In this Article, Professor Sunstein describes those aspects of republicanism that have the strongest claim to contemporary support, outlines the role of republican thought in thefounding period, and explores some of the implications of republicanismfor modern public law. Sunstein claims that the basic republican commitments involve (1) deliberation in government; (2) political equality; (3) universality, or agreement as a regulative ideal; and (4) citizenship. Professor Sunstein contends that all of these commitments played an important role during the founding period, generating a distinctive conception ofgovernance. In his view, the common oppositionbetween liberalismand republicanismis afalse one; the founders were liberal republicans-aposition that, Sunstein argues, is superior to its principal competitors. Sunstein claimsthat republicanideas suggest reformation of a number of currentareas of modern public law, encompassing such contexts as statutory construction, campaignfinance regulation,federalism, and discrimination.ProfessorSunstein concludes with a discussion of recent proposalsfor group or proportional representation,arguingthat such proposals can be supported by reference to the republican belief in deliberative democracy. 
For modern republicans, the task is not simply one of excavation. History does not supply conceptions of political life that can be applied mechanically to current problems. Circumstances change; theoretical commitments cannot be wrenched out of context without great risk of distortion; contemporary social and legal issues can never be resolved merely through recovery of features, however important and attractive, of the distant past. Difficulties of this sort severely complicate modern efforts to revive principles of classical republicanism. 
In addition, much in traditional republican thought gives little cause for celebration. Various strategies of exclusion-of the nonpropertied, blacks, and women-were built into the republican tradition. The republican belief in deliberation about the common good was closely tied to these practices of exclusion; it cannot be neatly separated from them. In some of its t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the annual meeting of the American Philosophical Association and at the legal theory workshop at McGill University. Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Drucilla Cornell, Richard Craswell, Jon Elster, William Eskridge, Richard Fallon, Philip Frickey, J. David Greenstone, Stephen Holmes, Larry Kramer, Catharine MacKinnon, Michael McConnell, Frank Michelman, Martha Minow, Richard A. Posner, Stephen Schulhofer, Richard B. Stewart, Kathleen Sullivan, Allan Sykes, Mark Tushnet, Robin West, and Iris Young provided valuable comments. 
1539 manifestations, moreover, the republican tradition has been highly militaristic, indeed heroic-exalting, as the model for public life, the fraternity of soldiers during wartime.' Equally important, the republican belief in the subordination of private interests to the public good carries a risk of tyranny and even mysticism. The belief is also threatening to those who reject the existence of a unitary public good, and who emphasize that conceptions of the good are plural, and dependent on perspective and power.' 
In spite of all this, republican theories of politics have a tenacious hold on political actors and observers, inside and outside of the judiciary. The characteristically republican belief in deliberative democracy continues to influence both legal doctrine and contemporary evaluations of the political process. Political advantages are generally sought through appeals to the public good, however cynical and transparent such appeals may sometimes appear. 
One of the largest accomplishments of modern historical scholarship has been the illumination of the role of republican thought in the period before, during, and after the ratification of the American Constitution.3 It is no longer possible to see a Lockean consensus 4 in the founding period, or to treat the framers as modern pluralists believing that self-interest is the inevitable motivating force behind political behavior.5 Republican thought played a central role in the framing period, and it offers a powerful conception of politics and of the functions of constitutionalism. 
theory in the American constitutional tradition.6 The republican revival is NicCOLO MACHIAVELLI (1984); J. WITHERSPOON, THE DOMINION OF PROVIDENCE OVER THE PASSIONS OF MEN, A SERMON 34 (1778); P. PAYSON, A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONOURABLE COUNCIL . . . OF THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY 32 (1778). See generally Bloch, The Gendered Meanings of Virtue in RevolutionaryAmerica, 13 SIGNS 37, 44- 
Impartiality and the Civic Public:Some Implications of Feminist Critiques of Moral and PoliticalTheory, 5 PRAXIS INT'L 381 (1986); Young, Social Movement Challenges to the Idea of Universal Citizenship, ETHICS (forthcoming 1989) [hereinafter Young, Social Movement Challenges];S. HOLMES, BENJAMIN CONSTANT AND THE MAKING OF MODERN LIBERALISM 148 (1984); K. Sullivan, Against Republicanism (1988) (unpublished manuscript on file with author); Herzog, Some Questions for Republicans, 14 POL. THEORY 473 (1986). 
MACHIAVELLIAN MOMENT (1975); G. WOOD, THE CREATION OF THE AMERICAN CONSTITUTION 1776-1787, at 46-90, 430-67 (1969); Appleby, Republicanism in Old and New Contexts, 43 WM. & MARY Q. 20 (1986); Appleby, The Social Origins ofAmerican Revolutionary Ideology, 64 J. AM. HisT. 935 (1977-78); Banning,Jeffersonian Ideology Revisited: Liberal and Classical Ideas in The New American Republic, 43 WM. & MARY Q. 3 (1986); Banning, Republican Ideology and the Triumph of the Constitution, 1789 to 1793, 31 WM. & MARY Q. 167 (1974); Kramnick, The "Great National Discussion": The Discourse of Politics in 1787, 45 WM. & MARY Q. 3 (1988); Shalhope, Republicanism and Early American Historiography,39 WM. & MARY Q. 334 (1982). 
TRADITION IN AMERICA (1955). For a different view, see, for example, J. ASHCRAFT, JOHN LOCKE AND THE REVOLUTIONARY TRADITION (1986). 

HARV. L. REV. 4 (1986); Sherry, Civic Virtue and The Feminine Voice in ConstitutionalAdjudicanow firmly in place, in legal scholarship if not in legal doctrine. The tasks for the immediate future are twofold. The first is to spell out, with some particularity, those aspects of republican thought that have the strongest claim to contemporary support. The second is to describe institutional arrangements and doctrinal shifts, inside and outside the courts, that might serve to implement the most attractive features of the republican vision. 
This Article has two principal parts. The first is relatively abstract. Its goal is to outline and defend a particular version of republican thought, one that avoids some of the difficulties associated with competing conceptions of public life, both republican and antirepublican. This version of republicanism, I argue, is not antiliberal at all;" it incorporates central features of the liberal tradition. Liberal republicanism is characterized by commitments to four central principles. These principles are related to one another; each republican commitment serves to inform and define the others. All of the principles derive from the republican understanding of individual and political freedom. All of them provide distinctive ways of controlling and limiting governmental power. 
The first principle is deliberation in politics, made possible by what is sometimes described as "civic virtue."' In the deliberative process, private interests are relevant inputs into politics; but they are not taken as prepolitical and exogenous and are instead the object of critical scrutiny. 
The second principle is the equality of political actors, embodied in a desire to eliminate sharp disparities in political participation or influence among individuals or social groups. Economic equality may, but need not, accompany political equality; in this sense, as in others, the political process has a degree of autonomy from the private sphere. 
The third principle is universalism, exemplified by the notion of a common good, and made possible by "practical reason." The republican commitment to universalism, or agreement as a regulative ideal, takes the form of a belief in the possibility of settling at least some normative disputes with substantively right answers. 
The fourth and final principle is citizenship, manifesting itself in broadly guaranteed rights of participation. Those rights are designed both to control representative behavior and to afford an opportunity to exercise tion, 72 VA. L. REv. 543 (1986); Sunstein, Interest Groups in American PublicLaw, 38 STAN. L. REv. 29 (1985); see also Ackerman, The StorrsLectures: Discovering the Constitution,93 YALE L.J. 1013 (1984) (discussing conceptions of "normal" and "constitutional" politics in framing period). 
Horwitz, History and Theory, 96 YALE L.J. 1825, 1831-35 (1987) (opposing liberalism to republicanism). 
the classical formulation-while others understand it as a precondition for the achievement of social justice. On the second view, civic virtue is necessary for participation in public deliberation, and it is instrumental to a well-functioning deliberative process. The second view is the principal object here. See infra text accompanying notes 55-56. For an emphasis on character, see A. Kronman, The Cooley Lectures (unpublished) (on file with The Yale Law Journal). and inculcate certain political virtues. Citizenship often occurs in nominally private spheres, but its primary importance is in governmental processes. 
The second part of this Article is quite concrete. Its goal is to describe some of the implications of republicanism, thus conceived, for a number of controversies in modern public law. I suggest that republican understandings call for a reformulation of many current legal rules, inside and outside the courts. For example, republican themes would affect governing principles in such contexts as campaign finance regulation, federalism, statutory construction, and discrimination law. Recent proposals for proportional or group representation raise especially interesting issues here. While posing serious risks, such proposals raise important issues about republican theory, and hold out considerable promise. Efforts to ensure group representation can be closely connected both with institutions in the original Constitution and with the republican belief in deliberative democracy. In all of these areas, the tasks of spelling out the contemporary appeal of republican thought, and of exploring its implications for traditional institutional arrangements and legal rights, make it necessary to go well beyond classical republicanism. 
I. 
CONCEPTIONS OF POLITICS 
American public law might be understood as a set of conflicts among competing conceptions of the nature of American political life. Elements of these conceptions played a role at the time of the framing; they continue to influence modern disputes. 
A. 
The first view, which takes both descriptive and normative forms, might be described as pluralist.9 Under this view, politics consists of a struggle among interest groups for scarce social resources. Laws are a kind of commodity, subject to the forces of supply and demand. Various groups in society compete for loyalty and support from citizens. Once they are organized and aligned, they exert pressure on political representatives, who respond, in a market-like manner, to the pressures thus exerted. The ultimate result is political equilibrium. 
BENrLEY, THE PROCESS OF GOVERNMENT (1908); R. DAHL, supra note 5; D. TRUMAN, THE GOVERNMENTAL PROCESS (1951); Becker, A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groupsfor Political Influence, 98 Q.J. ECON. 371 (1983); Stigler, The Theory ofEconomic Regulation, 2 BELL J. ECON. & MGMT. Sci. 3 (1971). For general discussion, see D. HELD, MODELS OF DEMOCRACY 186-220 (1987); Farber & Frickey, The Jurisprudenceof Public Choice, 65 TEx. L. REV. 873 (1987). I do not use the word "pluralism" to refer to conceptions of politics and society as involving different groups pursuing divergent conceptions of the good life. See N. ROSENBLUM, ANOTHER LIBERALISM 155-60 (1987). 
The pluralist approach takes the existing distribution of wealth, existing background entitlements, and existing preferences as exogenous variables. All of these form a kind of prepolitical backdrop for pluralist struggle."0 The goal of the system is to ensure that the various inputs are reflected accurately in legislation; the system is therefore one of aggregating citizen preferences. This understanding carries with it a particular conception of representation, in 
which officials respond to constituent desires and exercise little or no independent judgment."1 
The appeal of the pluralist understanding-if used normatively-stems from its utilitarian underpinnings, its effort to respect current preferences, and its desire to avoid the risks of tyranny that are associated with active and self-conscious preference-shaping by public officials. The most objectionable exercises of governmental power are often associated with approaches that see character formation as an end of politics. In these respects, pluralism is committed to familiar conceptions of majority rule12 and to a healthy revulsion to regimes that take citizen preferences as an object of collective control. But several risks threaten to undermine a pluralist system. In the aggregate, they suggest that pluralism is an altogether unattractive conception of politics. 
The case for pluralism becomes much weaker if some preferences can be shown to be objectionable or the product of unjust background institutions.1 3 A significant purpose of politics may be to reveal objectionable preferences as such through processes of political discussion and debate. 4 understood as prepolitical. See Hale, Coercion and Distributionin a Supposedly Non-coercive State, 38 POL. ScI. Q. 470 (1923). 
its competitors). 
Overview and Interpretation,in RATIONAL MAN AND IRRATIONAL SOCIETY? 229 (B. Barry & R. 
TALISM 259 (1985) (discussing weaknesses in traditional justifications for majority rule and suggesting reform). A different view is presented in E. SPITZ, MAJORITY RULE 198-216 (1984) (defending majority rule in part by reference to improvements in social deliberation). 
to identify unjust background institutions. Usually such judgments depend on a belief that the consequences of certain preferences are to subordinate social groups or that preferences are partly a function of social institutions that restrict available opportunities. See infra notes 18-20, 49-52. 
in laws based on (for example) racist premises; the republican hope is that deliberative processes will reduce their incidence. See Goodin, LaunderingPreferences, in FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL CHOICE THEORY 75 private behavior, as represented by criminal law and by some aspects of the common law of property, tort, and contract. To the extent that legal constraints impose limits on force and fraud, they do not take private preferences as exogenous variables: The target of such laws is character as well as behavior. The point in the text is that pluralism might be objectionable to those who see a function in "laundering preferences" through discussion quite outside of the context of force and fraud. Consider laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race or gender. Such laws owe their origin, at least in part, to a perception that the preferences that give rise to discrimination are objectionable or distorted by unjust social institutions. 15 Preferences of that sort may be objectionable because of their effects in subordinating a social group. They may also derive from various distortions, including the phenomenon of adaptive preferences on the part of victims-preferences that are based on the absence of available opportunities. 6 Preferences may be distorted as well by interest-induced beliefs on the part of the beneficiaries of existing practice. 17 A pluralist system is indifferent among preferences, so long as force and fraud are not involved; because it disregards the sources and effects of bad preferences, such a system will produce unacceptable results. 
The existence of objectionable or distorted preferences suggests that politics should not simply implement citizen desires, but should also allow for a measure of critical distance from and scrutiny of those desires, bringing new information and different perspectives to bear." In this sense, the political sphere should have a degree of autonomy. The difficulties of pluralism in this regard are compounded by the fact that pluralism tends to ignore the power of some groups to limit the number and nature of issues set for democratic resolution, 9 or, most generally, the fact that preferences are formed against the backdrop of disparities in power and limitations in both opportunities and information." 
The pluralist understanding increases the likelihood of undesirable lawmaking for another reason. Under republican approaches to politics, laws must be supported by argument and reasons; they cannot simply be fought for or be the product of self-interested "deals." Private-regarding reasons are an insufficient basis for legislation. Political actors must justify their choices by appealing to a broader public good. This requirement has a disciplining effect on the sorts of measures that can be proposed and enacted. The requirement of appeal to public-regarding reasons may make it more likely that public-regarding legislation will actually be enacted.2" 
The central idea here is that politics has a deliberative or transformative dimension. Its function is to select values, to implement "preferences about preferences,'1 22 or to provide opportunities for preference formation rather than simply to implement existing desires.23 The point is a quite general one, extending beyond discrimination law to environmental measures, regulation of broadcasting, welfare expenditures, and many other areas. Under the pluralist understanding, there is reason for skepticism about such laws; they might appear to be impermissible "rent-seeking," or illegitimate wealth transfers. 2 Indeed, on pluralist assumptions it is unclear why laws should not be bought and sold like commodities in a marketplace; such a process of sale might accurately aggregate preferences. But for those who believe in a deliberative function for politics, the marketplace metaphor will be misguided, and laws of these sorts must be understood in nonpluralist terms. 
Much of the appeal of pluralism stems from its connection with utilitarianism. 25 But even if one believes that an entirely utilitarian approach to politics is desirable, it is by no means clear that ordinary majoritarianism, understood in pluralist terms, should be accepted. 
First, accurate aggregation of preferences through politics is unlikely to be accomplished in light of the conundrums in developing a social welfare function.2 6 Public choice theory has shown that cycling problems, strategic and manipulative behavior, sheer chance, and other factors prevent majoritarianism from providing an accurate aggregation of preferences. 27 Seclaw. ond, majority rule is indifferent to variations in intensity of preferences,2" and it is fanciful to think that the various supplements to majoritarianism in a pluralist democracy-different levels of participation and financial contribution, for example-will take up the slack. 
Even if these problems might be surmounted, one would have to be optimistic indeed to believe that there is an identity between the result that would be reached by the considered utilitarian and that which would be reached by a legislature responding to constituent pressures as they are generally imposed. In any representative democracy, there is simply too much slippage between legislative outcomes and constituent desires. 9 These various considerations converge on a single conclusion: Although pluralist approaches are often defended as a means of ascertaining the "public will," that concept is an incoherent one within pluralist theory.30 
Sometimes republicans and others invoke considerations of this sort in order to support constitutional protections against the operation of the public sphere. In particular, some observers, often drawing on public choice theory and purporting to follow Locke, argue in favor of rigid property rights and severe restrictions on collective interference with the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements."' But this strategy disregards the other failings of pluralism. As we will see, it also depends on an undefended belief in a prepolitical or exogenous private sphere, greatly overstates the real-world failings of deliberative government, and ignores the ways in which existing distributions and preferences are a product of 3 2 
Pluralist approaches place no premium on political participation. Indeed, for pluralists the absence of political participation is an affirmative good, suggesting general contentment with the status quo and proximity to the equilibrium point.3 Pluralists will therefore be unwilling to take steps to promote political activity. But the absence of participation may reflect instead a collective action problem"' or an adaptation to practices that are believed intractable;3 5 and in any case, a system lacking widespread participation will suffer from the failure to cultivate the various qualities that may accompany political life-self-development, feelings of empathy, social solidarity, and so forth.36 One need not believe that the political life is uniquely valuable, or that a system lacking widespread and frequent citizen participation is necessarily oppressive '3 in order to conclude that political activity is often an important individual and collective good. 
There is considerable doubt about the descriptive power of pluralist understandings for contemporary political life; 8 but it would be hard to deny that elements of pluralism provide a central feature of modern politics. And in light of the multiple failings of pluralism, critics have often pointed to republican conceptions of politics as possible alternatives. Such conceptions appear, at every turn, to oppose pluralist approaches. Aspects of classical republicanism found an American home in the work of the antifederalists; and antifederalist thought has exerted a continuing influence on American public law. But elements of republican thought can be found in the views of the federalists as well. 
Republican conceptions of politics diverge substantially from one another; there is no unitary approach that can be described as republican. 9 Classical republicans emphasized the role of the polis as the locus for achieving freedom through active citizenship. On this view, political participants were to subordinate their private interests to the public good through political participation in an ongoing process of collective self34. See R. HARDIN, supra note 29. 
Boudon, The Logic ofRelative Frustration,in RATIONALITY AND REVOLUTION 245 (M. Taylor ed. 1988). 
note 16 (showing that such effects are "essentially by-products"). 
is the best life for human beings (or at least for certain classes of them). See, e.g., H. ARENDT, ON REVOLUTION 215-82 (1963); Frug, The City as a Legal Concept, 93 HARV. L. REV. 10 This view also appears to underlie M. SANDEL, LIBERALISM AND THE LIMITS OF JUSTICE (1982). But modern republicanism respects other conceptions of the good life as well. 
(1985) (arguing that congressional behavior cannot be explained by reference to interest-group pressures) and S. KELMAN, MAKING PUBLIC POLICY 44-66 (1987) (same) and A. MAASS, CONGRESS AND THE COMMON GOOD (1983) (same) with Becker, supra note 9 (discussing interest-group power over legislative outcomes) and Peltzman, Toward a More General Theory ofRegulation, 19 J.L. & ECON. 211 (1976) (same). 
Traditional Conception, in CONSTITUTIONALISM AND RIGHTS (G. Bryner & N. Reynolds eds. 1987); J.G.A. POCOCK, supra note 3; Kloppenberg, The Virtues of Liberalism: Christianity,Republicanism and Ethics in Early American PoliticalDiscourse, 74 J. AM. HisT. 9 (1987). determination. 40 Civic virtue was thus a central organizing principle of classical politics. 
Many of those in the framing period defined republicanism much more generally, opposing it to monarchy, aristocracy, and despotism. Madison, for example, defined a republic as "a government which derives all its powers directly or indirectly from the great body of the people; and is administered by persons holding their offices during pleasure, for a limited period, or during good behavior." ' 
Despite the differences among various forms of republicanism, republican theories tend to be united by four central commitments, and in any event it is in these commitments that the contemporary appeal of republican thought can be located. The elaboration of those commitments will be necessarily abstract. It would be possible to describe versions of republicanism that are quite concrete but far less attractive to modern observers;42 and as we will see, the republican commitments, as characterized here, have important implications for a number of controversies in modern public law. All of these commitments are united by the republican conception of individual autonomy as involving selection rather than implementation of ends, and the republican conception of political freedom, which prizes collective self-determination.43 
Many republican conceptions treat politics as above all deliberative; 4 and deliberation is to cover ends as well as means. Although elements of this idea can be found in Aristotle and, even more, in Harrington, the belief in political deliberation is a distinctly American contribution to republican thought."5 The function of politics, on this view, is not simply to implement existing private preferences. Political actors are not supposed to come to the process with preselected interests that operate as exogenous variables. The purpose of politics is not to aggregate private preferences, or to achieve an equilibrium among contending social forces. The republican belief in deliberation counsels political actors to achieve a measure of 
body of the society, not from an inconsiderable proportion, or a favored class of it.... It is sufficient for such a government that the persons administering it be appointed, either directly or indirectly, by the people ...." THE FEDERALIST No. 39, at 241 (J. Madison) (C.Rossiter ed. 1961) (emphasis in original). 
thought). 
supra note 18, at 113-20, 130-34, 166-71. 
accompanying notes 104-18 (discussing Madison and anti-federalists). 
deliberation among the citizenry. See J. RoUssAU, The Social Contract, in JEAN JAcQuES RouSSEAu: POLITICAL WRITINGs 29-30 (F. Watkins trans. 1986). critical distance from prevailing desires and practices, subjecting these desires and practices to scrutiny and review.4" 
To say this is not to suggest that deliberation calls for some standard entirely external to private beliefs and values (as if such a thing could be imagined).47 The republican position is instead that existing desires should be revisable in light of collective discussion and debate, bringing to bear alternative perspectives and additional information. Thus, for example, republicans will attempt to design political institutions that promote discussion and debate among the citizenry; they will be hostile to systems that promote lawmaking as "deals" or bargains among self-interested private groups; they may well attempt to insulate political actors from private pressure; and they may also favor judicial review designed to promote political deliberation and perhaps to invalidate laws when deliberation has not occurred. 48 
A central point here is that individual preferences should not be taken as exogenous to politics.' 9 They are a function of existing practice, including legal rules; such rules cannot, without circularity, be justified by reference to current preferences. As we have seen, private preferences may be a product of adaptation by the disadvantaged" and interest-induced beliefs on the part of the relatively well-off. 1 Republicans are thus unlikely to take existing preferences and entitlements as fixed. Both are permissible objects of political deliberation. In the republican view, for example, the distribution of wealth is a matter for political disposition; there is no hostility to redistributive measures. Republicans believe that if used as a term of opprobrium, the notion of "rent-seeking" is badly misdirected. 
The republican belief in deliberation is aspirational and critical rather than celebratory and descriptive. It is a basis for evaluating political practices. Modern republicans do not claim that existing systems actually embody republican deliberation. The republican commitments may reveal that actual deliberation, and purportedly deliberative processes, are badly distorted. On the republican view, moreover, the requirement of delibera(Vol. 97: 1539 tion is not purely formal. The antonym of deliberation is the imposition of outcomes by self-interested and politically powerful private groups; republicans emphasize that deliberative processes are often undermined by intimidation, strategic and manipulative behavior, collective action problems, adaptive preferences, or-most generally-disparities in political influence. The requirement of deliberation is designed to ensure that political outcomes will be supported by reference to a consensus (or at least broad agreement) among political equals. 
Thus understood, the requirement disciplines political outcomes," carrying with it constraints that exclude some results and compel others. The requirement of deliberation embodies substantive limitations that in some settings lead to uniquely correct outcomes.53 Modern examples include the protection of freedom of speech and the prohibition of discrimination against blacks and women.' In this respect, the republican commitment to deliberation is closely allied with the republican beliefs in equality and universalism, taken up below. The commitment to deliberation is particularly controversial to those who believe either that its role is inevitably minimal in modern politics or that even as an aspiration, deliberation, standing by itself, is of little assistance in generating desirable outcomes. 
The emphasis on deliberation in republican thought is closely allied with the republican beliefs that the motivating force of political behavior should not be self-interest, narrowly defined, and that civic virtue should play a role in political life. There is no mystery to this claim; it refers simply to the understanding that in their capacity as political actors, citizens and representatives are not supposed to ask only what is in their private interest, but also what will best serve the community in general 5'-understood as a response to the best general theory of social welfare. Thus understood, the requirement accommodates a wide range of possible positions; but it is a constraint nonetheless. Sometimes the appeal to civic virtue is designed to improve individual character-a particularly important theme in classical republican thought. But modern republicans discussion. See, e.g., M. WALZER, SPHERES OF JUSTICE: A DEFENSE OF PLURALISM AND EQUITY (1982); Rawls, The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus, 7 OXFORD J. LEGAL STUD. 1 (1987). The republican conception of political truth is, moreover, better thought of as pragmatic than foundationalist. See infra text accompanying notes 79-81. 
constraints on inputs and outcomes; as a consequence, certain results could not be the product of a genuine deliberative process. 
It is important to note as well that antidiscrimination measures are a product of a wide range of social developments, not of deliberation alone. Exercises of social power on the part of the disadvantaged, changing economic conditions, technical advances, and other factors play an important role. (It is ironic in this regard that the prohibition of sex discrimination was added by the opponents of title VII and was adopted without deliberation.) 
public good"); see also J. RAWLS, supra note 17, at 361 ("Each rational legislator is to vote his opinion as to which laws and policies best conform to principles of justice."). invoke civic virtue primarily in order to promote deliberation in the service of social justice, not to elevate the character of the citizenry. 
Republican approaches are often said to be antagonistic to private rights 5 6-an understanding traceable to the fact that republicans see the private sphere as the product of public decisions, and deny the existence of natural or prepolitical entitlements. Republican theories are not, however, hostile to the protection of individual or group autonomy from state control. Indeed, legal rights have quite consistently accompanied republican systems.57 What is distinctive about the republican view is that it understands most rights as either the preconditions for or the outcome of an undistorted deliberative process.5 8 Thus, for example, the principle of deliberation argues in favor of liberty of expression and conscience and the right to vote; these are the basic preconditions for republican deliberation. Liberal systems could be, and have in fact been, founded on premises of this sort;5 9 but understandings that point to prepolitical or natural rights"0 are entirely foreign to republicanism. On the republican point of view, the existence of realms of private autonomy must be justified in public terms. 
The difference is illustrated by different approaches to private property. Republicans have historically believed in the importance of property rights as a shield against the state and as a guarantor of security, independence, and virtue.6" Modern-day republicans might well share that view; but because of the republican emphasis on the social construction of property rights, republicans are hardly hostile to redistribution or to collective efforts to reassess the existing distribution of wealth and entitlements6. Indeed, because of the republican emphasis on the social conditions for republican deliberation, republican commitments point powerfully in the direction of equalizing political influence-a point to which I now turn. 
The 
Many republican writers have placed a high premium on political equality. Political equality, in republican terms, is understood as a requirement that all individuals and groups have access to the political process; large disparities in political influence are disfavored. 3 Republicans are likely to be highly receptive, for example, to measures designed to reduce the effects of wealth in the political process6 4 or to furnish access to the media.6" 
On at least some versions of the pluralist conception of politics, such measures point in exactly the wrong directions. Government is inevitably the enemy of freedom 
of expression; the distribution of private power is off limits to politics.6 6 By contrast, many republican writers emphasized the close connection between republican systems and economic equality. Dramatic differences in wealth and power are, in this view, inconsistent with the underlying premises of a republican polity. Montesquieu was particularly insistent on this point, envisioning equality as a necessary precondition for republicanism. 7 Even for republicans who accept a large degree of economic inequality, sharp disparities in political influence are a severe source of concern. 68 
between the republican belief in political equality and some pluralist efforts to promote access to the political process, see, e.g., J. ELY, DEMOCRACY AND DisTRusT (1980), but the pluralist view places little premium on deliberation or citizenship. 
Of course the republican aspiration to political equality was violated by important features of republican practice. The relationship between the republican belief in political equality and republican social hierarchies was quite complex; republicans saw political equality in surprising places. See J.G.A. POCOCK, supra note 3, at 467-70; H. PITKIN, supra note 11, at 23-90. 
fairness doctrine). It is important to note in this connection that some pluralists, growing out of the utilitarian tradition, seek to minimize side-constraints on government in order not to interfere with political struggle. See, e.g., Easterbrook, The Supreme Court, 1983 Term-Foreword: The Court and the Economic System, 98 HARV. L. REv. 5 (1984). Other commentators, believing in pluralism as an accurate description of politics, fearful of "rent-seeking," and purporting to be associated with Locke, attempt to create rigid, property-based barriers to government action. See R. EPSTEIN, supra note 31. Both of these views are at odds with republicanism. 

Love of the republic in a democracy, is a love of the democracy; love of the democracy is that of equality. Love of the democracy is likewise that of frugality. As every individual ought to have here the same happiness and the same advantages, they ought consequently to taste the same pleasures and to form the same hopes; which cannot be expected but from a general frugality. The love of equality in a democracy limits ambition to the sole desire, to the sole happiness of doing greater services to our country than the rest of our fellow citizens .... A true maxim it is therefore, that in order to love equality and frugality in a republic, these virtues must have been previously established by law. 
MONTESQUIEU, THE SPIRIT OF LAWS bk. V, chs. iii-iv (D. Carrithers ed. 1977). 
POCOCK, supra note 3, at 258 (discussing political equality amid economic disparities), 467-70, 537 (distinguishing equality of position from republican idea of political equality); Pocock, Oceana: Its Ideological Context, in THE POLITICAL WORKS OF JAMES HARRINGTON 15, 18 [hereinafter Pocock, Ideological Context] dependence among citizens who should be equally subject to none but the public power"); cf. S. VERBA & G. ORREN, EQUALITY IN AMERICA: THE VIEW FROM THE ToP 7-20 (1985) (discussing American 
Some of the American antifederalists emphasized the threats of commercialism and argued in favor of material equality. Thus Centinel wrote that a "republican, or free government, can only exist where the body of the people are virtuous, and where property is pretty equally divided; in such a government the people are the sovereign and their sense or opinion is the criterion of every public measure; for when this ceases to be the case, the nature of the government is changed, and an aristocracy, monarchy or despotism will rise on its ruin." 9 Thus Cato wrote that "Dominion follows Property . . . An Equality of Estate will give an Equality of Power; and an Equality of Power is a Commonwealth, or Democracy," and feared that "Very great Riches in private Men . . . destroy . . . that Balance of Property and Power, which is necessary to a Democracy. 1 70 
equal distribution of property was necessary. 11 It should not be surprising that a disproportionate number of those in favor of paper money and debtor relief legislation fell within the antifederalist camp. 2 
The republican belief in political equality is itself highly controversial, as the debate over campaign finance regulation reveals.73 The notion that political equality depends on economic equality is even more so, and has hardly been shared by all republican theorists."4 But many of the American framers, including Madison, expressed concern about both political 5 and economic inequality. commitment to political equality but ambivalence about economic equality); S. VERBA, ELITES AND THE IDEA OF EQUALITY 264-65 (1987) (noting that many people not committed to economic equality believe in political equality). 

162-67, 261-70 (1981). 

improper and vicious project"). Burke of course believed in political deliberation but not in equality; for a modern illustration of a similar view, see A. Kronman, supra note 8. On some of the risks in such approaches, see infra text accompanying notes 249-65 (discussing value of proportional representation). 
from a few, to increase the inequality of property, by an immoderate, and especially an unmerited, accumulation of riches. 3. By the silent operation of laws, which, without viblating the rights of property, reduce extreme wealth towards a state of mediocrity, and raise extreme indigence towards a state of comfort. 14 J. MADISON, THE PAPERS OF JAMES MADISON 197-98 original). 
See also Jefferson's suggestion: I am conscious that an equal division of property is impracticable. But the consequences of this enormous inequality producing so much misery to the bulk of mankind, legislatures cannot invent too many devices for subdividing property, only taking care to let their subdivisions go hand in hand with the natural affections of the human mind .... Another means of silently lessening the inequality of property is to exempt all from taxation below a certain point, and to tax the higher portions of property in geometrical progression as they rise. Whenever there is [sic) in any country, uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of 
Republican thought is characterized by a belief in universalism, a term that I will use in a somewhat idiosyncratic sense. The republican commitment to universalism amounts to a belief in the possibility of mediating different approaches to politics, or different conceptions of the public good, through discussion and dialogue. 6 The process of mediation is designed to produce substantively correct outcomes, understood as such through the ultimate criterion of agreement among political equals. It is because of the belief in universalism that republican approaches posit the existence of a common good, to be found at the conclusion of a well-functioning deliberative process." 
Republicans thus reject ethical relativism and skepticism, and believe that different perspectives are sometimes subject to mediation both in theory and in the real world. The institutional consequence is that republicans will be hostile to bargaining mechanisms in the political process 8 and will instead seek to ensure agreement among political participants. The republican belief in agreement as a regulative ideal, and the republican conception of political truth, are pragmatic in character. They do not depend on a belief in ultimate foundations for political outcomes.7 9 
Under pluralist assumptions, the notion of a common good is alternatively mystical or tyrannical.8" Republican theories, on the other hand, property have been so far extended as to violate natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labor and live on. 8 T. JEFFERSON, THE PAPERS OF THOMAS JEFFERSON 681-82 (J. Boyd ed. 1953). 
PAINE 221 (1795) ("The true and only true basis of representative government is equality of rights."); 4 J. ELLIOTT,DEBATES OF THE SEVERAL STATE CONVENTIONS ON THE ADOPTION OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION 320-23 (1888) ("mediocrity of fortune is a leading feature in our national character . . . we may with safety assert that the great body of national wealth is nearly equally in the hands of the people, among whom there are few dangerously rich or few miserably poor; that we may congratulate ourselves with living under the blessings of a mild and equal government, which knows no distinctions but those of merits or talents-under a government whose honors and duties are equally open to the exertions of all her citizens") (remarks of Pinckney). 
decision, of ensuring that it was free from corrupting particular interests. The role of the many was less to assert the will of the non-elite than to maximize the impersonality of government."); see also infra notes 108-17 (discussing Madison). 
this process occurs within cultural limits. 
in Your Eyes: Regulatory Negotiation and the Public Interest-EPA's Woodstove Standards, 18 ENVTL. L. 55 (1987). 
(1929) (claiming that there is a need for critical reflection on the "conditions under which objects are enjoyed" and "the consequences of esteeming and liking them" and arguing that 'judgments about values arejudgments about that which should regulate theformation of our desires, affections and enjoyments" (emphasis in original)); H. PUTNAM, supra note 47; C. PEIRCE, Pragmaticismin Retrospect: A Last Formulation, in PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS OF PEIRCE (J. Buhler ed. 1955); Michelman, Law's Republic, 97 YALE L.J. 1493 (1988). 
rely on the deliberative functions of politics and on practical reason," x and embrace the notion of the common good as a coherent one. To some degree this belief depends on a commitment to political empathy, 2 embodied in a requirement that political actors attempt to assume the position of those who disagree. Political outcomes are, on this view, not limited to the achievement of Pareto improvements or to the supply of collective goods. Measures that attempt to select and pronounce values-embodied in, for example, broadcasting regulation, environmental measures, or antidiscrimination law-attest to the republican belief in universalism. Such measures represent the outcome of a deliberative process among political equals; they do not take existing preferences and practices as exogenous. 
To say this is not to suggest that republicans believe in a unitary public good, or that they deny that differently situated individuals and groups will frequently be unable to resolve their disagreements through conversation.8 3 Sometimes compromises are necessary;"" sometimes there will be political losers; some issues-religion is a familiar example-should be entirely off-limits to politics8. 3 It would be fanciful to suggest that different conceptions of the good life can or should always be mediated through politics. The republican position is not that every issue is subject to political resolution; it is instead that some questions can yield general agreement through deliberation. A conception of politics that disregards this fact will be doomed to repeat the failings of pluralism. 
Republican approaches place a high premium on citizenship and participation,88 and thus seek mechanisms both for citizen control of national 
also J. RAWLS, supra note 17, at 358 ("In everyday life the exchange of opinion with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things from their standpoint and the limits of our vision are brought home to us."). 
be the ideal term of the process. In truth, no party will ever become an actually universal party; there will always remain opponents; this is the core of political pluralism. Nevertheless the structure of the deliberative system usually makes the protagonists strive to enlarge their points of view and propose more and more general positions. There is a sort of competition for generality. 
Manin, On Legitimacy and PoliticalDeliberation,15 PoL THEORY 338, 358-59 (1987); see also S. WHITE, THE RECENT WORK OF JtURGEN HABERMAS 75-77 (1988) (discussing role of compromise); E. SprTz, MAJORITY RULE 211-16 (1984) (discussing compromise, deliberation, and majority rule). 
conviction is a matter of private right and on the view that removal of religion from the political agenda protects republican politics by ensuring against stalemate and factionalism. In this somewhat ironic latter sense, rights are preconditions for republican deliberation. See Holmes, Gag Rules and Democracy, in CONSTITUTIONALISM AND DEMOCRACY (J. Elster ed. 1988). 
Harrington's effort to construct "a scheme of participation for all citizens, based on the frequent assemblies of local communities"). institutions and for decentralization, local control, and local self-determination. A large purpose of participation is to monitor the behavior of representatives in order to limit the risks of factionalism and self-interested representation. But on the republican view, political participation is not only instrumental in the ordinary sense; it is also a vehicle for the inculcation of such characteristics as empathy, virtue, and feelings of community8'7 (and this is so even if the motivation for participation is instrumental"'). The belief in citizenship is part of the republican antipathy to certain versions of political individualism. It repudiates approaches that place no premium on political participation as an independent good; republicans therefore attempt to provide outlets for the exercise of citizenship. 
According to the antifederalists, for example, representation was at best a necessary evil, and its risks were to be limited by ensuring that public officials would be tightly controlled by the citizenry. It was for this reason that in evaluating the institutions of the proposed Constitution, the antifederalists were least suspicious of the House of Representatives and regarded the President and the judiciary with most alarm; the Senate was an intermediate case.8" 
Allied with this idea is the familiar belief that republican systems should be small and decentralized. A large republic threatens to diminish the connection between rulers and ruled and decrease opportunities for participation. "[T]he civic humanist ideal had originated in a re-assertion of the vita activa, and it was the ultimate goal of the citizen to assert his virtue in action, of which the republic was the frame."9 A large republic would thus tend to produce corruption, the greatest obstacle to a wellfunctioning republican system. Moreover, and equally important, the republican belief in deliberation about the common good is most easily sustained when there is homogeneity and agreement about foundations. Where such agreement is entirely absent, deliberative processes may break down."1 A belief in decentralization and a fear of the diversity of a large republic naturally accompany this concern. This point raises important difficulties for efforts to revive republican thought in a large and heterogeneous nation. 
At the same time, traditional republican thought was hostile to com87. See supra note 36. 
the motivating force for political participation; they must instead be "essentially by-products" of activity engaged in for instrumental purposes. 

interests of the people should be similar. If this be not the case, there will be a constant clashing of opinions; and the representatives of one part will be continually striving against those of the other." 2 THE COMPLETE ANTIFEDERALIST 369 (H. Storing ed. 1980). But see infra text accompanying notes 126-27, 201-02 (discussing importance of disagreement to republican deliberation). merce and luxury.92 Commercial development tends, in this view, to produce avarice and to weaken the attachment to the public good on which republican systems depend. Other forms of republicanism approach commerce quite differently, regarding it as a means of achieving cordial relations among potential adversaries and thus of softening social tensions.9" 
The four basic republican principles are closely related to one another. For example, the commitment to political equality is allied with the belief in deliberation. The norm of equality constrains both inputs and outputs of the deliberative process; particular groups may not be excluded from the process, and results that subordinate politically weak groups are proscribed.94 The belief in universalism and agreement as a regulative ideal is a natural consequence of the republican faith in deliberation and political equality. Citizenship is a predicate for political deliberation, and the norm of political equality has consequences for the desirable forms of citizenship. The various republican commitments thus help to qualify and inform each other. 
The commitments are in turn traceable to the republican conception of individual and political freedom. On this view, individual freedom consists not in the implementation but instead in the selection of ends.9 5 Such a process emphasizes the existence of second-order preferences,9 6 the value of overcoming weakness of the will, the possibility that private ends have been distorted by unjust social institutions, and the importance of increasing available opportunities and information. The republican commitment to political freedom is a generalization of these ideas. 98 Although alert to possible malfunctions in the governmental process, republicans envision that process as a forum in which alternative perspectives and additional information are brought to bear, problems are occasionally revealed to be systemic rather than individual,99 second-order preferences may be vindi92. MONTESQUIEU, THE SPIRIT OF LAWS, bk. XX, ch. ii (spec. ed. 1984) (Dublin 1751) ("We see that in countries where the people are actuated only by the spirit of commerce, they make a traffic of all the humane, all the moral virtues; the most trifling things, those which humanity would demand, are there done, or there given, only for money."). 
THOMAS PAINE 6-7 (1792) ("I have been an advocate for commerce, since I am a friend to its effects. It is a pacific system, operating to unite mankind by rendering nations, as well as individuals, useful to each other."). See generallyA. HIRSCHMAN, THE PASSIONS AND THE INTERESTS (1973) (discussing softening effects of commerce). 
preferences); supra note 41 (Madison's view). 
63-70 (1980); R. YOUNG, PERSONAL AUTONOMY: BEYOND NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE LIBERTY 49-62 (1986). 
a Preference, 68 J. PHIL. 5 (1971). 
264 (1985). 
conceptions of democracy). 

In both liberal and republican systems, moreover, self-interest is an insufficient basis for political outcomes. In both systems, "rights" are not prepolitical givens, but the products (sometimes given constitutional status) of a well-functioning deliberative process. In both systems, social justice requires one "not to be a disembodied nobody," but instead to attempt "to think from the point of view of everybody."17 0 The most collectivist forms of republican thought1 7 ' are of course at odds with the most atomistic versions of liberalism; 172 republican thinkers who endorse traditional hierarchies reject the liberal emphasis on political and social freedom for the individual; but in numerous respects republicanism and liberalism are hardly antonyms. Republican thought, understood in a certain way, is a prominent aspect of the liberal tradition. 
The elaboration and defense of liberal republicanism is a large task indeed, but it is possible to describe some of the sources of its appeal. Liberal republicanism is responsive to an understanding of freedom as including critical distance from and scrutiny of ends. Republican thought treats this as a plausible conception of both individual and collective freedom; it sees political liberty in collective self-determination;' 73 while it does not regard political participation as the sole good life for human beings, it attempts to provide outlets for citizen control and local selfdetermination. 
At the same time, liberal republicans are fearful of public power, and impose numerous constraints on the operation of the public sphere. Both private rights and institutional arrangements are understood, however, as the outcome of a well-functioning deliberative process. Liberal republicanism is simultaneously responsive to possible abuses of both public and private power; it understands that the private sphere is constituted by public decisions, but treats that unsurprising insight as a reason for preservation rather than obliteration of constraints on government. Liberal republicanism attempts to limit disparities in political influence among various groups, including blacks and whites and rich and poor. In this respect, American republicanism must be understood not only in terms of the framing period, with its occasional strategies of exclusion, but also in terms of the Civil War amendments and the New Deal, with their more inclusionary approaches to public life. Endorsing the modern belief in individual rights, liberal republicanism is able to incorporate powerful and widely-held conceptions of both freedom and equality. And it is antagonistic to approaches that see politics as a replication of the existing distribu170. Okin, supra note 82; ef.City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 455 (1985) (Stevens, J., concurring) ("I cannot believe that a rational member of this disadvantaged class could ever approve of the discriminatory application of the city's ordinance in this case."). tion of social power, that take existing preferences for granted or downplay the deliberative functions of politics, and that deny the possibility of mediating social disputes in ways that are generally acceptable. 
To outline these points, or to suggest that political actors should "think from the point of view of everybody," is not sharply to limit the category of permissible approaches, let alone to solve particular problems. A large task for the future is to be quite concrete about the consequences of republicanism, properly understood, for social theory and legal reform. That task has three components. The first is to generate the appropriate device, or standpoint, from which to develop principles of social justice; the second is to describe those principles, having carried out the first task; the third is to describe institutions and rights with which to implement the relevant principles. 
A number of prominent efforts draw on one or more of the principles to which republicanism is committed. Thus utilitarian understandings, committed to universalism, attempt self-consciously to take account of everyone's point of view.""' Other theories, making deliberation and political equality central, attempt to derive substantive constraints from the ideas of neutral dialogue17 5 and undistorted communication.17 Rawls' own approach of course relies on the original position, attempting to ensure that those developing principles of justice are not influenced by factors that are irrelevant from the moral point of view.1 7 7 
It would be foolish to attempt in this space to evaluate these various approaches, which, for all their diversity, overlap in important ways with liberal republicanism as set out here. From the republican standpoint, however, some of the difficulties in these approaches are apparent. In many forms, utilitarian understandings take existing preferences as exogenous variables-an approach entirely foreign to republicanism. 17 8 Moreover, on republican grounds it is unclear that "neutrality" among competing conceptions of the good life is always desirable 179 even if it were possible for governmental institutions8' 0 to achieve it. It is also quite doubtful that the notion of neutrality, at least as understood by some, can generate powerful substantive constraints on political outcomes.181 Enor174. See, e.g., R. HARE, MORAL THINKING: ITS LEVELS, METHOD AND POINT 107-16 (1981). 294-326. 

utilitarianism that do not do this. See, e.g., J. RILEY, LIBERAL UTILITARIANISM (1988). 
The "neutrality" endorsed supra notes 160-69 and accompanying text is a much weaker constraint. 
Prrr. L. REV. 673 (1985) (discussing Dewey's liberalism). 
against use of neutrality as basis of social theory). mous work is necessary to unpack the notion of "distortion" in communication and to explain its role in developing theories of social justice." 2 Standing by itself, the concept depends on a highly ambiguous ideal case. 
For republicans, the problem with the original position as a guide to political institutions or as a political ideal18 is that it is too solitary and insufficiently dialogic. The task for political actors is to generate institutions that will produce deliberation among those differently situated, not to mimic the decisions that would be made by the unsituated-a problem taken up below. 
We may therefore suggest that the basic republican commitments will tend in the direction of guarantees of political deliberation, including the basic rights of political participation; the republican beliefs in political equality and citizenship will generate strong antidiscrimination norms; republicanism is likely as well to furnish basic guarantees of security, in the form of both private property and minimum welfare entitlements; and republican approaches will attempt to promote deliberation among multiple voices in the political process. 
In all of its various forms, republican conceptions of politics have been subject to vigorous criticism. Some observers have suggested that the belief in deliberative government is romantic and anachronistic-incompatible with the inevitably self-interested character of modern political life." 4 In this view, efforts to ensure civic virtue on the part of citizens and representatives are simply impractical-a diversion from more promising strategies for reform. A related objection would suggest that deliberation is purely formal, imposing no substantive constraints on political outcomes; on this view, any such constraints are the product of something other than deliberation. 
Others stress the dangers of totalitarianism that are built into the traditional republican belief in the subordination of private interests to the common good.185 Consider in this regard Benjamin Rush's suggestion that each citizen should be taught that he does not belong to himself, but that he is public property. Let him be taught to love his family, but let him be DEBATES 219, 234-37 (J. Thompson & D. Held eds. 1982) (criticizing Habermas for failing to do that work). 
Institutions of the sort described below might be necessary in order to generate real-world processes and outcomes that the original position is designed to produce as an analytical tool. 
Minorities, 1974 Sup. CT. REV. I (discussing self-interested character of legislative process). taught at the same time that he must forsake and even forget them when the welfare of his country requires it.... From the observations that have been made it is plain that I consider it as possible to convert men into republican machines. This must be done if we expect them to perform their parts properly in the great machine of the government of the state.1"' In the same vein, Rousseau suggested that the "newly-born infant, upon first opening his eyes, must gaze upon the fatherland, and until his dying day should behold nothing else."' 187 Such understandings of republicanism allow and indeed encourage the imposition of a comprehensive view of social life on the nation as a whole.188 From this point of view, interestgroup pluralism seems quite attractive in its willingness to allow pursuit of divergent conceptions of the good. Pluralism understood in quite another sense-as respect for diverse social groups, public and private, living different lives-appears to be an especially desirable alternative. 
Some of the most interesting criticisms of republican theories have come from those who have little sympathy for interest-group pluralism as it is conventionally understood. The basic point here is that some of the central notions of republican politics-deliberative politics, universalism, and citizenship-ignore the persistence of differences and oppositions among groups in society. 89 In a large and diverse nation, there is no common good to be mediated through discussion; there is no unitary political truth; there are instead irreducibly opposed perspectives and interests. In this view, the problem of modern politics is emphatically not that political actors have been disabled from bringing prepolitical interests to the process. 
Above all, social groups-especially the disadvantaged-should not, in this view, be prevented from invoking their private interests in the political process. A central purpose of political discourse is to enable such groups to bring about reform by doing precisely that. The conception of a civic public thus depends on a denial of difference and a belief in transcendence of context-unrealistic aspirations that threaten to forestall desirable change. An approach to politics that seeks to remove such issues from politics, to operate on the basis of a myth of commonness, and to remove prepolitical interests, leads in unproductive directions. What, in such a system, will politics be about? 9 ' 
This view stresses the difficulties of basing a modern political system on beliefs in deliberation, common good, and universalism. A related problem with republican understandings is that they put a high premium on delib186. See Rush, supra note 151, at 684, 687. supra note 162 (discussing problems of differentiating among various social groups). eration through public processes and through the state, and undervalue the need for intermediate organizations, often nominally private, that serve both as checks on government and as arenas for the cultivation and expression of republican virtues.' The most powerful statement of this position can be found in Tocqueville.' 9 2 
Citizenship, understood in republican fashion, does not occur solely through official organs. Many organizations-including labor unions, religious associations, women's groups of various sorts, civil rights organizations, volunteer and charitable groups, and others, sometimes marking themselves outside of and in opposition to conventional society-serve as outlets for some of the principal functions of republican systems. These functions include the achievement of critical scrutiny of existing practices, the provision of an opportunity for deliberation within collectivities, the chance to exercise citizenship and to obtain a sense of community, and the exercise of civic virtue, understood as the pursuit of goals other than selfinterest, narrowly conceived. The problem with at least some forms of republicanism is that they tend to ignore or devalue groups of this sort. What is needed, on this view, is a more differentiated approach to the relationship between citizen and state than that afforded by republican theories. 
Antirepublicans of this sort do not rely on possessive individualism, and they are at pains to distinguish themselves from pluralists. Many of them are dissatisfied with the existing distribution of resources and opportunities. Interest-group deals, under the pluralist conception, are no more attractive to them than to republicans, and for the same reasons; they simply replicate the existing distribution of social power. But there is considerable overlap between the view of antirepublicans of this sort and that of the pluralists. In both approaches, interests are seen as largely exogenous and prepolitical; in both, politics in governmental processes is a matter of selfinterests, and largely of deals; in both, it is normal and legitimate for political actors to seek goods or opportunities solely on the ground that it is in their interest to do so; in both, there is reason for considerable suspicion about the state, and in particular about measures that purport to reflect a unitary public good; in both, spheres of individual and group autonomy are highly valued; in both, the notion of mediation among conflicting conceptions of the good seems fanciful. The republican belief in a disjunction between prepolitical interests and political behavior is the principal object of attack as an ideal that is both unrealistic and undesirable. 
These challenges to republican approaches correctly emphasize the im191. See N. ROSENBLUM, supra note 9, at 143-47, 155-60. 
Mayer ed. 1969). portance of private association and the difficulties in some conceptions of universalism. The task of incorporating into republican theories the need for intermediate organizations to be insulated from the state is a large and critical one. But antirepublicanism of this sort carries serious risks as well. Intermediate organizations serve a variety of important functions, but recognition of that point does not eliminate the need to describe the appropriate role of the state and national governments. One must, in short, explain what it is that the government should do, and here the reference to intermediate organizations is inadequate. 
This is so for two principal reasons. First, an approach that sees the locus of republican virtues exclusively in private institutions undervalues the distinctive capacities of the state. In view of those capacities, political deliberation and citizenship must occur within public institutions as well. It should be a familiar point that the government is uniquely able to undertake a wide range of tasks, including (for example) the elimination of discrimination, the regulation of broadcasting, and the protection of the environment. Tasks of that sort cannot be undertaken entirely by private actors. 
Second, multiple threats are posed by private power, including that wielded by intermediate organizations, which are themselves a source of oppression.' Government must therefore play a role in limiting the powers of such organizations 9 " without denying the importance of their continued existence. A system that allowed intermediate organizations to proceed without regulation would lead to intolerable results. 
The unifying theme of antirepublican arguments is an attack on the ideals of universalism and impartiality; the relevant arguments stress the importance of situatedness and perspective, but it is here that the attack is itself most vulnerable. Properly understood, the principle of universalism' 9 5 does not deny the existence of different perspectives, and it does not assert that political participants must put their private complaints to one side when they come to politics. The belief in universalism affirms instead that some perspectives are better than others, and that that claim can be vindicated through discussion with those initially skeptical. Republican theories do not claim that there is a standpoint unsituated in the world; they do not impose a particular, parochial perspective in the guise of neu193. On the latter point, see C. TAYLOR, HEGEL AND MODERN SOCIETY 116-18 (1979); N. ROSENBLUM, supra note 9, at 155-60. 
U.S. 537 (1987) and Roberts v. United States Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609 (1984); see also Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas, 416 U.S. 1 (1974). The issue has arisen most frequently in efforts to use norms prohibiting sex discrimination against all-male organizations, see Rhode, Association and Assimilation, 81 Nw. U.L. REV. 106 (1986), and here there is good reason for a governmental role in countering practices by intermediate associations. 
unrealistic aspiration but at the same time to believe in the possibility of mediating different claims about social norms. trality. Instead they require public-regarding justifications offered after multiple points of view have been consulted and (to the extent possible) genuinely understood.1 9 Such an approach is the foundation of contemporary republicanism. It is for this reason that republican conceptions treat an understanding of the partiality of one's own perspective as a regulative ideal for politics, and are highly suspicious of approaches that see prepolitical interests as the exclusive determinants of political participation. 
The antirepublican critique rejects this approach as unrealistic and misguided. But the categories to which it refers and the commitments that it embodies are highly likely to reflect republican understandings. For example, spheres of autonomy for individuals and groups must be defended on some ground; they cannot be justified as prepolitical; and if the defense is to be persuasive, it will have to incorporate republican notions of deliberation and universalism. Indeed, the very conception of a disadvantaged group-central to some attacks 1 7 on republican notions of universalism-depends on a commitment to an understanding of what disadvantage amounts to, and a belief that the understanding can be vindicated through discussion with those initially skeptical. 9 The antirepublican critique, like many arguments of this sort, "can give no account of the normative foundations of its own rhetoric."1'9 9 Arguments that reject universalism tend to disable themselves from supporting their own descriptive and normative commitments; arguments that reject neutrality eliminate a possible source of argument that is not only strategically useful, but an accurate description of what is sometimes at work. 0 0 
Republicans do not insist that political actors must forget their private concerns, or that differences and disagreement are inadmissible in politics. A belief in universalism need not be accompanied by a desire to erase differences. Indeed, republicans see disagreement as a creative and productive force, highly congenial to and even an indispensable part of the basic republican faith in political dialogue2. 0 1 Discussion and deliberation problems-a difficulty that also infects attempts to use "empathy" as a tool for solving political or legal problems. 

also intrapersonally. Deliberation occurs within the self as well as among different people. Theories that incorporate notions of situated selves so as to criticize universalism and to celcbrate differences in perspective ultimately threaten to produce solipsism, or highly disaggregated conceptions of the person. Cf D. PARFIT, REASONS AND PERSONS 219-44 (1984) (exploring different conceptions of the person over time). 
Problems of the sort discussed in the text severely complicate efforts to describe and value a perspective without claiming its status as truth, understood pragmatically or in some other terms. See J. HABERMAS, supra note 58, at 294, 336-37. 

"differences of opinion" and "jarring of parties" can "promote deliberation"); H. PrrKIN, supranote 1, at 90 ("A plurality of classes and interests is necessary to the Citizen vision not merely because depend for their legitimacy and efficacy on the existence of conflicting views.20 2 The basic constitutional institutions of checks and balances and federalism should be understood at least partly in this light. Modern republicanism is thus not grounded in a belief in homogeneity; on the contrary, heterogeneity is necessary if republican systems are to work. As we shall see, this understanding will call for institutional innovations.20 3 
It would be extraordinarily foolish to suggest that disparities in perspective and power do not complicate and distort deliberative processes, or to claim that exhortations to citizens and representatives to consult the common good are sufficient to bring about desirable results. And it would be a mistake to suggest that the republican commitments as described here lead directly to a particular social theory or a particular set of institutional arrangements. Large questions-having to do with the appropriate conception of rights, institutions, and groups-remain to be resolved. But the question is one of governing ideals; and here liberal republicanism is superior to its competitors. 
Republican thought, thus understood, furnishes the basis for approaching a variety of issues in modern public law in somewhat different ways. To be sure, one cannot simply "apply" republican ideas as if they provided self-evident solutions to contemporary legal problems; there will be room to contest any particular application. But many contemporary controversies look quite different if viewed through the lens of the republican tradition. Some of these controversies involve public law doctrine in the courts; most of them call for initiatives from nonjudicial bodies. For the most part, the discussion of particular areas will be brief and summary, attempting to suggest how republicans would approach a variety of problems rather than to examine those problems in detail. 
Consider, for example, the problems raised by modern campaign finance regulation. Such regulation has often been challenged on the ground that it is inconsistent with the "marketplace of ideas"-indeed, that it effects a kind of First Amendment taking from rich speakers in each has its unique perspective and spirit to contribute to the community, but also because internal conflict is an essential and healthy phenomenon in its own right."); id. at 82 ("Citizen virtue is not the product of a uniform solidarity of identification or obedience. Indeed, in the Citizen vision, precisely plurality, competition, diversity, rather than uniformity, are the source of . . .strength." (emphasis in original)); id. at 300-04; cf.Michelman, supra note 6. 
also Manin, supra note 83, at 360-61. 
order to help poorer ones. It was under this rationale that the Supreme Court invalidated campaign finance regulation in Buckley v. Valeo.2 4 There the Court said that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment."2 0 5 The Court did not hold that the effort to promote deliberation among political equals was insufficiently weighty, or inadequately promoted by the legislation at issue; the Court held, much more sweepingly, that that effort was illegitimate under the First Amendment. 
Under a republican approach to the First Amendment, campaign finance regulation would be treated far more hospitably. At least some forms of regulation would be seen as plausible efforts to promote rather than to undermine First Amendment purposes, by counteracting the distortions brought about by expenditures on political campaigns. A deliberative conception of the First Amendment, incorporating a norm of political equality,20 8 would lead to a quite different analysis from the marketplace model, which has significant pluralist overtones. Above all, the Buckley Court's hostility to redistributive rationales for regulation would dissipate. 
To be sure, there are large difficulties in designing a system of campaign finance regulation that achieves its intended purposes and that does not serve as an incumbent protection measure.2"7 But republican understandings would point toward large reforms of the electoral process in an effort to improve political deliberation and to promote political equality and citizenship. 
For similar reasons, republican ideas offer reasons to reject recent attacks on the fairness doctrine in the broadcast and print media. Such ideas suggest that efforts to promote access to sources of public deliberation should be treated quite hospitably; and that the exclusive use of the economic market to regulate such access is undesirable. It is for this reason that on the republican view a principal current threat to a well-functioning system of free expression lies, not in government regulation, but in 
Their Priority,in 3 THE TANNER LEcrTUES ON HUMAN VALUES 76 (S.McMurrin ed. 1982). According to Rawls: 
IT]he Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair-value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fair-value it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage. . . .On this view, democracy is a kind of regulated rivalry between economic classes and interest groups in which the outcome should properly depend on the ability and willingness of each to use its financial resources and skills, admittedly very unequal, to make its desires felt. 
Id. 
1981). government "inaction" that allows the political process to be excessively influenced by disparities in private wealth and private access. 08 
A critical feature of the learning of the New Deal period-one with continuing influence on American law-is that the original constitutional structure of dual sovereignty was a large mistake, allied with anachronistic goals of limited government and inconsistent with the need for continuing national intervention into marketplaces.20 9 But one of the great strengths of the original constitutional system was its simultaneous provision of deliberative representation at the national level and self-determination at the local level, furnishing a sphere for traditional republican goals. A central lesson of the republican revival is the need to provide outlets for self-determination in the public and private spheres. 10 The Tocquevillian understanding of a variety of groups, some in local government, some in purely private organizations, furnishes an alternative understanding, far superior to the New Deal model. 
Understandings of this sort lead in a variety of directions. In the area of labor law, collective bargaining appears superior to uniform national standards.2 ' "Reconstitutive law"-reforms that allow state and local flexibility by restructuring markets rather than imposing inflexible national commands-should be viewed hospitably. 12 Proposals to loosen restrictions in federal grant programs are an example. From the republican point of view, efforts to promote workplace democracy also hold out considerable promise."' Interpretations of the establishment clause should recognize the role of religious organizations in the cultivation of republican virtues;" 4 approaches to the clause that end up disfavoring religion21 5 undervalue the role of intermediate organizations in a pluralistic society. 
Sunstein, supra note 115, at 440-43. 
54 U. CHI. L. REV. 1484, 1493-1511 (1987); Sunstein, supra note 115, at 504-08. 
Reflections on the CurrentStateofLabor Law and its Prospects,51 U. CHI. L. REV. 1012 (1984), point in precisely the wrong direction. See P. WEILER, THE FUTURE OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT LAW: REFLECTIONS ON WRONGFUL DISMISSAL WITHIN THE MARKET, THE LAW, AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (temp. ed. Oct. 1987). 
(forthcoming 1989). 
WORKPLACE DEMOCRACY (1986); C. GUNN, WORKERS' SELF-MANAGEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES (1984). 
inconsistency between the desire to remove religious issues from politics, see supra text accompanying note 85, and the claim that accommodation of religion will be desirable in the interest of neutrality. Measures that accommodate religion may be necessary in order to avoid disfavoring religion through facially neutral statutes that exclude religious organizations; accommodation is thus not inconsistent with a general desire to remove religious controversy from the political agenda. 

Courts review statutes for "rationality" under a variety of constitutional provisions, including the due process, contracts, takings, and equal protection clauses.216 To some, the idea that statues must be "rational" is inconsistent with the nature of the political process, which consists of "deals" among self-interested actors.2 1 But the requirement of rationality is best understood* as a requirement of deliberation by political officials. The Constitution requires some showing that a burden was imposed, or a benefit denied, for a reason other than the exercise of political power by the advantaged class. In its requirement of an element of deliberation in politics, rationality review recalls republican themes, indeed it is closely associated with Madisonian theories of representation."' Whether or not constitutional courts should enforce the rationality norm more vigorously,21 9 the norm does have constitutional status, and its continuing existence reveals the tenacity of deliberative conceptions of politics. 2 0 
The republican tradition also furnishes a different angle from which to understand the lesson of the Lochner period. In that period, the Supreme Court invalidated a wide range of regulatory measures, frequently by invoking libertarian conceptions of private rights. The Lochner period is frequently understood as a lesson in institutional role, revealing the risks of an aggressive judicial function in overseeing the political process.221 But a different understanding would stress issues of substance as well as of institutional competence. 
Such an understanding would emphasize the extent to which the Lochner Court posited the existence of a natural and prepolitical private sphere, one that served as a brake on legislation. The creation of such a sphere, based on a theory of natural rights, coexists uneasily with republican conceptions of politics. Republicans do of course believe in rights, understood as the outcome of a well-functioning deliberative process; hence republicans enthusiastically endorse the use of constitutionalism as a check 221 (1981); United States R.R. Retirement Bd. v. Frit , 449 U.S. 166 (1980); Williamson v. Lee Optical, 348 U.S. 483 (1955). 
note 184, at 27-31. 

HARV. L. REV. 1212 (1978) (discussing constitutional norms not enforced by courts). 
than substance). But see Sunstein, supra note 164 (arguing that lesson of Lochner lies in common law or staus quo baselines); Horwitz, supra note 7, at 1827-30 (suggesting that Lochner was rooted in conception of rights as prepolitical). on popular majorities. But republicans are skeptical of approaches to politics and constitutionalism that rely on rights that are said to antedate political deliberation. 
On this view, the problem with the Lochner Court was its reliance on common law and status quo baselines; the Court was unable to see the ways in which those baselines were implicated in, indeed a product of law.2 22 The heirs of Lochner, understood through a republican lens, are not cases like Roe v. Wade,2 3 but instead such decisions as Bowers v. Hardwic2k24 and Washington v. Davis2. 2 5 Both decisions rely on status quo baselines and downplay the role of law in creating existing practice. Thus Hardwick relies on the fact that gays and lesbians have not been permitted to marry, when marriage is in fact a creature of the legal system; thus Washington v. Davis disregards the fact that the existing distribution of benefits and burdens between blacks and whites is a function of the legal system, and not exogenous to it. On the republican view, Lochner, Hardwick, and Washington v. Davis share the same defect: they ignore the constitutive functions of law and the ways in which existing practices are dependent on past and present choices of the legal system. 
Republican thought might also provide a basis for understanding that the role of constitutionalism is countering classifications in such areas as race, sex, sexual orientation, and poverty. A central concern here is that whose origins lay in the common law itself. On this view, there is a close association between Lochner and Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896). In Plessy, the Court said that the plaintiff's argument assumes that social prejudices may be overcome by legislation, and that equal rights cannot be secured to the negro except by an enforced commingling of the two races. We cannot accept this proposition. If the two races are to meet upon terms of social equality, it must be the result of natural affinities, a mutual appreciation of each other's merits and a voluntary consent of individuals. . . . Legislation is powerless to eradicate racial instincts or to abolish distinctions based upon physical differences .... 
Id. at 551. Arguments of this sort would be at least coherent in the context of a forced integration law; they are plausible in the setting of Plessy only if the segregative status quo is treated as prelegal. Both Plessy and Lochner acted as if the law is facilitative rather than constitutive or-to put the point slightly differently-as if there is perfect transparency between individual will and legal constraints, and the latter has no impact on the former-a belief that infects much of current law, and that would be impossible to sustain under republican premises. See infra notes 224-25. 

it did not involve marriage. But marriage is hardly prepolitical or prelegal; it is the state that decides who may marry whom. The fact that gays and lesbians may not marry should not, on the republican view, be taken as a prepolitical barrier to the plaintiff's claim, but instead as part of a range of data that support an equal protection challenge to measures discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation. See Sunstein, Sexual Orientationand the Constitution:A Note on the Relationship Between Due Processand Equal Protection, 55 U. CH. L. REv. 1161 (1988). 
difficulties in developing a workable alternative to an "intent" test. the values supporting such classifications are the product of social power; they must therefore be subject to scrutiny and review.22 6 
In this view, judicial decisions that take a skeptical approach to such classifications are consistent with the rejection of the Lochner decision, not with Lochner itself. Republican premises might eventually serve as the foundation of a theory of social subordination to undergird constitutional hostility to discrimination against various social groups. The republican beliefs in political equality and deliberation would function as the defining notions. The argument here would have to be quite elaborate, but some of its foundations can be found in current law. 227 
There is an irony here. Republican thought has traditionally been allied with exclusionary practices. It is thus odd to invoke republicanism as a basis for rejecting those same practices. But the premises of republican thought furnish an aspiration that turns out to provide the basis for criticism of republican traditions. There is nothing especially unusual in this phenomenon. Frequently cultural commitments are used to revise cultural practices; indeed those who attempt to revise existing practice inevitably draw on traditional commitments. 22 8 The use of republican aspiration to counteract republican practice is simply an illustration of this general proposition. 
In recent years, there has been something of a revival of interest in theories of statutory construction. It should not be controversial to suggest that approaches to construction are informed by theories of the political process. Thus it is suggested that courts should understand statutes as "deals" among self-interested actors and enforce them as such.229 Suggestions of this sort of course are an outgrowth of interest-group pluralism. 230 The idea that the role of the court is solely to implement congressional purposes in the particular case is also congenial to pluralist understandings. On the republican view, by contrast, one of the tasks of statutory construction is to promote actual deliberation in the lawmaking process and to interpret statutes, within the appropriate confines of the judicial role, so as to minimize the pathologies of pluralism.2 3 1 
Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982). 
INTERPRETATION AND SOCIAL CRITICISM (1987). 
Economic System, 98 HARv. L. REV. 4 (1984); Easterbrook, Statutes' Domains, 50 U. CHI. L. REV. 533 (1983). 
inyokes a Lochner-like presumption in favor of private ordering as a tool of construction. 
Interpretation: An Interest Group Model, 86 COLUM. L. REv. 223 (1986). 
The basic defense of canons of statutory construction is that they are literally unavoidable. In hard cases, statutory construction is impossible in the absence of understandings about the background against which Congress legislates. Moreover, it is possible to understand and defend some canons of statutory construction as a straightforward outgrowth of republican conceptions of politics. Many such canons appear alert to possible malfunctions in the legislative process, and attempt to use interpretation to guard against or limit those malfunctions.2 32 In these canons, or "clear statement" principles, one can find the foundations of a republican approach to statutory construction, an approach that repudiates the idea that the only role of the courts is to ascertain legislative intent in the particular case. 
Consider, for example, the idea that appropriations measures should not readily be thought to amend substantive statutes. 23 3 Such a rule might be defended on the ground that the appropriations process is comparatively likely to be dominated by well-organized private groups, that it lacks visibility, and that the outcomes of that process should be narrowly construed. One might on similar lines defend the notion that federal statutes should not easily be thought to preempt state law. 234 The central ideas here are that from the founding period, the federal system has furnished an opportunity for state and local self-determination, and that the national government should not be taken to have interfered with that goal unless Congress deliberated on the express point. Finally, courts sometimes suggest that statutes will be understood as an integrated whole; 235 one part of a statute will not lightly be taken to undermine the general statutory structure. This approach to statutes is controversial to those who believe that statutes tend to be unprincipled trade-offs among private groups. But the idea becomes more understandable if it is understood as an effort to ensure that statutes are not undermined by "deals" that serve as largely invisible qualifications of basic statutory purposes. 
These approaches to statutory construction might be defended straight232. Some canons of construction attempt to discern the intent of the legislature; others, by contrast, operate as a kind of tie-breaker when legislative intent is unclear, and frequently invoke procedural or substantive goals that are sometimes constitutionally inspired. The notions that statutes should be construed so as to promote state autonomy, see Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1 (1981), or to avoid harming Indian tribes, see Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 471 U.S. 759 (1985), are examples of substantive canons; the claims that deference should be given to agency interpretations of statutes, see Chevron USA Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 865-66 (1984), or that courts should not lightly find that appropriations statutes amend substantive statutes, see TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978), are examples of process-oriented statutes. For general and more detailed discussion of these devices, see Sunstein, Statutes and the Regulatory State (1988) (unpublished manuscript); Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Construction (1987) (unpublished manuscript on file with author). 
Through Limitation Riders, 1987 DUKE L.J. 456. 
forwardly on republican grounds. The narrow construction of appropriations statutes is designed to restrict the effect of measures likely to represent interest-group deals; protection of state and local autonomy recalls the republican belief in local self-determination; in interpreting statutes as integrated wholes, courts minimize the pathologies of pluralism. 
In light of massive changes in the nature of the national government since the founding, however, it would be surprising if existing canons of construction were sufficient. And it is possible to outline a series of canons of construction that are designed to promote republican goals in a different institutional environment. All of these canons, to be noted briefly here, have some basis in current law; all of them have been used by courts in the interpretive process. The suggestion here is that they ought to be adopted as self-conscious guides to statutory construction. 
Some cases suggest a judicial perception that statutes should be construed so that the aggregate social benefits are proportionate to the aggregate social costs.28 This principle, implicit in some of the recent cases,2"" recognizes the risk that well-organized groups might be able to obtain legislation that would likely not be the outcome of a well-functioning Madisonian process. On this view, moreover, regulatory statutes should ordinarily be understood to contain de minimis exceptions. Administrators should generally be authorized to refuse to impose costly regulations for highly speculative or de minimis gains." 8 
The difficulty with a proportionality principle or a de minimis exception stems from the fact that there is no uncontroversial metric with which to measure social costs and social benefits. If courts understand benefits and costs technically-as in the economic formulation-and make the assessment turn on private willingness to pay, they will be relying on a highly controversial approach, one that is likely to have been repudiated by the legislature that enacted the program in question. An approach that measures costs and benefits in terms of private willingness to pay is hardly consistent with republican tenets; it would be quite odd to invoke republicanism in order to support such an approach. Many statutes are designed to transform rather than implement preferences, to redistribute resources, or to reflect the outcome of a deliberative process about relevant public values. Moreover, there may be symbolic benefits in a statute that protects (for example) endangered species. Noncommodity values of various sorts are served by regulatory programs, and republican understandings treat those values quite hospitably. The proportionality principle becomes workable on the assumption that in some cases, it will be relatively clear that the social benefits are small in comparison to the social costs, and that in some cases statutes should be construed so as not to permit or require the action at issue. In order to make the principle operational, it will therefore be necessary to make a typology of statutes in terms of redistributive, efficiency, and aspirational functions. 
An analogous principle, also implicit in the cases, counsels courts narrowly to construe procedural limitations on substantive rights. Many cases involve, for example, the question whether to imply a private right of action to enforce a regulatory statute;23 the appropriate procedures for adjusting or eliminating a substantive benefit, as in a claimed right to a hearing before elimination of welfare benefits;24 0 and the availability of judicial review to test enforcement or nonenforcement.2 4 1 Constitutional questions are of course implicated here. But the constitutional issues are avoided if courts construe procedural qualifications narrowly in the belief that the procedures are less likely to be the product of a deliberative process than the substance, and from fear that procedural qualifications might enable well-organized groups to defeat substantive programs. 
Courts have also employed clear statement principles of statutory construction so as to help bring about consistency and coordination in the law.24 2 Such a role has clear precedent in the context of administrative law. Courts have, for example, aggressively construed statutes of the 1920's and 1930's so as to require old-line agencies to consider environmental concerns.24 The Bob Jones case 2" might best be understood as an effort to ensure that the I.R.S. takes account of the widespread social antagonism toward racial discrimination, as part of the general thrust of "public policy." Some cases limiting agency authority to impose significant costs for speculative benefits can be understood in similar terms. 2 45 Decisions of this sort might be justified on republican grounds, as part of the integration of statutory systems into a coherent whole that could plausibly be understood as the outcome of deliberative processes. 
Finally, republicans would urge that principles of statutory construction be designed to ensure that decisions are made by those who are politically accountable and highly visible. If the issue is one of allocation of institu239. See Stewart & Sunstein, Public Programsand Private Rights, 95 HARV. L. REv. 1193, 1206-07, 1289-1316 (1982). 
statutory construction, see Bartlett v. Bowen, 816 F.2d 695 (D.C. Cir. 1987). 

courts should be allowed to treat statutes as precedents to ensure against statutory obsolecence); Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation,135 U. PA. L. REv. 1479 (1987) (arguing that courts should interpret statutes so as to allow for changing social conditions). 
tional authority, courts should construe statutes in such a way as to promote political accountability. An example is the Supreme Court's decision in Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong,24 in which the Court held-as a matter of due process-that if aliens were to be prevented from serving as federal employees, the decision must be made by Congress or the President rather than by the Civil Service Commission. In other cases the Court, and individual Justices, have suggested that the Constitution requires that certain disabilities may not be visited on certain groups unless an accountable actor has so decided.247 Decisions of this sort might be understood as involving a kind of clear statement principle. 
These examples are designed simply to illustrate some of the directions in which statutory construction might move if republican understandings were taken seriously.2 48 
approaches account for some otherwise surprising practices here, and they might spur further developments as well. 
In recent years, there has been a revival of interest in systems of proportional or group representation. Blacks, women, the handicapped, gays and lesbians, and other disadvantaged groups have often had little success in the ordinary electoral process. In particular, the problem of racial block voting has sometimes made it impossible for blacks to elect anyone in certain election districts.149 This problem-sometimes described as minority vote dilution-produces a system in which blacks and other groups have a much lower percentage of representatives than of the population. 5 ' Be246. 426 U.S. 88 (1976). 
dissenting); Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978) (Powell, J.); see also Gewirtz, The Courts, Congress, and Executive Policy-making,40 LAW & CONTEMP. PRoas. 46, 65-83 (1976) (arguing in favor of clear statement principles to limit executive power). 
collective action problems will be overcome. See supra notes 25-31 (discussing failure of pluralism to solve collective action problems); Eskridge, PoliticsWithout Romance: Implications ofPublic Choice Theoryfor Statutory Interpretation, 74 VA. L. REV. 275, 323-24, 330-34 (1988) (same). Second, statutes should be construed favorably to traditionally disadvantaged groups. See supra text accompanying notes 62-75 (discussing republican norm of political equality); supra text accompanying notes 13-20 (discussing adverse impact of interest-group pluralism on such groups). Note that this latter idea has roots in current law. See Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677 (1979) (implying private cause of action to redress sex discrimination); Allen v. State Bd. of Elections, 393 U.S. 544 (1969) (implying private cause of action under Voting Rights Act). Note also that the canon in favor of construing statutes favorably to Indian tribes is an explicit example. A more detailed discussion of statutory construction can be found in Sunstein, supra note 232. 
Reassessment of Historicaland ContemporaryEvidence, 43 J. POL. 982 (1981); Frickey, Majority Rule, Minority Rights, and the Right to Vote: Reflections Upon a Reading of Minority Vote Dilution, 3 LAW & INEQUALITY 209 (1985); Note, The ConstitutionalImperativeof ProportionalRepresentation, 94 YALE L.J. 163 (1984). 
generally S. WELCH & A. KARNIG, BLACK REPRESENTATION AND URBAN PoLIcY (1980); S. WELCH & T. BLEDSOE, URBAN RETURN AND ris CONSEQUENCES (1987). cause proportional representation might be justified on pluralist and republican grounds, and because it holds out such substantial promise and risk, it will be useful to discuss the problem in some detail here. 
There is a solid constitutional pedigree for group representation, notwithstanding the constant and emphatic rejections of constitutionallybased arguments for representation of members of racial minority groups."5' Despite the rigidity of the one person-one vote formula,2 52 with its majoritarian and individualistic overtones, group representation has always been an important feature of American constitutionalism. At the time of the framing, for example, geography was thought to define distinct communities with distinct interests; representation of the states as such seemed only natural. 5 ' It would not be difficult to argue that racial and ethnic groups (among others) are the contemporary analogue to groups that were defined in geographical terms during the founding period. 
Moreover, the basic constitutional institutions of federalism, bicameralism, and checks and balances share some of the appeal of proportional representation, and owe their origins in part to notions of group representation.2 54 These institutions proliferate the points of access to government, increasing the ability of diverse groups to influence policy, multiplying perspectives in government, and improving deliberative capacities.2 55 In this respect, they ensure something in the way of group representation, at least when compared with unitary systems. Of course both the separation of powers and bicameralism grow in part out of efforts to promote representation of diverse groups; bicameralism allowed representation of the wealthy and the masses; the notion of separation derived from notions of mixed government, which was designed to ensure a measure of representation of groups defined in social and economic terms. 256 
Proportional representation might be designed to ensure representation in the legislature of all those groups that are able to attain more than a minimal share of the vote. Such a system has variants in Germany, Israel, Italy, and many other countries.2 57 In another form, the system might be designed to ensure that members of disadvantaged groups are given the VOTES COUNT? (1987) (criticizing Voting Rights Act for producing proportional representation). 
government). 

OF JOHN ADAMS 290-91 (C.F. Adams ed. 1851) (emphasizing role of Senate in representing the "rich, the well-born, and the able" and the House in representing "the mass"); D. HELD, supra note 9, at 55-61. The American system, however, dramatically departed from these origins. 
Arrow problems referred to in connection with pluralist systems must also be taken into account here. 
power to exert influence on political outcomes.2 5 Rather than exhorting political participants to seek the common good, advocates of proportional representation claim that the political process should be structured so as to encourage the expression and affirmation of diverse perspectives and interests. 
There is a large literature on various voting schemes designed to serve the end of proportional representation.2 59 But whatever the scheme, the simple point is this: If interests are irreducibly opposed, the remedy for political life consists in providing mechanisms for group representation, not in arguing in favor of pursuit of the common good. 
Various risks, however, threaten to undermine systems of proportional representation. Proportional representation may marginalize rather than help disadvantaged groups; it may also increase the risk of factionalism and political paralysis. The risks of marginalization may be greater in a system in which disadvantaged groups have one representative who speaks for their interests, rather than many representatives who are at least to some degree beholden to them.28 0 The dangers of factionalism and paralysis threaten to undermine the political process quite generally.2"1 A principal function of proportional representation is to shift the process of coalition building from the electoral process to the representative assembly itself. In so doing, such systems may impair governmental outcomes. This conclusion may follow whether one is looking from the standpoint of politically weak groups or the system as a whole. 
From the republican point of view, however, the most significant problems with proportional representation are that it threatens to ratify, perpetuate, and encourage an understanding of the political process as a self-interested struggle among "interests" for scarce social resources, that it may discourage political actors from assuming and understanding the perspectives of others, and that it downplays the deliberative and transformative features of politics. Indeed, in some incarnations, proportional representation tends to accept the basic premises of pluralist politics; it simply reallocates the distribution of power that underlies interest-group (even racial) struggle. The reallocation of power is in some settings highly desirable, but the improvement in politics is only partial. 
based on this idea. See 42 U.S.C.  1973(2) (1982). Here of course there are problems in deciding which groups to treat as disadvantaged and in determining which people should be permitted to speak for such groups; ordinary proportional representation eliminates these difficulties. 
W. LAKEMAN, How DEMOCRACIES VOTE: A STUDY OF ELECTORAL SYSTEMS (4th ed. 1974); D. RAE, THE POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES OF ELECTORAL LAWS (rev. ed. 1971); F.A. HERMENS, DEMOCRACY OR ANARCHY? A STUDY OF PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION (1972); CHOOSING AN ELECTORAL SYSTEM: ISSUES AND ALTERNATIVES 
JudicialRegulation of Politics, 87 COLuM. L. REV. 1325 (1987). 

These considerations offer powerful arguments against prominent modern defenses of proportional representation; they also offer reasons for skepticism about systems of group representation as a solution to the multiple problems of modern political life. The skepticism is especially appropriate in national institutions, for which Madisonian mechanisms may be better suited. 
Ironically, however, efforts to ensure proportional representation become much more plausible if they are justified on republican grounds. The basic argument here would be that deliberative processes will be improved, not undermined, if mechanisms are instituted to ensure that multiple groups, particularly the disadvantaged, have access to the process. 26 2 Group representation, precisely by having this effect, would ensure that diverse views are expressed on an ongoing basis in the representative process, where they might otherwise be excluded. In this respect, group representation would be a kind of second-best solution for the real-world failures of 
deliberation. 
And the purpose of access is not primarily to allow each group to have its "piece of the action"-though that is not entirely irrelevant-but instead to ensure that processes of deliberation are not distorted by the mistaken appearance of a common set of interests on the part of all concerned. 6 3 In this incarnation, proportional representation is designed to increase the likelihood that political outcomes will incorporate some understanding of the perspective of all those affected. 2 4 For this reason proportional representation may be the functional analogue to the institutions of checks and balances and federalism, recognizing the creative functions of disagreement and multiple per262. Cf Michelman, supra note 6, at 76-77 (arguing for "plurality" on courts). Aristotle supplied the basic underpinnings of the argument, suggesting that when diverse groups "all come together . . . they may surpass-collectively and as a body, although not individually-the quality of the few best. . . . When there are many who contribute to the process of deliberation, each can bring his share of goodness and moral prudence; . . . some appreciate one part, some another, and all together appreciate all." ARmSToTtLE, POLrrICS 123 (E. Barker trans. 1972). See the discussion of Aristotle in J.G.A. POCOCK, supra note 3, at 72-73 (suggesting Aristotelian effort to work "out the theory of society in which every conceivable individual and social type had its appropriate role in decision-making"). 
Consider also J. RAWLS, supra note 17, at 358-59 (1971) ("In everyday life the exchange of opinion with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things from the standpoint of others and the limits of our vision are brought home to us. . . . The benefits from discussion lie in the fact that even representative legislators are limited in knowledge and the ability to reason. No one of them knows everything the others know, or can make all the same inferences that they can draw in concert. Discussion is a way of combining information and enlarging the range of arguments."). 
this ground); Pitkin, supra note 1, at 90 (noting that on the republican view, a "plurality of classes and interests is necessary" partly because "internal conflict is an essential and healthy phenomenon in its own right"). 
political deliberation: "The differences of opinion, and the jarrings of parties in [the legislative] department of the government . . . often promote deliberation and circumspection; and serve to check the excesses of the majority." THE FEDERALST No. 70, at 426-27 (A. Hamilton) (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). spectives for the governmental process. 65 In this sense there is continuity between recent proposals for proportional representation and the republican elements of the original constitutional regime. 
The formal or functional exclusion of important categories of the citizenry has often been an ingredient in republican systems; contemporary politics furnishes several illustrations. For this reason, proportional or group representation may, in some contexts, be a highly desirable reform. Perhaps surprisingly, it is desirable above all from the standpoint of republican premises that its supporters are often at such pains to deny. Distinctly non-Madisonian institutions may be necessary to achieve the Madisonian goal of deliberative democracy. 
CONCLUSION 
Republican conceptions of politics have taken many forms; only some of them are attractive. I have suggested that the most powerful versions of republicanism are not antiliberal at all. Instead they borrow from a significant strand of the liberal tradition, emphasizing political equality, the need to provide outlets for self-determination by the citizenry, the impossibility of maintaining democracy without a degree of citizen mobilization, the value of institutional and rights-based constraints on factionalism and self-interested representation, and the deliberative functions of politics. Above all, republican theories stress the importance of dialogue and disagreement in the governmental process; they are designed to ensure, not that political actors are disembodied, but that to the extent possible they look through the eyes of all those affected." 6' 
It would be a mistake to suggest that by itself, an approach of this sort could lead to a particular set of institutional arrangements or a particular specification of public and private rights. But if understood in this fashion, republican theories have played a central role in American public law. The task for modern republicanism is not, however, one of excavation. Contemporary republicanism is more to be made than found, even if historical commitments can illuminate, in somewhat surprising ways, the nature of American constitutionalism at its inception. 
One of the principal tasks for modern constitutional theory is to move beyond the republican revival by integrating aspects of traditional republican thought with the rise of the modern regulatory state, emerging theories of social subordination of various groups, and the need for intermediate organizations, public and private, to satisfy republican goals. I have suggested that many areas of modern legal controversy are illuminated by republican understandings, and that some such areas would be pushed in Young, Sodal Movement Challenges, supra note 2. 

Reviewed by Cass R. Sunstein2 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Occasionally an intellectual or political movement disrupts existing categories, throws into question practices and conceptual structures that had previously been accepted or even invisible, and eventually produces substantial changes in legal rules. How and why this happens is quite mysterious. The abolitionist movement of the 1850's is one example. Another is the New Deal, which grew out of an understanding that the common law was neither natural nor prepolitical and failed to provide a neutral baseline for decision. 3 The most prominent recent illustration is the civil rights movement of the 1950's and i96o's, which challenged practices of racial exclusion. Thus the Supreme Court rejected Plessy v. Ferguson4 on the ground that an understanding of the purposes and effects of school segregation revealed that racial separation was hardly neutral. In all of these contexts, practices that had for a long period been taken as natural and inviolate, sometimes even as based on biological differences, were revealed as socially created and subject to criticism and change. 
The women's movement is the most powerful contemporary development of this sort; feminism provides its theoretical foundation. Despite its longevity5 and its recent impact on the law, the feminist movement has hardly run its course. Nonetheless, the basic claims of feminist theory are in many circles denied credibility and respect, or even a fair hearing. Ironically, those circles include many observers 
IVisiting Professor of Law, University of Chicago; Professor of Law, Osgoode Hall Law School. 
2 Professor of Law, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. The author would like to thank Mary Becker, Veronica Dougherty, Richard Fallon, Mary Ann Glendon, Sara Ketchum, Larry Kramer, Michael McConnell, Frank Michelman, Geoffrey Miller, Martha Minow, Richard A. Posner, Geoffrey Stone, David A. Strauss, Kathleen Sullivan, and Diane Wood for valuable comments on a previous draft. 
3 See West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379 (1937); B. ACKERMAN, RECONSTRUCTING AMERICAN LAW (1984); L. TRIBE, AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 6-8 (2d ed. 1988); Sunstein, Lochner's Legacy, 87 COLUM. L. REv. 873 (1987). 
4 x63 U.S. 537 (1896). 
5 "The first unmistakably feminist voices were heard in England in the 17th century." A. JAGGAR, FEMINIST POLITICS AND HUMAN NATURE 3 (1983). strongly committed to perceptions associated with the New Deal and the civil rights movement. 
Feminist legal theory has had three principal strands, which for convenience may be called the "difference," "different voice," and "dominance" approaches. 6 The least controversial, associated with the movement for the Equal Rights Amendment, is the "difference" approach, which argues that women should be permitted to compete on equal terms with men in the public world. In this view, characteristics legally and socially attributed to women - passivity, weakness, irrationality - are inaccurate or overbroad generalizations and at most the product of anachronistic social practices. Thus, feminists attack distinctions on the basis of gender - for example, laws excluding women from "male" jobs - as reflecting prejudice rather than reality and as perpetuating women's second-class citizenship. 7 This strand of feminism, sometimes represented by the National Organization for Women, has achieved widespread acceptance in legal doctrine.8 A more controversial aspect of the same strand is the claim that, just as women should participate on equal terms with men in the professional world, so too should men participate on equal terms with women in the domestic sphere. A basic point here is that the domestic sphere has been devalued and used as a major arena for the subordination of women. The difference approach, if accepted, would produce significant changes in the employment market and in the care of children. 
The "different voice" strand of feminist theory, associated most visibly with the work of Carol Gilligan, 9 asserts that there is a distinctly female way of approaching moral and legal dilemmas and that that way has been ignored or downplayed in legal doctrine and scholarship.' 0 In this view, women tend to value relationships and con6 Other strands exist outside of law. See, e.g., M. DALY, PURE LUST: ELEMENTAL FEMINIST PHILOSOPHY (1984); M. DALY, GYN/ECOLOGY: THE METAETHICS OF RADICAL FEMINISM (1978); A. JAGGAR, supra note 5. 
ConstitutionalBasisfor Equal Rights for Women, 8o YALE L.J. 871, 888-91 (1971) (arguing for an equal rights amendment to eliminate most classifications on the basis of sex). Some of the most important work here was done, in and out of the courts, by then Prof. Ruth Bader Ginsburg. See, e.g., Ginsburg, Sex Equality and the Constitution, 52 TUL. L. REV. 451 (1978). 
8 See, e.g., Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (I977) (social security benefits); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973) (military dependance allowances). 
9 See C. GILLIGAN, IN A DIFFERENT VOICE (1982). 
10 See, e.g., Karst, Woman's Constitution, 1984 DUKE L.J. 447, 48o-508 (discussing the possible consequence of reconstructing constitutional law to include women's distinctive morality); Menkel-Meadow, Toward Another View of Legal Negotiation: The Structure of Problem Solving, 31 UCLA L. REV. 754 (1984) (applying a feminist conception of dispute resolution and transaction planning to negotiation); Scales, The Emergence of Feminist Jurisprudence:An Essay, 95 YALE L.J. 1373 (1986) (arguing that the feminist jurisprudence abandons prescribed legalistic terms); Sherry, Civic Virtue and the Feminine Voice in ConstitutionalAdjudication, 72 VA. L. REv. 543 (1986) (arguing that the feminine jurisprudence that relies on a vision closely aligned with classical republicanism is unlike any other contemporary jurisprudence). nections - an "ethic of care" - whereas men tend to place a higher premium on abstraction, rights, autonomy, separation, formality, and neutrality - an "ethic of justice."" A centerpiece of this position is that prevailing theories of moral development and morality in general have taken a partial perspective and supposed it to be universal, ignoring alternative perspectives or treating them as primitive.12 The "different voice" approach assumes both descriptive and normative form, often contending that the legal system unduly emphasizes rules and abstraction and attends insufficiently to context and reciprocal responsibility. 13 Sometimes this approach draws on psychoanalytic theory.14 The approach has significant consequences for a wide range of legal rules and practices, as well as for legal and social theory, both inside and outside the area of sex discrimination. 15 
A third strand of feminist theory - the "dominance" approach describes gender inequality not in terms of arbitrary or irrational differentiation but in terms of the social subordination of women. The problem is not that those similarly situated have been treated differently; it is instead that one group has dominated the other, in part through sexual practices. A wide range of issues that are not normally thought to involve sex discrimination - including sexual harassment, prostitution, reproductive freedom, rape, and pornography - thus raise questions of inequality. More broadly, these feminists see inequality in patterns of interaction between men and women that are normally taken as unobjectionable and even as intrinsic to traditional gender roles. Rape and prostitution are, in this view, not isolated deviations from social norms; they are extreme examples of the subordination of women that occurs in many places.16 The dominance approach joins the different voice approach's critique of partial perspective, but whereas the different voice approach embraces wom 
I Gilligan does not attribute these characteristics to any particular biological or social source. See C. GILLIGAN, supra note 9. Okin attempts to dissolve the distinction between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice by incorporating empathy into Rawls' theory of justice. See Okin, Reason and Feeling in Thinking About Justice, 99 ETHICS - (forthcoming Jan. 1989). 12 See C. GILLIGAN, supra note 9. 
13 See Minow, The Supreme Court, 1986 Term - Foreword:Justice Engendered, xox HARV. L. REv. io (1987). 
14 See, e.g., N. CHODOROW, THE REPRODUCTION OF MOTHERING (1978); D. DINNERSTEIN, THE MERMAID AND THE MINOTAUR (1976). 
Is See, e.g., Menkel-Meadow, supra note io;Michelman, The Supreme Court, 1985 Term Foreword: Traces of Self-Government, ioo HARV. L. REv. 4, 17 n.68 (1986); Minow, When Difference Has its Honze: Group Honesfor the Mentally Retarded, Equal Protection and Legal Treatment of Difference, 22 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REv. X1I (1987); Simon, The Invention and Reinvention of Welfare Rights, 44 MD. L. REv. I (1985). 
16Examples can be found throughout popular culture. Consider, for example, the familiar forcible taking of women in movies and television; the scenario in which a woman initially resists aggressive overtures and then relents; the plot in which a woman falls in love with her rapist. en's need for relationship and connectedness, the dominance approach claims that women need to be freed from practices that subordinate and invade them. The dominance view is thus sometimes skeptical of the different voice approach, claiming that women's capacity for empathy and need for relationship is in part the product of the social subordination of women. 
Catharine MacKinnon is the most prominent and persistent advocate for the dominance strand of feminist theory. She is also the most important force behind the claim that sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination. 17 That notion, for which MacKinnon is given too little credit, seemed bizarre and radical to many when initially put forward. Remarkably, MacKinnon's basic position was accepted in 1986 by every member of the Supreme Court - with a majority opinion written by then Justice Rehnquist.18 This development must count as one of the more dramatic and rapid changes in legal and social understanding in recent years. In addition, MacKinnon has supplied much of the underpinning for the current rethinking of both rape and prostitution; her criticisms focus on the systemic effects of these practices, their parallels in more conventional forms of gender relations, and the partial perspectives found in the legal treatment of both. 19 MacKinnon has been perhaps the most important force behind the burgeoning theoretical literature in law on sex discrimination and feminist theory.20 With Andrea Dworkin, MacKinnon has developed what is probably her most controversial thesis: the idea that pornography is a form of sex discrimination. 21 In these and other areas, MacKinnon's work has generated a dramatic shift in legal thinking and reoriented the terms of debate. 
In all of these settings, MacKinnon's basic position is that the social and legal treatment of gender should be challenged today just as common law categories and racial exclusion were challenged during the New Deal period and the 195o's, respectively. MacKinnon claims that gender relations, like the common law and racial practices, are regarded as natural or prepolitical but are actually socially constructed, alterable, and unjust. Although few recent writers in law have been so creative or influential, there are important arenas in which her work is ignored and even ridiculed. 
Feminism Unmodified is a collection of MacKinnon's speeches on sex discrimination over a six-year period, some of which have been published previously. The book is divided into three parts. The first is theoretical and general, setting out MacKinnon's distinctive approach to sex discrimination. The second, called "Applications," deals with rape, abortion, sexual harassment, and athletics. The third part of the book consists of six essays on pornography. 
Each of the essays published in Feminism Unmodified stands on its own, making the book a collection of separate entries rather than one sustained argument. Because each essay was originally a speech, the discussions are lucid and dramatic, with the dynamism, immediacy, and sense of discovery of a live presentation; they are also filled with irony, wit, and humor. On the other hand, the book has considerable repetition and overlap. The arguments are less tight, analytic, and systematic than they might be; some of MacKinnon's other work is more careful and sustained. 22 MacKinnon anticipates counterarguments only occasionally, and careful elaboration of implications is not one of the book's strengths; the discussion is sometimes too polemical. Nevertheless, the book contains brilliant insights, genuine creativity, and rare originality. It should have a significant impact on thinking about sex discrimination and on social and legal thought more generally. 
MacKinnon's general treatment of sex discrimination, first set out in Sexual Harassmentof Working Women, 23 derives from her description and critique of the difference approach, which she claims is the most prominent in current law. The difference approach holds that the purpose of constitutional and statutory proscriptions is to ensure that laws reflect both real similarities and real differences and thus "track reality." 
The difference approach endorses two paths to equality. The first is rooted in strict gender neutrality and insists that women are and should be treated "the same as men" (p. 33). Distinctions on the basis of gender, especially those that deny women opportunities available to men, are presumptively unlawful. Much of modern law under the 22 See C. MacKinnon, Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the State (unpublished manuscript, May 1987); sources cited supra note ig. 
23 C. MACKINNON, supra note 17. equal protection clause and title VII reflects this understanding. 24 The central premise is freedom of choice, often expressed in terms of equality of opportunity: people should be permitted to choose jobs and social roles in ways unaffected by irrelevant characteristics like gender. 
The second path to equality under the difference approach qualifies this basic theme of sameness, recognizing that in some respects women are not similarly situated to men. This path is designed for "women who want equality yet find that [they] are different" (p. 33) and culminates in "the special benefit rule," which authorizes the state to recognize "real differences" between men and women. Thus, for example, courts will uphold laws or practices that recognize the distinctive physical characteristics of women. Sometimes such laws impose burdens on women, as in reproduction-related restrictions of employment opportunities; sometimes they create "special benefits," as in leave policies for pregnant women. 
MacKinnon is not entirely hostile to the difference approach; she acknowledges that it has accomplished considerable good. In her view, however, it is inadequate for two reasons. First, the difference approach - precisely because it is based on a norm of formal equality or sex-blindness - does nothing about many existing structural inequalities between men and women. Those inequalities in wealth and power are taken for granted; they are treated as the inevitable background conditions against which legal disputes must be resolved. "A gender-neutral approach ... obscures ... the fact that women's poverty, financial dependency, motherhood, and sexual accessibility ... substantively make up women's status as women" (p. 73) (emphasis in original). For a variety of reasons, women are not in fact situated similarly to men, and legal rules pretending that they are will sometimes reduce rather than increase the likelihood of obtaining equality. For example, the recent transformation of the law of custody and divorce, embodying a norm of formal equality, has harmed women and helped men. 25 Under the difference approach, "society advantages [men] before they get into court, and law is prohibited from taking that preference into account because that would mean taking gender into account" (p. 35). 
24 See supra note 8; see also D. KIRP, M. YUDOF & M. FRANKS, GENDER JUSTICE (i986) [hereinafter GENDER JUSTICE] (arguing for equal liberty as the benchmark in governmental treatment of gender). 
25 See Weitzman, The Economics of Divorce:Social and Economic ConsequencesofProperty, Alimony and Child Support Awards, 28 UCLA L. REv. ii8i (ig81); see also M. GLENDON, ABORTION AND DIVORCE IN WESTERN LAW 86 n.67 (1987) (noting that post-divorce economic burdens fall disproportionately on women). See generally Becker, Prince Charming: Abstract Equality, 1987 SuP. CT. REV. - (forthcoming x988) (criticizing formal equality as a constitutional standard). 
The difference approach is also inadequate because it uses men as the baseline from which to measure difference. According to MacKinnon, legal rules that use men as the referent, and allow differential treatment of women when it is based on real differences from men, do not enshrine any obvious conception of gender equality. Instead, they amount to a false universalization that depends on a particular standpoint - men's biology and career patterns - from which to assess "difference." Consider the legal treatment of women's distinctive reproductive capacities: to understand rules that accommodate those capacities as a "special benefit" is to apply a male baseline. "Men's physiology defines most sports, their needs define auto and health insurance coverage, their socially designed biographies define workplace expectations and successful career patterns .... For each of their differences from women, what amounts to an affirmative action plan is in effect" (p. 36). The use of male practices as the norm thus produces an inadequate law of sex discrimination; for MacKinnon, the problem is not one of abstract differences at all. 
Of recent cases addressing states' attempts to provide pregnancy leave and related job security,2 6 MacKinnon remarks, "Difference doctrine says it is sex discrimination to give women what we need, because only women need it. It is not sex discrimination not to give women what we need because then only women will not get what we need" (p. 36). Under the difference approach, the legal system does nothing about preexisting legal and social disabilities brought about by past discrimination and women's reproductive roles. Examples include public or private rules that forbid employees from being the primary caretaker of a preschool child, rules that prohibit fertile women from taking certain jobs, 27 and the concentration of women in low-paying jobs. 28 None of these practices is unlawful under the difference approach. The claim of inequality underlying Feminism Unmodified is not the relatively narrow argument that women have been treated "unequally to men"; it is instead that there is a system of sexual subordination of women that should be altered. For MacKinnon, the notion that the similarly situated must be treated similarly is an inadequate way to approach issues of sex discrimination. 
Under MacKinnon's alternative - the dominance approach - the goal of sex discrimination law "is not to make legal categories trace 1988] and trap the way things are. It is not to make rules that fit reality. It is critical of reality" (p. 40).29 The problem is not whether and how much difference there is between men and women; it is instead how the legal system should respond to these differences. "The difference approach tries to map reality; the dominance approach tries to challenge and change it" (p. 44). "[S]ex inequality questions are questions of systematic dominance, of male supremacy, which is not at all abstract and is anything but a mistake" (p. 42). 
MacKinnon is impatient with biological explanations of gender inequality. The question is not whether such differences exist, but what society does with them - in short, their legal and social consequences. For the situations relevant here, it is the legal system that decides when and how biological differences are relevant, turning differences, which might be treated as immaterial, into legal disadvantages. 30 The dominance approach thus reads difference as "inequality's post hoc excuse, its conclusory artifact, its outcome presented as its origin" (p. 8). 
In some circumstances, the dominance approach might yield results that are identical to current law - for example, by invalidating statutes that make employment of a particular sort more attractive for men than for women. 3 1 Some laws would be upheld under both approaches but with divergent rationales. A law establishing different ages for statutory rape of men and women might be upheld not on the biological ground invoked by the Supreme Court in the Michael M. case3 2 but on the theory that rape of young girls by men is far more common than rape of young boys by women. Gender-specific statutory rape laws are thus sensible safeguards rather than underinclusive reflections of prejudice. 
At the same time, the dominance approach would challenge many legal practices that current law takes for granted. It would, for example, treat as issues of sex discrimination questions that are not so regarded by current law, including reproductive rights and abortion, battery of women, rape, prostitution, sexual assault of girls, the disproportionate presence of women in low-paying occupations, and female poverty. In all of these areas, the dominance approach would not treat current practices as the inevitable background conditions against which questions of sexual equality must be measured; it would instead require changes in those practices in order to bring about equality. 
29 Here the analogy to the New Deal critique of the common law is particularly clear. See 
note 3. 
3oSee C. MAcKINNON, supra note 17. 
31See, e.g., Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199 (1977) (invalidating a Social Security Act provision that made survivors' benefits payable to widows but not to widowers). 32 Michael M. v. Superior Court, 450 U.S. 464 (ig8i). 
MacKinnon's critique addresses the same problem that underlay the controversy over Lochner v. New York:33 legal formality that assumes a particular and unarticulated baseline. Assumptions about baselines produce understandings of what is natural or constructed, neutral or partisan, and action or inaction. MacKinnon is in a long tradition of critics of social practices premised on status quo baselines, and her discussion here has implications not only for sex discrimination but also for legal and social theory more generally. 
MacKinnon's attack on unarticulated baselines challenges some familiar analytic strategies in law. Her discussion of legal abstraction, formality, principle, and neutrality suggests that these terms often conceal a contested substantive understanding that denies its status as such. 34 MacKinnon argues that the idea that justice is neutrality between abstract categories ignores social distinctions between those categories, as the Court did in Plessy v. Ferguson35 (pp. 165-66). In MatKinnon's view, similar understandings are at work in current law, including the attack on affirmative action: "[i]n the view that equates differentiation with discrimination, changing an unequal status quo is discrimination, but allowing it to exist is not" (p. 42). Indeed, the very term "affirmative action" suggests that use of the market represents inaction and that efforts to compensate for the existing distribution of benefits and burdens between blacks and whites or women and men should be regarded as "affirmative." MacKinnon's claim also challenges one understanding of "neutral principles" '3 6 - an understanding that was initially deployed to question the Court's reasoning in Brown v. Board of Education3 7 on the grounds that the case did not involve discrimination at all and that the Court had failed to show why the associational preferences of blacks should be favored over those of whites. 38 
Although aspects of the general approach to sex discrimination in Feminism Unmodified were first set out in Sexual Harassment of Working Women, the emphasis has changed. Feminism Unmodified attributes gender inequality above all to sexuality and sexual practices: "I think the fatal error of the legal arm of feminism has been its failure to understand that the mainspring of sex inequality is misogyny and 33 198 U.S. 45 (1905). 
34 Consider, for example, the "state action" doctrine in current constitutional law, which is not in fact a search for state action, but instead depends on background understandings about what government ordinarily or naturally does. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 886-88. 35 163 U.S. 537 (1896). 
36 See Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of ConstitutionalLaw, 73 HARV. L. REV. I (1959). 
3' 347 U.S. 483 (i954). 
38 See Wechsler, supra note 36, at 33-34; cf. Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Sup. CT. REV. 99 (arguing that affirmative action is logically continuous with the prohibition of discrimination as established in Brown v. Board of Education). the mainspring of misogyny is sexual sadism" (p. 5). MacKinnon takes the sexual objectification of women, and current sexuality in general, as a central cause of sexual subordination - an issue I take up below. It is for this reason that pornography, rather than, for example, occupational segregation or childcare responsibility, is MacKinnon's central target. And it is no doubt in part this aspect of MacKinnon's critique that has made her views so controversial. Her claims threaten areas thought to be personal and private, attack the neo-Freudian orthodoxy that urges the liberation of sexual drives from repression, and pointedly part company with certain aspects of mainstream liberalism. 3 9 
To summarize, MacKinnon's basic criticism is an attack on the understanding of sex discrimination as a problem of irrational differentiation. In her view, sexual harassment is a form of sex discrimination. Pornography is a participant in the construction and perpetuation of sexual hierarchy. Roe v. Wade40 turns out to be a case involving sex discrimination. 4 1 MacKinnon's argument cuts deeper still: state action limits, at least as conventionally conceived, become subject to challenge. The private sphere, in which widespread sex discrimination takes place, is hardly prepolitical and sacrosanct, as recent developments in family law have demonstrated. 42 It should be plain that MacKinnon's approach, because it expands and recasts the prohibition on sex discrimination, is radically different from much of current law. Hence MacKinnon's proposed substitute for the Equal Rights Amendment is a women's rights amendment providing: "the subordination of women to men is hereby abolished" (p. 28). 
Challenges to MacKinnon's approach come from several directions. The first challenge involves MacKinnon's ends. Many women today do not perceive the world in MacKinnon's terms; indeed, not a few are hostile to her depiction, and many do not seek the sorts of changes proposed in Feminism Unmodified. For these women, the problem 39 In Feminism Unmodified, MacKinnon identifies liberalism with conceptions of politics that see threats as coming exclusively from the public sphere or that take the existing set of preferences and the existing distribution of power as exogenous and natural. These ideas represent, however, a quite narrow aspect of the liberal tradition. See S.HOLMES, BENJAMIN CONSTANT AND THE MAKING OF MODERN LIBERALISM (1984). It is a mistake to reject the liberal tradition entirely simply because it has been distorted by some of its purported opponents. MacKinnon's remarks about "liberalism" are too casual in this regard. 
40 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 
41See infra pp. 839-40; see also Ginsburg, Some Thought on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade, 63 N.C.L. REv. 375, 382-83 (1985) (discussing Roe as a sex discrimination case). 
42 See sources cited supra note 25. of sex discrimination has neither the nature nor the magnitude that MacKinnon suggests, and the world she describes - one of widespread and objectionable gender hierarchy - is not the world in which they live. The forms of discrimination MacKinnon challenges are, in this view, largely a product of free choice or biology; other, more invidious inequalities are already addressed or can be remedied by contemporary law. For such skeptics, the difference approach, the overriding goal of which is to free people to seek their own disparate goals, is preferable. 4 3 Many women who find traditional roles satisfying and rewarding would find it intrusive and counterproductive for government to try to bring about MacKinnon's version of substantive equality. 44 
This critique of MacKinnon replicates earlier invocations of freedom of choice that have been roundly repudiated in modern law, including the attack on the New Deal (especially minimum wage and maximum hour legislation), 4 5 and the critique of modern civil rights legislation. 46 Such critiques ignore both problems of collective action and the ways in which apparently free choices are the product of the existing legal regime. Collective action problems make it extremely difficult for a dispersed and diffuse group to organize and seek reform. In the context of sex discrimination, moreover, the phenomenon of adaptive preferences - emphasized in recent rational choice theory 47 - is especially important, for it undermines conventional understandings of free choice. 48 Private preferences are not always autonomous; they are in part a product of existing social practice, including social pressures and the absence of opportunities. 4 9 If opportunities are unavailable, people often try to reduce cognitive dissonance 50 by scal43See GENDER JUSTICE, supra note 24, at 12. 44See id. at 13-28. 45For a recent example, see R. EPSTEIN, TAKINGS 274-82 (1985). 46 See Bork, Civil Rights - A Challenge, THE NEW REPUBLIC, Aug. 31, 1963, at 21. 47See J. ELSTER, SOUR GRAPES 109-40 (1983); J. Roemer, Optimal Endogenous Preferences (1985) (unpublished manuscript on file with the author); MacPherson, Want Formation,Morality, and Some 'Interpretive'Aspects of Economic Inquiry, in SOCIAL SCIENCE AS MORAL INQUIRY 96 (N. Haan, R. Bellah, P. Rabinow & W. Sullivan eds. 1983). The term "adaptive preferences" is preferable to "false consciousness," because the latter has a tendency to tautology and lacks cognitive foundations. 
48 Serious collective action problems also arise here; the individual costs of organization may be quite high in comparison to the individual benefits, but the aggregate benefits may outweigh the aggregate costs. 
49 Sometimes the phenomenon of adaptive preferences is treated as a preference change through learning. In practice, it is difficult to distinguish between adaptive preferences and preferences modified by greater information; for present purposes, we may treat them as equivalent. 
50 See generally L. FESTINGER, A THEORY OF COGNITIVE DISSONANCE (1958) (describing cognitive dissonance and attempts to reduce it). i988] ing back their aspirations. More generally, the phenomenon of adaptive preferences makes it difficult to contend that legal rules should always or necessarily be based on current preferences. 5 ' If preferences are a function of legal rules and social practices, those rules and practices cannot be defended by reference to the preferences without circularity.5 2 
This basic point has especially powerful implications in the area of sexual inequality.5 3 Women's preferences have been formed against a background of limited opportunities. In these circumstances, the fact that many women are or seem content with the status quo is not a dispositive argument against social change. A system of formal equality leaves in place preferences and opportunities that are products of past discrimination. 54 It is a significant advantage of MacKinnon's approach that, unlike many purportedly feminist critiques, it does not evade the "freedom of choice" question but challenges it head on. 
Although MacKinnon's argument responds persuasively to a familiar argument in favor of the difference approach, it does not supply a complete affirmative case for the dominance approach. That approach is difficult to evaluate in the abstract, and it is not fully elaborated in Feminism Unmodified. Moreover, the notion of "dominance" is somewhat ambiguous and itself depends on some sort of baseline. Any judgment about the dominance approach calls for an evaluation of both the context and the practical impact of that approach on the lives of women and men.5s Such an evaluation will also depend on the prospects for change in light of the fact that preferences and practices are already in place and may be difficult to alter. Indeed, sometimes efforts at alteration are counterproductive, and Feminism Unmodified does not examine the problem of transition. 
S Consider Montesquieu's discussion of adaptive preferences on the part of women in the harem, Montesquieu, Letter XXVI: Usbek to Roxana, at the Seraglio at Ispahan, in i THE PERSIAN AND CHINESE LETTERS 6I (J. Davidson trans. 1892) (1721), and the ambivalent reactions of the newly freed slaves as discussed in L. LITWACK, BEEN IN THE STORM So LONG (1979). 
52 See Sunstein, Legal Interferencewith PrivatePreferences,53 U. CHI. L. REV. 1129 (1986). Of course, it is important to be careful and precise with rationales of this sort, for there are risks of tyranny in approaches that tend to disregard private preferences. 
53 Analogues exist in the racial area, see L. LITwAcK, supra note 51, and in the judicial reception of so-called "freedom of choice" plans in school desegregation, discussed in Gewirtz, Choice in the Transition: School Desegregation and the Corrective Ideal, 86 COLUM. L. REV. 728 (x986). 
54 The Supreme Court has recognized this point in the context of school segregation. See Green v. County School Bd., 391 U.S. 430, 441-42 (1968); see also Gewirtz, supra note 53, at 748-54. 
55 Of course, difficult epistemological questions lurk here on the issue of cultural criticism. See P. RICOEUR, LECTURES ON IDEOLOGY AND UTOPIA (1986); M. WALZER, INTERPRETATION AND SOCIAL CRITICISM ch. 2 (1987). It is an advantage of MacKinnon's argument, however, that she tends to be highly contextual in her discussion, particularly in the areas of reproductive freedom, sexual harassment, and pornography. 
MacKinnon proposes that statutes restricting reproductive rights be treated as forms of sex discrimination. Such laws are discriminatory, both in purpose and effect, because they are a product of traditional understandings of the role of women in bearing and raising children. Seen in this light, laws prohibiting public funding of abortions should be understood as grounded in the same discrimination that motivates laws forbidding abortion altogether.5 6 
Sexual harassment and pornography present somewhat different problems, but their cultural context and practical effects also raise issues of discrimination. It is fanciful to deny that women are the principal victims of sexual harassment or that they are the principal objects of abuse in and as a result of pornography. Comparable worth raises still different issues. 57 By increasing salaries in traditional female jobs, comparable worth remedies might reinforce women's preferences for those jobs or distort the employment market. These possibilities argue against such remedial proposals, even if countervailing factors make them justifiable. Practical considerations of this sort suggest that substantial work will be necessary to apply the dominance approach in particular contexts. Whatever the precise meaning of the approach, however, it is clear that its application would move the law further in the direction of gender equality. 
B. The Problem of Means 
Another challenge to MacKinnon's approach emphasizes the problem of means. MacKinnon does not specify which institutions would provide the locus for the changes she advocates. It is difficult to expect courts to undertake the relevant tasks; there is no real parallel in public or private law for the sorts of departures MacKinnon seeks. Even in the area of racial discrimination, the judiciary has played a relatively narrow role. The lack of an available institution for implementing MacKinnon's proposals thus might argue against the dominance approach. 
The institutional objections, however, are hardly insurmountable. Even if courts are inapt initiators, they might assist in achieving the measures sought by MacKinnon - for example, by recognizing sexual harassment as a form of sex discrimination, upholding at least some forms of antipornography regulation, or requiring the legislature to fund abortions if it funds the expenses of bringing a child to term. Consider also the possibility of constitutional or statutory attacks on s6 See L. TRIBE, supra note 3, at 1345-47. 
s7 See Weiler, supra note 28. criminal enforcement policies that permit differential risks of violence to be faced by men and women, both in and out of the home. Most measures directed toward what is currently conceived of as the private sphere would require executive or legislative action. In still other areas, coercive action in the form of legal requirements might be counterproductive or otherwise undesirable, 58 in which case private efforts would be preferable. 
It is important to recognize that the dominance approach is not self-applying. In some settings, it is not clear whether a law subordinates women - or, more importantly, whether a change in the law would reduce social subordination or reinforce it. These considerations suggest that MacKinnon's approach needs to be deepened and supplemented. But her basic critique of the law of sex discrimination is quite powerful in its exposure of issues that have traditionally been understood in gender-neutral terms. It points in the right directions. 
A large portion of Feminism Unmodified is devoted to the exploration of particular topics. MacKinnon points out that the extent and nature of rape and sexual harassment are relatively recent discoveries (P. 5); the same is true of pornography. These topics were hardly on the legal agenda just a decade ago. Courts and commentators have begun to rethink all of them, and MacKinnon, who helped initiate that process, offers a number of useful observations in Feminism 
In a provocative essay on abortion, MacKinnon applies her general critique of the notion of a prepolitical and noncoercive private sphere of gender relations into which government must not enter. She argues that the Court's decision to approach Roe v. Wade5 9 as a case involving privacy rather than equality was a mistake, based on a disregard for the sex-based character of reproduction and the tacit assumption that women have equal control over sex. In MacKinnon's view, "[s]exual intercourse, still the most common cause of pregnancy, cannot simply be presumed coequally determined" (p. 94-95). Women often fail to use contraception because to do so "means acknowledging and planning the possibility of intercourse, accepting one's sexual availability, and appearing nonspontaneous" (p. 95). In light of these overlooked facts, MacKinnon argues that Roe was myopic in treating [V/ol. 1oi:826 the issue as one involving privacy. That formulation suggests that the decision was partly responsive to "the interests of men as a group" (P. 97) in making women sexually available to men. 60 MacKinnon argues that "under conditions of gender inequality, sexual liberation [as promoted by the Roe reasoning] does not free women; it frees male sexual aggression" (p. 99). 
MacKinnon speculates about why the legal system has structured the abortion issue in terms of privacy: "if inequality is socially pervasive and enforced, equality will require intervention, not abdication, to be meaningful. But the right to privacy is not thought to require social change. It is not even thought to require any social preconditions, other than nonintervention by the public" (p. ioo). If the Court had structured the issue in terms of gender inequality and resolved it under the dominance approach, the issue of federal funding61 might have come out differently. "[F]ramed as a privacy right, a woman's decision to abort would have no claim on public support" (p. ioi); but as a right to equality, such a claim would be much harder to deny. 
MacKinnon's principal application of the dominance approach is in the area of pornography - defined not as sexually explicit materials but as those that associate sex with violence. 62 There is some repetition in the six relevant chapters, but the reader is given a good sense of the development of MacKinnon's thought. The early essays are tentative. The middle ones have a sense of discovery, developing MacKinnon's now well-known approach to the subject. The later essays deal harshly with the objections of some women to the antipornography campaign and with the judicial treatment of the subject. 63 
MacKinnon's discussion of pornography is likely to be the most controversial part of Feminism Unmodified. It is important to understand the treatment within the context of her broader argument 60 See A. DWORKIN, RIGHT WING WOMEN 95 (i983) ("Getting laid was at stake."), quoted in FEMINISM UNMODIFIED at 99. 
61 See Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297 (i98o); see also Ginsburg, supra note 41, at 383-86 (criticizing the Supreme Court's abortion funding decisions). 
62 See American Booksellers, 771 F.2d 323; Indianapolis Code  16-3(q). 63 Of female opponents of pornography, MacKinnon writes: Women who defend the pornographers are defending a source of their relatively high position among women under male supremacy, keeping all women, including them, an inferior class on the basis of sex, enforced by sexual force .... I want you to stop claiming that your liberalism, with its elitism, and your Freudianism, with its sexualized misogyny, has anything in common with feminism (p. 205). 
Of the judiciary, she argues: The Supreme Court just told us that it is a constitutional right to traffic in our flesh, so long as it is done through pictures and words, and a legislature may not give us access to court to contest it .... The struggle against pornography is an abolitionist struggle to establish that just as buying and selling human beings never was anyone's property right, buying and selling women and children is no one's civil liberty (p. 213). about sex discrimination and her general strategy for reform. A focus on the antipornography movement isolated from these broader themes will miss the basic point, regardless of one's ultimate conclusion about the issue of government control of pornography. 
"What you are hearing tonight," MacKinnon asserts, "is something that has not been said before" (p. 127). She believes that feminist claims about the meaning and effects of pornography have been obscured by the sexual revolution of the 196o's and by the power of Freudian and associated antirepression theories of sexuality in intellectual and popular circles. MacKinnon's argument differs sharply from other, far less persuasive arguments for the regulation of sexually explicit speech. 64 
MacKinnon makes three basic claims. First, she suggests that severe harms are done to women in the production of pornography and that regulation of the resulting material is necessary to prevent those harms. Second, MacKinnon contends that pornography has a causal connection to acts of sexual violence against women. Third, and most generally, MacKinnon claims that pornography influences the attitudes of both men and women in gender relations, attitudes that help produce unlawful discrimination and foster gender inequality. Her basic argument is that the creation of a cause of action on behalf of women harmed by pornography would reduce the amount of pornography, give relief to those directly harmed by it, and at the same time affect male and female attitudes toward it. 
In MacKinnon's view, Pornography sexualizes rape, battery, sexual harassment, prostitution, and child sexual abuse; it thereby celebrates, promotes, authorizes, and legitimates them. More generally, it eroticizes the dominance and submission that is the dynamic common to them all. It makes hierarchy sexy and calls that "the truth about sex" or just a mirror of reality (p. 17i) (citations omitted). 
MacKinnon claims that "pornography is neither harmless fantasy nor a corrupt and confused misrepresentation of an otherwise natural and healthy sexual situation. It institutionalizes the sexuality of male supremacy, fusing the eroticization of dominance and submission with the social construction of male and female" (p. 172). MacKinnon continues: "What in the pornographic view is love and romance looks a great deal like hatred and torture to the feminist" (p. 174). The law 64 The argument has also been made by other feminists, including Andrea Dworkin, with whom MacKinnon has worked closely. See, e.g., A. DWORXIN, supra note 21. Similar arguments have been accepted in West Germany since the early 197o's, and West German courts have concluded that pornography is inconsistent with constitutionally guaranteed human dignity. See Rieman, Pornographyand Human Dignity: A West German Perspective, MICH. L. QUADRANGLE NOTES, Fall 1986, at 1-2. of obscenity65 misconceives the problem because it is indifferent to the issue of harm - depending instead on offensiveness - and because it is gender-neutral. 
The recognition that many categories of speech are currently regulable adds power to MacKinnon's argument, as do her description of the abuses that are sexualized in pornography, her discussion of the harms to women in and as a result of pornography, and her highly plausible claims of a causal connection between pornography and violence. Having absorbed MacKinnon's point, one notices sexualized violence against women in numerous places in modern culture, severely weakening one's initial instincts against control of at least some speech that merges sex with violence. 
This analysis produced the well-known ordinance drafted by MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin, which defines pornography as discrimination based on sex - a civil rights violation. The ordinance defines pornography in part as "the graphic sexually explicit subordination of women, whether in pictures or in words" (p. 262). The ordinance is not aimed at sexually explicit materials in themselves. Its principal target is sexually explicit materials that also involve violence, either in their making or their use. Most of the provisions are directed at the production of pornography or abusive practices in or as a result of pornography; the most controversial provision authorizes women to sue traffickers in pornography. The ordinance denominates this general right to relief from pornographic practices a civil rights action. 
It is important to distinguish positions with which MacKinnon's approach is sometimes confused. MacKinnon does not argue that pornography should be regulated because it is offensive. She does not claim that the community has a right to censor speech that does not conform to its moral position. Nor, on the other hand, does she draw a sharp distinction between pornography and erotica. MacKinnon's highly controversial claim is not that pornography is a perversion of sexuality; it is instead that pornography helps to constitute sexuality. 
MacKinnon's analysis raises two distinct questions. First, is her description of the problem posed by pornography persuasive? Second, is her remedy for the problem - a civil rights action - a desirable ognraep?hyObneutcosiumldultaacnceeoputshlyeropvpieowse acboonuttrotlheofspocoiranlomgreaapnhiincg spoefepcho.rn66o 
With respect to the first question, MacKinnon's diagnosis of pornography as a form of sex discrimination has been criticized from two perspectives. Some. critics deny that pornography is harmful. Others 65 See Miller v. California, 413 U.S. I5 (973). 
66 See American Booksellers Ass'n v. Hudnut, 771 F.2d 323 (7th Cir. 1985), aff'd mere., 475 U.S. iooi (1986); Stone, supra note 58. claim that feminism and pornography are compatible, that women enjoy (at least some forms of) pornography, and that the harms of pornography are gender-neutral. But these objections seem weak. There is mounting evidence that sexual violence occurs both in and as a result of pornography. Abuses within the pornography industry appear widespread. 67 Considerable evidence from laboratory experiments and the real world also suggests a link between pornography and sexual violence. 68 Of course, both laboratory and real world evidence suffer from serious methodological defects - the former because of the enormous difficulty of extrapolation, the latter because of possible confounding variables. Even if causation were clear and overwhelming, however, it would be hard to demonstrate, and in other areas of law, regulation is permitted on the basis of suggestive - but inconclusive - evidence. 69 It would be absurd to suggest that most sexual violence is a result of pornography or that sexual violence would disappear if pornography were eliminated. Moreover, some of MacKinnon's rhetoric is overstated. The evidence with respect to the harmful effects of pornography is, however, sufficiently powerful to justify regulation. 
It is true that some women enjoy pornography, even if it is narrowly defined to include work that merges sex with violence. It is sometimes urged in this connection that female sexuality has only begun to express itself openly and voluntarily and that regulation of pornography, even when violent, would prevent the free development and expression of women's sexuality.70 MacKinnon responds that sexuality is to a large degree socially constructed for both men and women. In her view, it is entirely unsurprising that some women find cultural symbols that mesh violence with sexuality to be sexually arousing. We have seen that preferences and beliefs are socially formed. 71 In light of the harmful effects of pornography as defined here - with its focus on violence - the fact that some women enjoy it is not a reason to do nothing about it. 7 2 One need not take a position on MacKinnon's broadest claims about the relationship between sexuality and sexual inequality in order to agree that the fact 67 See I ATTORNEY GENERAL'S COMMISSION ON PORNOGRAPHY, FINAL REPORT 767-835 (x986). 
68 See, e.g., PORNOGRAPHY AND SEXUAL AGGRESSION (N. Malamuth & E. Donnerstein eds. 1984). 
69 Consider, for example, the uncertainties involved in the regulation of carcinogens. See S. BREGER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORMS 135-40 (1982). 
70 See Brief Amici Curie of the Feminist Anti-Censorship Taskforce at 27-32, American Booksellers, 475 U.S. iooi (1986) (No. 85-1090). 
71See supra pp. 836-37. 
72 "[The defense of lesbian sadomasochism would sacrifice all women's ability to walk down the street in safety for the freedom to torture a woman in the privacy of one's basement without fear of intervention, in the name of everyone's freedom of choice" (p. 15). that some women associate sexuality and violence is not a sufficient reason to permit the distribution of every film that merges sexuality and violence. 
Other critics claim that pornography cannot be a form of sex discrimination because it harms and degrades both women and men. This argument, reflecting fundamental resistance to MacKinnon's basic point, is difficult to take seriously: whether or not women are nominal victims, pornography generally treats them as the ultimate target of sexual violence and objectification. Indeed, the persistence of such claims reveals the strength of MacKinnon's critique, especially insofar as she suggests that pornography renders some forms of sexual inequality invisible. 73 
All of this suggests that MacKinnon's analysis of the social meaning of pornography is persuasive. The question of legal control, however, is trickier. The conventional criticisms are that the problem of defining pornography is insurmountable and that the risks to freedom of speech outweigh any gains that would come from regulation. In these circumstances, the remedy, opponents claim, is "more speech," not government regulation. 74 From a strategic perspective, critics argue that other problems facing women - also emphasized in Feminism Unmodified - are much higher priorities than government regulation of pornography. 
The problems of definition are indeed considerable - especially in light of the fact that materials with some of the characteristics of pornography can be found throughout modern culture. Moreover, parts of MacKinnon's own effort at definition might be faulted for overbreadth. 75 The problems of definition are not, however, insurmountable. 
First amendment doctrine furnishes the building blocks for a quite conventional argument for regulation of pornography. First, most of the speech at issue is far afield from the central purposes of the first amendment under almost any view. Distinctions among categories of speech in terms of their centrality to first amendment purposes are well established in constitutional law, and a system of free expression could not sensibly ignore them. 76 For example, conspiracies, bribes, 73 "The harm of pornography, broadly speaking, is the harm of the civil inequality of the sexes made invisible as harm because it has become accepted as the sex difference" (p. 178). 
74 The roots of the "more speech" approach are found in Justice Brandeis' concurring opinion in Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 377 (1927) (Brandeis, J., concurring). 
75 For example, it might be desirable to exempt at least some pornographic material having significant social value, at least when there was no illegality in the production. See generally Sunstein, Pornography and the FirstAmendment, 1986 DUKE L.J. 589, 624-26 (arguing that pornography is generally "low-value" speech entitled to less protection). 
76 See Sunstein, Government Control of Information, 74 CALIF. L. Rev. 889 (1986); Sunstein, supra note 75. MacKinnon attacks the first amendment logic that distinguishes between harmful unlawful contracts, false statements of fact, private libel, misleading commercial advertising, and child pornography are regulable, 7 7 largely because they do not promote the purposes associated with free speech, which involve public deliberation, broadly understood. 78 The harms of pornography, canvassed above, are sufficient to justify regulation under the standards applied to low-value speech. 79 Pornography, narrowly defined, does not present a weaker claim for regulation than many similar types of speech that are regulable under current law. 
Those skeptical of MacKinnon's approach are undoubtedly concerned about the dangers of overinclusion and misapplication. These concerns are persuasive when the underlying harms are minimal and the risks of overinclusiveness or misapplication quite large. In the context of pornography, however, the risks of what some might see as "inaction" - involving harms to women in and as a result of pornography - are considerable. Further, there is little reason to doubt that a carefully worded statute, posing no greater threat to free expression than the other categories of regulable speech, could be drawn. 
The final set of objections to MacKinnon's approach is largely strategic. Opponents suggest that pornography is a relatively minor factor in gender inequality8  compared to economic and other factors. The antipornography campaign is said to create an odd alliance with groups whose concerns conflict with feminism. And to the extent that the merger of violence-and sexuality is a social problem, it is also severe in mainstream advertising, television, and popular culture all of which sexualize violence, but none of which would be reached by the ordinance written by Dworkin and MacKinnon. Seen in this words and acts. Thus, she asks, is a "Whites Only" sign the idea or the practice of segregation? (p. I56). 
77 For an overview, see G. STONE, L. SEIDMAN, C. SUNSTEIN & M. TUSHNET, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW ch. 7 (1986). 
78 This is of course a controversial view, associated with Alexander Meiklejohn. See A. MEIKLEJOHN, FREE SPEECH AND ITS RELATION TO SELF-GOVERNMENT (1948). But on any plausible view of the central function of free expression, pornography, if narrowly defined, is likely to qualify as low-value speech. 
79See Sunstein, supranote 75, at 609-17 (rejecting the claim that antipornography legislation is viewpoint based). 
80 MacKinnon responds: Some of the social theorists in my audiences are not convinced that pornography can be part of the subordination of women because the subordination of women happens in places where, they say, there is no pornography.... Pornography, they say, is effect and not cause because the oppression of women predates pornography, so anything done about pornography will do nothing about the oppression of women. It does not matter that racism happens in specific forms all over the world without ceasing to be racist. It does not matter that these people think something should be done about the Ku Klux Klan even though white racists in South Africa do not wear sheets and burn crosses.... They do not say apartheid should be ignored as effect rather than cause because white racism precedes it and happens elsewhere in different forms (p. 222). context, the attack on the pornography industry might be thought misdirected.81 
Such an attack would, however, do some good for some women, and - a central point - discussion and identification of the problem is likely to contribute to efforts to address the other problems as well. The fact that control of pornography would not bring about sexual equality by itself is hardly a persuasive reason not to initiate a measure that might do considerable good. In some circles, moreover, the antipornography movement has served as a powerful spur to changed attitudes on the part of both men and women. 
MacKinnon's discussion of sexuality, however, has a deeper point, and this point underlies some of the resistance to the antipornography movement. Some observers suggest that MacKinnon's objections are in fact threatening to sexuality itself. MacKinnon's critics are correct here, for her argument bears on sexuality quite generally, even though it is possible to generate a defense of antipornography legislation that does not go so deep. In brief, MacKinnon suggests that we must reformulate "the problem of sexuality from the repression of drives by civilization to the oppression of women by men" (p. 98). In her view, the sexual revolution of the i96O's and neo-Freudian arguments in favor of removal of repression8 2 are part of the problem rather than its solution. Hence MacKinnon is reluctant to distinguish sharply between erotica and pornography.83 Her central claim is that "[s]exuality itself is a social construct gendered to the ground. Male dominance here is not an artificial overlay upon an underlying inalterable substratum of uncorrupted essential sexual being" (p. 173). In short, there is no prepolitical, unmediated "sexuality" that law, or feminists, should attempt to uncover and translate into actual practice. Sexuality, as practiced currently and generally, is itself enmeshed in, a cause and a product of, sexual inequality. It is in this view that pornography, sexual harassment, rape, and prostitution are not marginal issues but instead at the core of the problem. In her emphasis on the centrality of sexuality, moreover, MacKinnon is in agreement with Freud - although her conception of the purposes and effects of sexuality is of course entirely different, because Freud treats sexuality 81 See Flogging Underwear: The New Raunchiness of Anierican Advertising, THE NEW REPUBLIC, Jan. 18, 1988, at 20. 
82 Cf. I M. FOUCAULT, THE HISTORY OF SEXUALITY (R. Hurley trans. 1978) (discussing different social attitudes toward sexuality). Astonishingly, Foucault fails to discuss problems of sex discrimination and gender hierarchy. 
83 MacKinnon writes: What pornography says about us is that we enjoy degradation, that we are sexually turned on by being degraded. For me that obliterates the line, as a line at all, between pornography on one hand and erotica on the other, if what turns men on, what men find beautiful, is what degrades women. It is pervasively present in art, also, and advertising. But it is definitely present in eroticism, if that is what it is (p. 91). 1988] as essentially natural rather than socially constructed and does not regard it as a source of unjustified subordination of women. 
MacKinnon's claims about sexuality raise large and difficult issues that cannot be properly evaluated in this space. The skepticism that has greeted some of MacKinnon's work is surely in part a product of the threat that this critique poses to practices that many think of as deeply personal and private. It is here that MacKinnon's claims sharply differ from other forms of social criticism, such as the New Deal and the civil rights movement: despite the analytic parallel, MacKinnon's argument enters an area that many men and women perceive as far more threatening and even dangerous. Moreover, the critique of sexuality is distinct from the dominance approach to sex discrimination, although in MacKinnon's formulation the two are merged. One might, for example, believe that issues of sex discrimination should be approached in terms of dominance rather than irrational differentiation without believing that sexuality itself is the source of the problem. 
How would one evaluate MacKinnon's approach to sexuality? An enormous amount of theoretical and empirical work would be necessary to convince skeptics of her basic claim. The arguments that sexuality is a social construct, that sexual sadism is the mainspring of sexual inequality (p. 5), and that sexuality is built on male dominance raise several questions. First, the connections among sexuality, nature, law, and culture are extraordinarily complex; indeed, it is not altogether clear what the claim that "sexuality" is "a social construct" means. Second, the relationship between sex discrimination and sexual sadism is hardly simple and clear cut. The term "sadism" is perhaps misleading in this context, for it connotes a kind of pleasure from pain that captures only a part of sexual inequality. Moreover, sexual inequality is sometimes rooted in things other than sexual sadism; economic, domestic, and other advantages are also important. Women have been oppressed in nonsexual ways, and men receive much more from gender inequality than sex on their own terms. Third, the claim that sexuality is based on male dominance is in some tension with the presence of affirmative descriptions of sexuality from women, descriptions that are true to subjective experience. Indeed, MacKinnon herself emphasizes that unremittingly bleak depictions of sexuality are inconsistent with important elements of female as well as male experience.8 4 8 MacKinnon states: In serious political analyses, say marxism, a worker can sometimes have a good day or even a good job. That does not mean the worker has false consciousness or the work is not exploited labor, structurally speaking .... Because sexism is basic and has been impervious to basic change, it makes sense that it would live in something socially considered basic, deceptively a part of the given, enshrouded with celebratory myth and ritual. Sex feeling good may mean that one is enjoying one's subordination; it would not 
Nevertheless, notions of sexual liberation and the removal of repression often have as their underlying purpose and effect the increased sexual availability of women to men. Elements of sexual sadism form an ingredient in sexual inequality; MacKinnon's position here is both original and confirmed by unmistakable aspects of modern culture. Moreover, the case for regulation of at least some pornographic materials is quite persuasive. Equally important, the antipornography movement has begun to affect both male and female thinking about sexuality, rendering visible many practices and issues formerly taken for granted. Sexualized violence toward women is pervasive in advertising, popular culture, and everyday life. It is difficult to see much of popular culture - and some high art as well - in quite the same way after reading Feminism Unmodified. MacKinnon's arguments furnish the tools with which to understand all of this and eventually to do something about it. This is in itself a considerable achievement. 
Feminism Unmodified is filled with novel, sometimes brilliant insights carrying broad implications for sex discrimination in particular and legal theory in general. Insights of this sort have begun to reorient legal understanding and social practices - especially in the area of sexual harassment, where a minor revolution has already occurred. Feminism Unmodified is reminiscent - and deliberately so - of some of the arguments associated with the New Deal attack on the common law, the downfall of Lochner v. New York, and the civil rights movement. 
At the same time, Feminism Unmodified will be hard for skeptics to take; parts of it will appear polemical, one-sided, insufficiently empirical, and at times conclusory. Controversy will continue about the proper legal approach to pornography, comparable worth, abortion, and sexual violence - and even more about the relationship between sexuality and sex discrimination. My suspicion, however, is that a decade from now, the central insights of Feminism Unmodified, and of MacKinnon's work generally, will be taken as substantially correct in the legal culture. If they are not, the fault will lie with the legal culture, not with the insights themselves. 
be the first time. Or it may mean that one has glimpsed freedom, a rare and valuable and contradictory event .... The point is, the possible varieties of interpersonal engagement, including the pleasure of sensation or the experience of intimacy, does not, things being as they are, make sex empowering for women (p. 218). 
Sexual Orientation and the Constitution: A Note on the Relationship Between Due Process and Equal Protection 
In Bowers v Hardwick1, the Supreme Court held that the due process clause does not protect the right to engage in homosexual sodomy. The Court said that heightened judicial protection under that clause was reserved to rights "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty" or "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition."' 2 According to the Court, homosexual sodomy could not qualify for special protection under either test.3 
In some circles, Hardwick was thought to spell the end, at least for the immediate future, to efforts to use constitutional litigation to prevent government from imposing sanctions on the basis of sexual orientation. In Padula v Webster,4 for example, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld the FBI's policy of considering homosexual conduct a "significant" and often dispositive factor in employment decisions. The court said that the issue was controlled by Hardwick: It would be quite anomolous [sic], on its face, to declare status defined by conduct that states may constitutionally criminalize as deserving of strict scrutiny under the equal protection clause.... If the Court was unwilling to object to state laws that criminalize the behavior that defines the class, it is hardly open to a lower court to conclude that state sponsored discrimination against the class is invidious.' 
What the Padula court described as an anomaly became the holding of United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Watkins v U.S. Army.6 There the court concluded that the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause forbids the Army from discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation.7 The court so held in spite of Hardwick and Padula, and in the face of a vigorous dissent from Judge Reinhardt. Judge Reinhardt predicted that "a wiser and more enlightened Court" would overrule Hardwick and, indeed, described that decision in exceedingly harsh terms: "I believe that the Supreme Court egregiously misinterpreted the Constitution in Hardwick.... I believe that history will view Hardwick much as it views Plessy v Ferguson....8 In Judge Reinhardt's view, however, the Hardwick decision compelled the conclusion that the Army's policy did not offend the Constitution. 
In this essay, I make two claims. The first is quite narrow. In spite of appearances, Hardwick-strictly as a matter of doctrine-was interpreted correctly in the majority opinion in Watkins,9 and misread in Padula and Judge Reinhardt's dissenting 5 Id at 103. ' 847 F2d 1329 (9th Cir 1988), reh'g granted, en banc 847 F2d 1362 (1988). 7 Since Watkins involved a federal measure, no question was raised under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The court relied instead on the equal protection component of the Fifth Amendment's Due Process Clause, initially recognized in Bolling v Sharpe, 347 US 497, 499 (1954). See 847 F2d at 1335 n 9. For purposes of the present discussion, the phrases "equal protection component of the Due Process Clause" and "Equal Protection Clause" will be used interchangeably. Again for present purposes, it may be assumed that the basic antidiscrimination principles applicable to the states are also applicable to the federal government. In some contexts, however, that assumption is highly questionable. See, for example, Mathews v Diaz, 426 US 67 (1976) (Medicare eligibility statute distinguishing among aliens does not violate Due Process Clause of Fifth Amendment). 8 847 F2d at 1358. 
' Much of the Watkins opinion emphasizes that the relevant Army regulation discriminates on the basis of homosexual status rather than homosexual acts. See 847 F2d at 1338, relevant acts are not at issue in Watkins, Hardwick does not control. 
It would, however, be a mistake to conclude that the Equal Protection Clause freely permits discrimination against a class of gays and lesbians, even if some, many, or even all of them engage in activity that may be regulated consistently with the Due Process Clause. The principal thrust of the Watkins decision-emphasizing unjustified hostility, past and present, against gay men-supports that conclusion. See 847 F2d at 1345-49. Watkins can be distinguished from Hardwick even if the former decision were to be applied to a class of people including some, many, or all who engage in the conduct at issue in Hardwick. opinion in Watkins. Properly understood, the Hardwick decision does not resolve the issue in Watkins and Padula. 
My second, somewhat broader claim is that the disagreement over the meaning of Hardwick contains a larger lesson for the relationship between the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. That lesson is structural, and operates even in the face of different views about how hard cases should be resolved under the two clauses. From its inception, the Due Process Clause has been interpreted largely (though not exclusively) to protect traditional practices against short-run departures. The clause has therefore been associated with a particular conception of judicial review, one that sees the courts as safeguards against novel developments brought about by temporary majorities who are insufficiently sensitive to the claims of history. 10 
The Equal Protection Clause, by contrast, has been understood as an attempt to protect disadvantaged groups from discriminatory practices, however deeply engrained and longstanding. The Due Process Clause often looks backward; it is highly relevant to the Due Process issue whether an existing or time-honored convention, described at the appropriate level of generality, is violated by the practice under attack. By contrast, the Equal Protection Clause looks forward, serving to invalidate practices that were widespread at the time of its ratification and that were expected to endure. The two clauses therefore operate along different tracks. 
Because of the independence of the lines of analysis under the two clauses, the conclusion in Hardwick does not dispose of the issue in Watkins. This claim suggests that the Equal Protection Clause is a natural route for constitutional protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation;" and that, more 10For examples of this conception of judicial review, see Alexander M. Bickel, The Least DangerousBranch, ch 3 (Yale, 2d ed 1986); Harlan F. Stone, The Common Law in the United States, 50 Harv L Rev 4, 25 (1936); Lochner v New York, 198 US 45, 76 (1905) (Holmes dissenting). For a recent example, see James M. Buchanan, ContractarianPolitical Economy and ConstitutionalInterpretation,78 Am Econ Rev 135, 139 (May 1988) ("The function of the judiciary is protection of that which is .... The judicial branch properly serves a stabilizing rather than a reformist... role. The courts should protect what is rather than try to promote what might be . . "). 
" I do not discuss in this essay the complex issues raised by the claim that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. Advocates of that position argue that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is (a) at least on its face, a form of sex discrimination; (b) part of a system of sex role stereotyping; and (c) even if in not readily apparent ways, a method of disadvantaging women. See Sylvia A. Law, Homosexuality and the Social Meaning of Gender, 1988 Wisc L Rev 187. See also Adrienne Rich, Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence, in Blood, Bread and Poetry 23 (Norton, 1986); Note, From This Day Forward:A Feminine Moral Discourse on generally, statutes that are unaffected by the Due Process Clause may be drawn into severe doubt by principles of equal protection. 
A 
Perry Watkins enlisted in the Army in 1967, at the age of 19. The pre-induction medical form asked whether Watkins had homosexual tendencies; he answered "yes."' 2 The Army found Watkins qualified for admission and inducted him. In 1975, the Army convened a board of officers to decide whether Watkins should be terminated because of his homosexual tendencies. Watkins's commanding officer testified that he was "the best clerk I have ever known," that he did "a fantastic job - excellent," and that Watkins's open homosexuality did not affect the company.13 A sergeant stated that Watkins's sexual orientation was widely known but that it caused no problems among other soldiers. The board unanimously recommended that Watkins be retained "because there is no evidence suggesting that his behavior has had either a degrading effect upon unit performance, morale or discipline, or upon his own job performance."'' 
In 1977, Watkins was initially denied a position in the Nuclear Surety Personnel Reliability Program; the ground for denial was Watkins's statements about his sexual orientation. Watkins's commanding officer requested that he be requalified for the position, stating that Watkins was "one of our most respected and trusted soldiers, both by his superiors and his subordinates" and that "[f]rom daily personal contacts I can attest to the outstanding professional attitude, integrity, and suitability ... of ...Watkins." 5 The decision to deny Watkins a position in the nuclear program was reversed. 
In 1980, Watkins's security clearance was revoked because of his sexual orientation. In 1981, the Army issued a regulation mandating the discharge of all homosexuals.16 In the same year, an army board voted to discharge Watkins because of his revelation of his sexual orientation. Watkins brought suit in federal district Single Gender Marriage, 97 Yale L J (forthcoming 1988); Loving v Virginia, 388 US 1 (1967) (invalidating miscegenation law). 
12 Watkins, 847 F2d at 1330. 13 Id at 1331. 14 Id. 15 Id. 
Is Id at 1332. court. 17 While the action was pending, the Army rated Watkins's performance and professionalism, giving him a score of 85 out of 85 possible points. The Army's written statement said that "Watkins is without exception, one of the finest Personnel Action Center Supervisors I have encountered.... He requires no supervision .... Watkins' potential is unlimited.'" s 
The district court held that Watkins's discharge violated neither the Constitution nor any relevant statute."" A divided court of appeals reversed, holding that the discharge violated the Equal Protection Clause. The court concluded that Bowers v Hardwick did not resolve the equal protection issue, that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation should be subject to heightened judicial scrutiny, and that the Army could not meet its burden of justification. 0 
B 
If Hardwick is examined in simple lawyerly terms, the majority in Watkins appears to have understood the reach of the decision correctly. There was no equal protection issue before the Supreme Court in Hardwick. The plaintiffs invoked the Due Process Clause, complaining that the Georgia prohibition on consensual sodomy was an impermissible invasion of constitutional privacy. The Georgia statute did not classify on the basis of sexual orientation.2 ' Indeed, the Supreme Court said, in explicit terms, that its conclusion did not deal with principles of equal protection.22 At first glance, then, the result in Hardwick does not bear on challenges, brought on equal protection grounds, to discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. 
It is hardly unusual, however, for a decision not directly dealing with an unanswered question to have powerful implications for that question, or implicitly to resolve it. This view underlies both the Padula decision and Judge Reinhardt's dissenting opinion in Watkins. In Padula,the court of appeals suggested that it would 17 Id. 
IS Id at 1333-34. 
" The district court granted an injunction in 1982. On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed and remanded to the district court for determination of whether the regulation violated the Constitution or any statute. 721 F2d 687 (9th Cir 1983). On remand, the district court held that the regulation was lawful. 551 F Supp 212 (WD W Va 1988). " Watkins, 847 F2d at 1340, 1349, 1352. 21 See Ga Code Ann  16-6-2 (1984). 
2 478 US at 196 n 8 ("Respondent does not defend the judgment below based on the Ninth Amendment, the Equal Protection Clause or the Eighth Amendment."). In fact, the respondent raised an equal protection problem in a footnote, but the Court ignored it. See Brief for Respondents at 28 n 60. be quite strange to hold that the Constitution allows the state to criminalize certain conduct, but at the same time that it forbids the state to discriminate against those who engage in that very conduct.2 3 In the same vein, Judge Reinhardt argued that "when conduct that plays a central role in defining a group may be prohibited by the state, it cannot be asserted with any legitimacy that the group is specially protected by the Constitution. '24 
At first glance, there is a powerful logic to this view. After Bowers v Hardwick, the Constitution does not protect homosexual acts from criminalization. Since it does not, it may appear peculiar to suggest that participation in conduct that may constitutionally be criminalized can help to entitle a group to special constitutional 25 protection. 
Despite appearances, there is no peculiarity in this suggestion. In Hardwick, the Court did not answer the question whether a state may constitutionally criminalize heterosexual sodomy. Whether the Court had answered that question in the affirmative or in the negative, its answer would not have prevented a plaintiff from resorting to the Equal Protection Clause to challenge a statute discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation or, indeed, criminalizing homosexual but not heterosexual sodomy.26 It should make no difference if the question of heterosexual sodomy remains undecided. 
More generally, the Equal Protection Clause is aimed at classifications. The question in Padula and Watkins was whether discrimination against a subgroup of people, some or many of whom engage in conduct that can constitutionally be criminalized, is a 23 822 F2d at 103. It should be unnecessary to point out, however, that not all gays and lesbians engage in the conduct at issue in Hardwick. 
24 847 F2d at 1357. 
25 As we will see, this way of phrasing the issue in Watkins is misleading, not least because many members of the class penalized by the Army regulation did not engage in the conduct at issue in Hardwick. 
26 See note 84 and accompanying text. As elaborated below, the Hardwick case has no relevance to a statute challenged on the ground that it discriminates on the basis of sexual orientation; such a statute would have no necessary connection with homosexual acts. Moreover, it is important to understand that a statute that discriminates between people who have engaged in homosexual acts, and people who have not, does not in fact discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation. Some people of heterosexual orientation have engaged in homosexual acts; some people of homosexual orientation have not engaged in homosexual acts. For reasons suggested below, a statute discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation should be subject to special scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause; the same considerations also support the view that statutes should be subject to such scrutiny if they discriminate on the basis of participation in homosexual acts, though I do not argue that point in detail here. violation of the Equal Protection Clause. Nothing in Bowers v Hardwick purports to answer that question. The fact that the underlying conduct can be criminalized is irrelevant to the problem; it is always immaterial to an equal protection challenge that members of the victimized group are engaging in conduct that could be prohibited on a general basis." 
The principal flaw in both Padulaand Judge Reinhardt's dissenting opinion in Watkins is that they read the Constitution as an undifferentiated unit, rather than as a set of entitlements and prohibitions that are targeted at quite discrete problems. Each constitutional provision must be taken on its own. It would hardly be odd to find that one constitutional provision invalidates practices about which another provision has nothing to say. The Fourth Amendment, for example, does not disable the state from regulating activities that the First Amendment protects, and vice versa. The fact that the Fourth Amendment does not prevent the state from regulating all speech-related activities could not plausibly be a reason to immunize speech from special First Amendment scrutiny.28 Such phenomena can be found throughout constitutional law. As we shall see, results of this sort should be especially unsurprising for the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. 
To clarify the point in the context of Watkins, it is useful to imagine that there is no privacy principle in the Constitution, or that the Due Process Clause is purely procedural. 9 Suppose that in such circumstances a plaintiff brings a suit challenging, under the Due Process Clause, a statute criminalizing consensual homosexual sodomy. The constitutional challenge would of course fail, for the Due Process Clause-containing no privacy principle or being limited to procedure-does not bar the law in question. The fact that a purely procedural Due Process Clause, or a Clause with27 To this extent, the Watkins court is persuasive in suggesting an analogy to discrimination against (for example) blacks who engage in acts that may constitutionally be prohibited. 847 F2d at 1340. The fact that the underlying conduct may be banned does not mean that a classification against some people who engage in that conduct is permissible. The analogy is imperfect, however, because it has already been decided that blacks are entitled to special judicial protection; the question in Watkins was whether gays and lesbians are entitled to such protection in the face of Hardwick. 
28 See Stanley v Georgia, 394 US 557 (1969). 
29 Positions of this sort are defended in, for example, David P. Currie, The Constitution in the Supreme Court ch 11 at 363-82 (Chicago, 1985); Robert H. Bork, NeutralPrinciples and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind L J 1, 8-11 (1971). The view that the Due Process Clause is without substantive content has of course been repeatedly rejected by the Court. See for example Roe v Wade, 410 US 113 (1973); Moore v East Cleveland, 431 US 494 (1977). out a privacy principle, does not protect homosexual conduct would have no bearing on the question whether some other clause forbids the state from singling out gays and lesbians for special disability. The two questions are entirely unrelated. Or suppose that a ban on consensual homosexual activity were challenged as violative of the First Amendment or the Takings Clause. Such a challenge would in all likelihood 0 fail; but the failure would have no consequences for an attack brought under the Equal Protection Clause. 
The situation in Watkins was quite similar. The Supreme Court based its decision in Bowers v Hardwick on the view that the scope of substantive due process should be defined largely by reference to tradition. Thus the Court looked to whether homosexual sodomy was "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty" or "deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition."31 But a holding that the Due Process Clause extends thus far and no farther does not affect the equal protection claim, which is founded on a different set of values. As we will see, the Equal Protection Clause is a self-conscious repudiation of history and tradition as defining constitutional principles. Analysis of an equal protection claim therefore proceeds along an entirely distinct track. To say this is not to provide the affirmative argument for the outcome in Watkins. It is, however, to suggest that the Hardwick decision simply does not bear on the problem in that case, and that in this respect the Watkins majority was correct. 
In short, the question after Hardwick is not whether it is illogical to hold that those who engage in acts that can be criminalized might by virtue of that fact qualify as a suspect class. The question is instead whether it is anomalous to conclude that a class that includes people who engage in acts substantively unprotected by the Due Process Clause can be entitled to judicial protection against official discrimination. In view of the different functions of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses, an affirmative answer to that question would produce no anomaly. 
Indeed, close parallels to this sort of reasoning can be found in a long line of cases in existing law. The "fundamental rights" branch of equal protection doctrine is self-consciously designed to prohibit states from drawing impermissible lines with respect to rights that the Due Process Clause does not substantively protect. For example, discrimination with respect to the right to vote and 330' 4S7e8e RUoSe,at411091U-9S2.at 152-53. the right to appeal is prohibited even though the states may eliminate both rights.2 Similarly, the Court has barred distinctions affecting the right to marry"3 and the right to procreate3 4 while assuming that those rights are substantively unprotected by the Due Process Clause. The Court's decision in Eisenstadt v Baird 5 was also in this tradition, invalidating a distinction between the rights of the married and the unmarried to obtain contraceptives without holding that there was a substantive right of access to contraception. In this sense, there is nothing at all unusual in the Watkins court's conclusion that the Equal Protection Clause forbids classifications with respect to practices that the Due Process Clause does not independently protect from state control.36 
The principal objection to this line of argument stems from the way the Court constructed its opinion in Hardwick. In the Supreme Court, the plaintiffs challenged the regulation of consensual sodomy on due process grounds3.7 The plaintiffs did not speak only in terms of sexual orientation. It was the Court that understood the case as presenting an issue of regulation of homosexual conduct rather than of sodomy in general.3 8 The Court upheld the statute only insofar as it applied to consensual homosexual sodomy. The Court reserved the question whether the statute would be valid if applied to heterosexual sodomy.3 9 In this way, the Court itself drew a line between homosexual and heterosexual conduct, upholding regulation of the first but not necessarily the second. The problem, in short, is this: if Watkins is correct, the very line drawn by the Supreme Court in Hardwick violates the Equal Protection Clause. On this view, it is quite odd to suggest that Hardwick did not at least implicitly resolve the equal protection problem. 
The first difficulty with this line of argument is that it disregards the fact that Hardwick was self-consciously styled as an interpretation of the Due Process Clause. The Court itself said that respondent did not defend the judgment below on the basis of the '2 See Harperv Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 US 663 (1966); Griffin v Illinois,351 US 12 (1956). 
33 See Zablocki v Redhail,434 US 374 (1978). 1, Skinner v Oklahoma, 316 US 535 (1942). 36 405 US 438 (1972). 
'" The difference lies in the fact that Watkins relies on the "suspect class" branch of equal protection, whereas Eisenstadt and related cases are rooted in the "fundamental rights" branch. That difference, however, seems immaterial for present purposes. 11 Brief for Respondents 8-9. 38 Hardwick, 478 US at 190. 31 Id at 188 n 2. Equal Protection Clause, and that disclaimer would be puzzling indeed if the Court's interpretation of the Due Process Clause were understood to resolve the equal protection issue. 
The larger point is that it may be plausible to interpret the Due Process Clause to permit the regulation of homosexual sodomy but to proscribe the regulation of heterosexual sodomy. 40 Such an interpretation would not, however, immunize from attack on equal protection grounds a law that drew a line between heterosexuals on the one hand and gays and lesbians on the other. In its substantive dimension, the Due Process Clause protects a range of basic rights; it does not speak to the constitutionality of classifications. It is in this respect that the Equal Protection Clause operates as a functional complement to the Due Process Clause, addressing a different set of questions. For this reason, it would not be anomalous for the Equal Protection Clause to prohibit the state from drawing lines that a tradition-based Due Process Clause itself incorporates. In order to support that view, however, it will be necessary to talk more generally about the relationship between the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. 
II. DuE PROCESS AND EQUAL PROTECTION 
The discussion thus far has suggested that purely as a doctrinal matter, the court of appeals was correct in concluding that the due process ruling in Hardwick had no bearing on the equal protection issue in Watkins. That claim reveals a more fundamental point. From its origin, the Due Process Clause has often been interpreted so as to protect traditionally recognized rights from state and federal power. 41 Nothing in the text of the clause compels such a conclusion, and on this point as on others the history is ambigu40 That question is beyond the scope of the present discussion. It is notable, moreover, that at the very most, the Hardwick Court distinguished between homosexual and heterosexual acts; it did not draw any line between homosexual and heterosexual people, as did the Army regulation at issue in Watkins. 847 F2d at 1336-37 n 11. For reasons already discussed, that line raises distinctive considerations under the Equal Protection Clause. 
11At its inception, however, the Due Process Clause had a kind of equal protection dimension as well. The clause grew out of requirements in English law that the executive must comply with "the law of the land." See C.H. McIlwain, Due Processof Law in Magna Carta,14 Colum L Rev 27, 44-49 (1914); Edward S. Corwin, The Doctrine of Due Processof Law Before the Civil War, 24 Harv L Rev 366, 368-70 (1911). Such requirements imposed a principle of generality and equal treatment. The Executive was thereby barred from imposing criminal disabilities on whomever he happened to choose. The evenhandedness function of the Due Process Clause thus has an equal protection component. That component is, however, distinct from the function of the Equal Protection Clause in providing special protection for disadvantaged groups. ous.42 But in its judicial interpretation, the clause has frequently been understood as an effort to restrict short-term or shortsighted deviations from widely held social norms; it has an important backward looking dimension. For purposes of due process, the baseline for inquiry has tended to be the common law, AngloAmerican practice, or the status quo. The Due Process Clause is thus closely associated with the view that the role of the Supreme Court is to limit dramatic and insufficiently reasoned change, to protect tradition against passionate majorities, and to bring a more balanced and disinterested perspective to bear on legislation. 
The point should not be overstated. There are a number of important qualifications. Tradition has not been and should not be the exclusive focus of the Court's due process jurisprudence. But this basic understanding has played a large role in the Court's decisions on substantive due process-a point central to the opinion in Hardwick itself. Indeed, it is on the surface of many of the most important substantive due process cases. Hence the early incorporation decisions attempted to defend their outcomes by reference to notions deeply held in Anglo-American law. In Murray'sLessee v Hoboken Land and Improvement Co.,43 the Court suggested that the content of the Due Process Clause would be defined by reference "to those settled usages and modes of proceeding existing in the common and statue [sic] law of England .... , In Twining v New Jersey,45 the Court asked whether the right in question is a "fundamental principle of liberty and justice which inheres in the very idea of free government," as to which tradition would be critical. 46 In the most important of recent incorporation cases, Duncan v Louisiana,47 the Court examined whether "a procedure is necessary to an Anglo-American regime of ordered liberty," a question that would be answered by an exploration of "actual systems bearing virtually every characteristic of the common-law system that has been developing contemporaneously in England and in this country. '48 
Quite outside of the area of incorporation, a number of the 412See Frank H. Easterbrook, Substance and Due Process, 1982 S Ct Rev 85, 95 (arguing that the Fifth Amendment and the Bill of Rights generally were understood as a "nondegradation principle" designed to ensure that things would not "get worse."). 43 59 US 272 (1855). 41 Id at 277. 45 211 US 78 (1908). 16Id at 106. 47 391 US 145 (1968). 18 Id at 149-50 n 14. substantive due process cases are rooted in similar instincts. For example, the Court's principal decisions in the Lochner period were based on the Due Process Clause.49 In those cases, the Court viewed deviations from common law standards with considerable skepticism. Regulation that interfered with the existing allocation of property rights was treated as impermissibly partisan and as constitutionally suspect.50 A large part of the reason for this skepticism was that the relevant regulation departed significantly from common law norms; public law was thus defined by reference to traditional private law.51 There is, of course, a broad consensus that the relevant cases were wrongly decided. The central point here is about structure, not about particular outcomes. The Court's skepticism about departures from what it perceived as historical understandings of property rights fits comfortably with a traditionbased conception of substantive due process. 
In cases involving limitations on state court jurisdiction, the Court has spoken in the same terms. In InternationalShoe Co. v Washington5,2 the Court said that the question is whether "the maintenance of the suit" transgresses "traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice."53 Similar formulations have been used in the more recent cases as well. 4 
The most controversial and important of the modern substantive due process cases of course involve privacy.5 These cases also depend importantly on references to tradition. The theme is made explicit in the majority and concurring opinions in Griswold v Connecticut5.6 It is also present in Moore v East Cleveland5,7 where Justice Powell wrote, 
Appropriate limits on substantive due process come. . . from careful 'respect for the teachings of history [and] solid recognition of the basic values that underlie our society.'. . Our decisions establish that the Constitution protects the sanctity of the family precisely because the institution of the family is deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition. 8 
Despite rhetoric of this sort, the Court's privacy jurisprudence cannot be understood exclusively in these terms. It is a familiar point that the use of tradition has produced considerable awkwardness in the cases. The principal difficulty lies in determining the contours and reach of the relevant tradition. Traditions can be described at varying levels of generality. There may well be, for example, a tradition of respect for intimate association. The application of that tradition has hardly been consistent, however, and the hard cases arise when the general tradition of respect meets a particular context in which the general tradition has been repudiated and, to that extent, does not exist at all. There is no established tradition of protection of abortion, marital privacy, or use of contraception. In the hard cases, part of the question is whether the tradition should be read at a level of generality that draws the particular practice into question.59 Many of the important privacy cases read the role of tradition in precisely this way. 
In short, the tradition cannot by itself be controlling in close cases, and the constitutional question must be answered instead by an inescapably normative inquiry into how the relevant tradition is best characterized. 60 As a result, the tradition is sometimes treated as aspirational. The Court has referred in some key cases to "evolving standards of decency," as to which tradition is relevant but not dispositive.6' It is for this reason, among others, that the Court's decision in Hardwick itself is extremely troublesome.62 Indeed, it is here that the Hardwick Court erred in its treatment of the privacy problem. At the level of generality that best explains such decisions as Roe and Griswold, the governing tradition would require far stronger justification than did the Hardwick Court for criminal bans on sexual activity between consenting adults. 
The point here, however, is not to explore the relationships among tradition, Hardwick, and the rest of the privacy cases. It is instead to suggest that the Due Process Clause has called for an inquiry with a significant historical dimension, that the Hardwick decision turned on precisely this fact, and that a large part of the function of the clause has been to limit myopic or short-term deviations from social convictions that have been long and widely held. The Court's function as provider of a "sober second thought"6 by which to measure legislation is most evident in its use of the Due Process Clause. 
Since its inception, the Equal Protection Clause has served an entirely different set of purposes from the Due Process Clause. The Equal Protection Clause is emphatically not an effort to protect traditionally held values against novel or short-term deviations. The Clause could not be characterized as a "nondegradation principle" designed to ensure that things will not "get worse." 5 It is implausible to describe the role of the Supreme Court, under the Equal Protection Clause, as the provision of a sober second thought to legislation or the defense of tradition against pent-up majorities. The clause is not backward-looking at all; it was selfconsciously designed to eliminate practices that existed at the time of ratification and that were expected to endure.6 
The function of the Equal Protection Clause is to protect disadvantaged groups, of which blacks are the most obvious case, against the effects of past and present discrimination by political majorities. The scope of the Clause and the precise content of the equality norm are of course deeply disputed. 7 But on any view, the Equal Protection Clause is not rooted in common law or status quo baselines, or in Anglo-American conventions. The baseline is instead a principle of equality that operates as a criticism of existing practice. The clause does not safeguard traditions; it protects against traditions, however long-standing and deeply rooted. 
This difference accounts for the fact that Supreme Court deciSee generally Bickel, The Least DangerousBranch (cited in note 10). 15 Easterbrook, 1982 S Ct Rev at 95 (cited in note 42). 
66 See Charles Fairman, Does the Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights? The Original Understanding,2 Stan L Rev 5 (1949). Brown v Board of Education, 347 US 483 (1954) is the most obvious illustration of judicial endorsement of this point. 
67 See Owen M. Fiss, Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5 Phil & Pub Affairs 107, 108 (1976); Paul Brest, Foreword: In Defense of the AntidiscriminationPrinciple,90 Harv L Rev 1, 5 (1976). sions that reject common law or status quo baselines usually rely on the Equal Protection Clause. 8 Cases involving the protection of disadvantaged groups are, of course, the most conspicuous examples of this. 9 But it should be no surprise that the Equal Protection Clause has also been the source of decision in cases involving such matters as voting rights,70 access to court,71 and disparities in 72 education. 
This approach also has implications for the privacy cases. In particular, it suggests that there is much to be said in favor of the mounting academic consensus73 that Roe v Wade involved issues of sex discrimination as well as privacy, and that the problem of abortion might plausibly have been approached in equal protection terms. Laws that restrict reproductive rights burden women exclusively; they are closely associated with traditional ideas about the role of women in the raising of children, ideas that have played a part in sex discrimination. The reason that it is both possible and problematic to treat cases involving reproductive rights in terms of due process is the same: the relevant tradition is highly ambiguous. It may be that the Equal Protection Clause will ultimately prove to be a preferable source of decision, though in order to defend the outcome in Roe, the argument would have to be quite elaborate.7 4 
However these more difficult questions may be resolved, there is a large difference in the basic functions of the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. The decision of the Court of Appeals in Watkins therefore contains a lesson for doctrinal development under the two clauses. The Due Process Clause may sometimes permit traditions that the Equal Protection Clause proscribes, even if those traditions are rooted in discrimination-a point that both Eisenstadt and Watkins make clear. 
This is hardly the space for a full-scale defense of the argument that classifications on the basis of sexual orientation should be subject to heightened scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause, an argument that has been made in detail in many places75 And there is reason for uncertainty about whether the current Supreme Court will accept that argument, especially in the context of the military.70 
It may be suggested, however, that the majority opinion in Watkins correctly emphasized the history of discrimination against gays and lesbians and the likelihood that challenged measures will reflect past and present prejudice.77 Empathetic identification on the part of the majority is peculiarly unusual in this setting. Statutes and regulations that discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation often reflect fear and hostility that are not susceptible to rational justification.78 The rationale accepted in Hardwick as sufficient for due process purposes-relating principally to traditionally held moral norms-has little or no weight in the context of an equal protection challenge; consider the Court's rejection of such norms in the areas of race and sex discrimination. The Watkins court also pointed to the peculiar difficulty of using political avenues to seek redress e and the usual irrelevance of sexual orientation to legitimate governmental goals.8 0 In these respects, the pattern of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is strikingly analogous to the pattern of discrimination against blacks. Particularly notable is the Watkins court's treatment of the relationship between immutability and equal protection problems."' 
The arguments used to justify exclusion of gays and lesbians from the military are the same arguments that were once used to allow discrimination on the basis of race and sex. Those justifications refer primarily to adverse effects on military morale and discipline, adverse effects that are a product of private biases.82 The record in Watkins suggests that those arguments are no more persuasive here than there. The general argument for heightened scrutiny of classifications based on sexual orientation applies regardless of the weight of the justifications in particular cases, and regardless of the possibility that the military presents special considerations arguing in favor of judicial deference." 
It may be useful to conclude by suggesting that the legal regime produced by Watkins is coherent even in the face of Hardwick. Watkins makes it generally impermissible to single out gays ence, and among the most important sources of real world political failure is the undue influence of well organized private groups as against diffuse, poorly organized majorities. See Geoffrey P. Miller, The True Story of Carolene Products, 1987 S Ct Rev 397, 404-06, 42228; Ackerman, 98 Harv L Rev at 734-37 (cited in note 75). The insights of modern public choice theory thus bear significantly on the theory of equal protection. 
It would be a large mistake, however, to use those insights in order to suggest that equal protection problems can be approached solely through a non-normative understanding (assuming that such a thing could be imagined) of the problems of political organization in the particular case. As the defining case of blacks reveals, the question whether a group deserves special solicitude under the Equal Protection Clause depends on an inescapably normative inquiry into the legitimacy of the reasons ordinarily used to disadvantage that group. Although such an inquiry will ask whether political organization is feasible in the circumstances, it cannot be limited to that question. 
80 847 F2d at 1346. 
81 "Although the causes of homosexuality are not fully understood, scientific research indicates that we have little control over our sexual orientation and that, once acquired, our sexual orientation is largely impervious to change.[citations omitted]. Scientific proof aside, it seems appropriate to ask whether heterosexuals feel capable of changing their sexual orientation. Would heterosexuals living in a city that passed an ordinance banning those who engaged in or desired to engage in sex with persons of the opposite sex find it easy not only to abstain from heterosexual activity but also to shift the object of their sexual desires to persons of the same sex?" 847 F2d at 1347-48 (emphases in original). 
82 See Watkins, 847 F2d at 1350: "These concerns strike a familiar chord. For much of our history, the military's fear of racial tension kept black soldiers separated from whites." Note also that in the context of Watkins, the concern about blackmail was quite weak. "[H]omosexuality poses a special risk of blackmail only if a homosexual is secretive about his or her sexual orientation." Id at 1352. 
83 See note 76 (cases reflecting judicial deference in matters concerning the military). and lesbians for special disabilities; differential treatment of that sort will face a large burden of justification. So long as Hardwick remains the law, however, measures that proscribe certain sexual activities may be upheld against a due process attack so long as the prohibitions apply regardless of sexual orientation. 4 The requirement of generality operates as a political safeguard, ensuring that if the heterosexual majority is to burden gays and lesbians, it must burden itself as well. In imposing this requirement of generality, the Equal Protection Clause, as understood in Watkins, serves its most familiar and established function. 
CONCLUSION 
The Watkins court's interpretation of Bowers v Hardwick was correct. The court of appeals in Padula, and Judge Reinhardt in his dissenting opinion in Watkins, misconstrued the Hardwick decision. The conclusion that the Due Process Clause does not protect consensual homosexual sodomy does not resolve the question whether principles of equal protection forbid discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. 5 
I"The qualification is necessary because Hardwick left open the possibility that heterosexual sodomy is constitutionally protected. According to the view presented here, of course, an equal protection attack would be available in those jurisdictions that banned homosexual but not heterosexual sodomy. See note 26. But see Baker v Wade, 769 F2d 289 (5th Cir 1985) (en banc) (upholding such a statute). Watkins itself need not be understood to go that far, however, since the decision applies to distinctions based on sexual orientation rather than on the nature of sexual acts. 
85 For purposes of the present discussion, I put to one side some of the other difficulties with using Hardwick to dispose of claims of unconstitutional discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. To list just a few: 
in which there is no criminal prohibition on homosexual acts. In such a jurisdiction, Hardwick is of uncertain relevance. It is by no means clear that the fact that the state could criminalize the relevant acts is sufficient to support discrimination in circumstances in which the state has chosen to impose no such criminal disability. 
authority to impose unique or distinctive civil disabilities on a class of people that includes many who engage in such acts. Imagine, for example, a law prohibiting gays and lesbians from teaching in the public schools. Even if homosexual acts may be criminalized, it remains necessary to explain why a class including many who engage in such acts, and not other criminal acts, are being forced to suffer civil sanctions. The problem becomes more severe in light of the fact that the civil sanctions appear weakly related to legitimate state purposes. 
discrimination against people who engage in acts that are and can constitutionally be criminalized-as the Watkins court emphasized. The difference is important in at least two ways. First, members of the relevant class may not have engaged in the prohibited acts at all. Second, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation has some of the characteristics of a status offense as prohibited in Robinson v California,370 US 660 (1962). 
The conclusion of the Watkins court also contains a large and often overlooked lesson about the relationship between the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses. The Due Process Clause is backward-looking; a large part of its reach is defined by reference to tradition. The clause is closely associated with, even if not limited to, the view that the role of the Court is to protect against illconsidered or short-term departures from time-honored practices. The Equal Protection Clause, by contrast, is grounded in a norm of equality that operates largely as a critique of traditional practices. The Watkins decision provides reason to believe that constitutional protection against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation will ultimately take place under the Equal Protection Clause. It should be unsurprising if such developments occur even in the wake of Bowers v Hardwick. 
A detailed assessment of arguments of this sort would, however, go far beyond the subject of this essay. 
It is ironic that during the early period of administrative law, doctrines controlling regulatory agencies were built directly on commonlaw principles that administrative regulation was self-consciously designed to displace.' Not until the 1960s did courts, in concert with Congress, begin to develop an independent public law-a set of principles that owed their origin not only to traditional private law, but also to the ideas that gave rise to administrative regulation in the first place.2 At their best, the emerging principles revealed an understanding of the functions and malfunctions of regulation, the potential dangers of inaction and deregulation as well as overzealous intervention, the risks and possibilities of judicial control, the appropriate roles of politics and technical sophistication in the administrative process, and the extent to which regulatory systems repudiated the premises of market ordering that had been built into common-law principles. 3 
The last decade has seen preliminary signs of a countermovement, with courts reorienting administrative law in the direction of ideas that last appeared in the initial encounters between the judiciary and the administrative state. 4 Some of those signs have been especially con* Professor of Law, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Bruce A. Ackerman, Akhil Amar, David P. Currie, Frank H. Easterbrook, Richard Fallon, Larry Kramer, Michael W. McConnell, Daniel Meltzer, Martha Minow, Richard A. Posner, Richard B. Stewart, David A. Strauss, and Joseph Vining for helpful comments on a previous draft; and to Margaret Antinori for valuable research assistance. 
reviewability, as well as interpretation of the due process clause and of article III. See J. Vining, Legal Identity (1978) (discussing standing); Stewart, The Reformation of American Administrative Law, 88 Harv. L. Rev. 1667 (1975) (discussing standing, due process, and reviewability); see also infra notes 8-25 and accompanying text (tracing development of standing). 
supra note 1; Sunstein, Deregulation 

U.S. 821, 832 (1985) (holding agency inaction presumptively unreviewable); cf. Meltzer, Deterring Constitutional Violations by Law Enforcement Officials: Plaintiffs and Defendants as Private Attorneys General, 88 Colum. L. Rev. 247, 295-313 (1988) (criticizing asymmetry between rights of defendants to seek deterrent remedies and judicial skepticism toward deterrent suits brought by plaintiffs). The Court has also reinvigorated separation of powers obstacles to legislative experimentation with the administrative process, though the recent decisions call into play distinct problems of congressional usurpation of executive power. See, e.g., Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986) (invalidating Gramm-Rudman statute); INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) (invoking separation of powers objections to legislative veto); cf. Morrison v. Olson, 108 S. Ct. 2597, 2620-22 (1988) (upholding independent counsel act, in part because spicuous in the Supreme Court's standing decisions. 5 Recent and still quite tentative innovations in the law of standing have started to push legal doctrine in the direction of what we may call a private-law model of standing. Under this model, a nineteenth century private right is a predicate for judicial intervention; as a result, courts may not redress the systemic or probabilistic harms that Congress intended regulatory schemes to prevent. 
Not fully developed until the New Deal, the private-law model played a large role in legal doctrine between the late 1930s and the early 1960s. The principal problem with that model-widely recognized in the 1960s and 1970s-was that it distinguished sharply between the legal rights of regulated entities on the one hand and those of regulatory beneficiaries on the other. The interests of regulated industries could be protected through the courts, whereas the interests of regulatory beneficiaries were to be vindicated through politics or not at all. 
The private-law model was correctly repudiated in a series of developments culminating in the 1970s. While the model is often justified by reference to the case or controversy requirement of article III, there is in fact no basis in that article or in any other provision of the Constitution for the view that the private-law model is constitutional in status. For purposes of standing, the principal question should be whether Congress has created a cause of action, through the Administrative Procedure Act 6 (APA) or otherwise, not whether the plaintiff is able to invoke a nineteenth century private right.7 If the law were reoriented in this way, existing doctrine would be greatly simplified; and a focus on congressional enactments would reveal that the Court's current approach has resulted in some decisions denying standing when it Congress did not usurp executive prerogatives). Some of these ideas retain vitality. See Strauss, Formal and Functional Approaches to Separation-of-Powers Questions-A Foolish Inconsistency?, 72 Cornell L. Rev. 488,496-502 (1987) (defending the result in Bowsher and the continued use of separation of powers principles, understood in functional terms, to limit congressional initiatives). 
Litigation: Notes on the Jurisprudence of Lyons, 59 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1 (1984); Nichol, Causation as a Standing Requirement: The Unprincipled Use ofJudicial Restraint, 69 Ky. L.J. 185 (1981); Nichol, Abusing Standing: A.Comment on Allen v. Wright, 133 U. Pa. L. Rev. 635 (1985) [hereinafter Abusing Standing]; Scalia, The Doctrine of Standing as an Essential Element of the Separation of Powers, 17 Suffolk U.L. Rev. 881, 897-99 (1983). 

administrative and constitutional law-mosdy because the APA creates distinctive standing doctrines for review of agency behavior and partly because efforts to require administrative agencies to comply with the governing statute raise considerations different from those raised by efforts to require Congress or the executive branch to comply with the Constitution. See infra note 197. For the most part, this discussion focuses on principles of standing in administrative law, although constitutional principles are frequently introduced. ought to have been granted, and others granting standing when it ought to have been denied. 
This Article is organized in three parts. Part I traces the evolution of modem standing doctrine, outlining its original roots in private law, the creation of a novel set of standing limitations in response to the New Deal, and the development of an independent public law of standing in the 1960s and 1970s. Part II discusses the recent revival of private law understandings and the principles of separation of powers that appear to underlie that revival. Part III criticizes the recent developments, describes the appropriate contours of standing requirements in administrative law cases, and concludes with a discussion of the relationship between article III and standing doctrine. 
I. PRIVATE LAW, PUBLIC LAW, AND THE EVOLUTION 
OF STANDING DOCTRINE 
For most of the nation's history, there was no distinctive body of standing doctrine. Whether there was standing depended on whether positive law created a cause of action.8 In the modem period, however, judicial review of administrative action has been an outgrowth of a simple framework.9 If administrators intruded on interests protected at common law, judicial review was available to test the question whether there was statutory authorization for what would otherwise be a common-law wrong. If no common-law right were at stake, judicial protection was unavailable. The most distinctive feature of this framework was the use of common-law understandings to define the judicial role in public-law cases. 
The basic framework was built on an analogy and an identifiable underlying theory. The analogy was to private law, in which the issues of standing, cause of action, and the merits are closely intertwined. In an action in which A causes an injury to B, the question whether B has a cause of action overlaps a great deal with the question whether B has standing and whether B is correct on the merits. For all three issues, the question is whether A has violated a duty it owes to B. C, an affected third party, generally may not bring suit when A injures B-even if C is Requirement?, 78 Yale LJ. 816, 839 (1969);Jaffe, The Citizen as Litigant in Public Actions: The Non-Hohfeldian or Ideological Plaintiff, 116 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1033, 1044 (1968); Winter, The Metaphor of Standing and the Problem of Self-Governance, 40 Stan. L. Rev. 1371, 1395-96 (1988). 
tradition of prerogative writs-most notably mandamus-provided a different framework, one that allowed a variety of actions when no common-law right was at stake. See infra note 19. The existence of the writ tradition, especially at the origin of the republic, makes it extremely awkward to suggest that modern notions of injury in fact, see infra notes 52-55 and accompanying text, have constitutional status. See Berger, supra note 8; Jaffe, supra note 8; Winter, supra note 8. materially affected. 10 At private law, there is no need for a distinctive set of principles to govern standing. 
In the early period of administrative regulation, similar ideas were at work in public law. II A prospective litigant could not bring suit if the government had regulated, or failed to regulate, some entity, even if the interests of the prospective litigant had been substantially and materially affected. At both private and public law, the question was not whether the litigant was harmed or whether the governmental or nongovernmental defendant acted unlawfully, but whether the government breached some duty owed to the litigant. If the litigant had no common-law interest at stake-if it was not the "object" of the regulation 12 -courts saw no legal duty suitable for legal redress. Illegality in the abstract was not an appropriate concern of the courts. Since the line between legal injury and injury in the abstract was defined by reference to the common law, the interests of statutory beneficiaries were invisible as far as the courts were concerned. 
The underlying theory was based on notions of social contract. When citizens entered into civil society from the state of nature, they did so with certain rights.' 3 The state could not interfere with those rights except on a showing of collective authorization for the interference-legislative action combined with proper executive implementation. The relevant category of interests consisted of the rights of private property and liberty that had existed in the state of nature. If no such interest was at stake, there was simply no predicate for legal intervention. Common-law interests, or traditional private rights, were thus sharply distinguished from statutory benefits for purposes of standing. 
It should be unsurprising that this framework operated at the same time as-indeed was a part of-the set of ideas associated with the Lochner era.1 4 When the Supreme Court invalidated social and economic regulation associated with the progressive and New Deal periods, it did so by invoking common-law categories in order to test the Farnsworth, Contracts  10.5 (1982). 
(1924) (allowing standing for competing carriers to challenge acquisition approval by ICC), though the private-law understanding played a large role until the 1960s. See infra notes 26-67 and accompanying text. 
baseline-the nineteenth century common law-establishing the ordinary or natural functions of government. Under an alternative baseline, however, any beneficiary left unprotected by government might be treated as an object of the inadequate protection. See Sunstein, Lochner's Legacy, 87 Colum. L. Rev. 873 (1987) (discussing role of baselines in standing and other areas of public law); infra notes 61-63 and accompanying text. For a defense of the old view, see Scalia, supra note 5, at 887 & n.28. 
working hours unconstitutional). validity of public law. 15 Intrusions on common-law interests, or departures from common-law principles, were thought to require special justification; by contrast, adherence to the common law was seen as unobjectionable neutrality. The use of common-law notions, sharply distinguishing between statutory benefits and nineteenth century private rights, was the central mark of the jurisprudence of the Lochner 1 6 period. 
In the context of standing, this view had two principal implications. First, regulated entities-industries and others who were the object of regulation-had access to court to challenge agency action as unlawfully infringing on their common-law rights. In such cases, there was no problem of standing. Regulated entities were usually in the position of actual or prospective defendants, and there was little doubt that defendants had standing to resist coercive governmental action-a view with constitutional foundations.1 7 Second, the interests of competitors and regulatory beneficiaries1 8 were not legally cognizable. t 9 Those interests, treated as privileges or legal gratuities, were to be vindicated through the political process or not at all. We may describe the resulting framework-an ambiguous amalgam of federal common law, statutory construction, and constitutional law-as a private-law model of public law. 
Another, quite different idea was at work here as well. Many judges who were hospitable toward administrative regulation sought to develop devices to minimize legal or judicial intrusions into the regula15. See generally L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law  1-3, at 5,  1-4, at 76-77 (2d ed. 1988) (describing the Lochner-era"belief that property and its contractually realizable advantages were attributable to some natural order to things implicit in a revealed structure of common-law rights"); Sunstein, supra note 12, at 879 (common law formed "baseline from which to measure deviations from neutrality, or self-interested 'deals' "). 
depended on an assortment ofunarticulated substantive conclusions. But the characterization of a claim as that of a bystander operates as a conclusion or an epithet rather than as an analytical device. There is no prepolitical or prelegal way to decide who is a bystander; the term is a function of law, not of anything in the world that is independent of the legal system. See Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 373 (1982) (indicating that statute may create an injury where none existed before). 
(competitors). An exception here can be found in the law of mandamus. As a historical matter, mandamus remedies quite generally permitted suits to compel government action. See L. Jaffe, Judicial Control of Administrative Action 468-69 (1965). But the Supreme Court ruled in an early case that federal courts do not have general authority to issue writs of mandamus, McIntire v. Wood, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 503, 504 (1813), and in any case, mandamus could not control discretionary decisions. See Wilbur v. United States ex rel. Kudrie, 281 U.S. 206, 218 (1930);Jarrett v. Resor, 426 F.2d 213, 216 (9th Cir. 1970). Note, however, that such rulings were interpretations of positive law, and therefore of congressional intent, not of article III. tory process. 2 0 This development was a conspicuous part of the New Deal attack on legalism and the judiciary. That attack had substantive and institutional dimensions. The substantive dimension consisted of a belief that the nineteenth century catalogue of common-law rights was hardly natural; instead, it was a controversial regulatory system. In the view of the New Deal reformers, the common law was inadequate as such because it was excessively protective of property rights, insufficiently protective of the disadvantaged, and ill-adapted to economic welfare in an integrated national economy. 2 1 The institutional dimension consisted of an attack on the judicial system in favor of regulatory agencies, which were to be democratically controlled, technically expert, self-starting, and free of the traditional constraints of adjudication. Taken in concert, these ideas provided much of the impetus for administrative regulation. 2 2 
Against this background, courts favorably disposed toward the New Deal reformation developed doctrines of standing, ripeness, and reviewability largely to insulate agency decisions from judicial intervention. 23 Such doctrines were used enthusiastically by judges associated with the progressive movement and the New Deal, most prominently Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter, who reflected the prevailing belief that traditional conceptions of the rule of law were incompatible with administrative regulation. 24 In this view, the interests supporting the (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring) (upholding agency action by denying standing in part because challenged action was not final); Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 341-45 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring) (upholding agency's dealings with corporation by denying standing to corporate stockholders); cf. Fairchild v. Hughes, 258 U.S. 126, 129-30 (1922) (dismissing prospective challenge to constitutional amendment and its enforcement by attorney general, by denying standing to plaintiff); Wilson v. Shaw, 204 U.S. 24, 30-31 (1907) (upholding agency action, in part because injunctive relief is inappropriate remedy to protect citizen against wrongful government act). Notably, in McGrath,Ashwander, and other cases, a majority of the Supreme Court rejected the Brandeis-Frankfurter position and allowed standing in cases that plausibly amounted to taxpayer suits. These and other aspects of the development of standing limitations are illuminatingly discussed in Winter, supra note 8. 
One of the most influential achievements of A. Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch (1962), was to generalize the Brandeis-Frankfurter position on standing, to remove it from its context, and to give it a life entirely independent of New Deal concerns. Id. at 113-27. 
423, 437-40 (1987). In this respect, there is an alliance among Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1 (1948), Erie R.R. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64 (1938), and West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379 (1937)-all of which recognized that the common law is a regulatory system and hardly prepolitical. 

National Mediation Bd., 320 U.S. 297 (1943) (reviewability); FCC v. CBS, 311 U.S. 132 (1940) (reviewability); Myers v. Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corp., 303 U.S. 41 (1938) (reviewability and ripeness). 
rise of regulation-technocratic expertise, flexibility, and political accountability-argued strongly against judicial interference. 2 5 This view has enjoyed a kind of renaissance in recent years, though from judges with a quite different political orientation. 
The private-law model of standing thus reflected a confluence of two sets of ideas, both closely associated with the Lochner era and the New Deal attack on the jurisprudence of Lochner. The first, prominent in Lochner itself, was that the judiciary existed largely to protect common-law interests from governmental incursions. The common law formed the baseline from which courts distinguished between government inaction and action or neutrality and partisanship. For this reason, intrusions on common-law rights, and not on other sorts of interests, served to trigger judicial protection. The second idea-a reaction against Lochner on the part of those hospitable to the administrative state-was that doctrines of justiciability, including standing, should be designed to minimize the occasions for judicial intervention into the regulatory process. 
The advocates ofjudicial control, hostile to administrative regulation, saw no need for judicial intervention in order to safeguard the interest in regulatory protection. And in light of the recent history, those favorable to regulation were highly suspicious of the courts. The idea that courts might intervene to protect regulatory beneficiaries from a recalcitrant agency was entirely foreign to their experience. As a result, there was mutual agreement on the private-law model from those who believed in the need for a continuing role for the legal system in supervising administrative regulation, and those who thought that adjudicative controls were to a large degree anachronistic. The consequence of the convergence of these ideas was that those without a common-law interest were unable to seek judicial relief. At the time, it was unclear whether this framework was rooted in federal common law or statutory construction-or instead whether it amounted to a largely revisionist reading of article 111.26 
In two basic steps, courts abandoned this model. The first was the conclusion that interests protected by statute were also judicially cognizable.2 7 If the interest of a prospective litigant in freedom from compeinadequate as regulatory scheme); Sunstein, supra note 21, at 440-42 (describing New Deal attack on common law and on traditional notions of separation of powers); Winter, supra note 8, at 1455-57 (discussing use of standing by Brandeis and Frankfurter to protect legislative sphere); supra note 20 (same). 

limit standing to those with common-law injuries); infra notes 205-32 and accompanying text. 
standing based on provisions of Transportation Act and Judicial Code). It may have been thought here that competition among the objects of regulation, including monitoring of compliance with regulation, would ultimately serve to protect the public as a whole. tition was a factor made relevant by the governing statute-if the agency was required by law to take that factor into account in deciding the merits-the litigant would have access to court in order to vindicate its interest.28 In such a case, the litigant would not have to show that a common-law interest was at stake. 
The second step was the recognition of "surrogate standing," by which Congress could allow certain plaintiffs to bring suit to vindicate the claims of the public at large even though they did not themselves have a statutorily protected interest. This principle applied when an organic statute granted standing to anyone "who is aggrieved or whose interests are adversely affected." 2 9 Thus, for example, competitors of a radio station would have standing to protect the interests of listeners under the FCC statute.3 0 
Under this framework, it was not always necessary for Congress expressly to confer a right to bring suit on the plaintiff. The existence of an interest protected by statute was sufficient. Courts treated the congressional desire to protect a statutory interest as an implicit grant of a right to bring suit. The requirements for an implicit cause of action were thus quite lenient.31 
Moreover, the existence of an interest protected at common law was sufficient to confer standing, even if there was no particular evidence of congressional intent to allow the action to go forward. This conclusion reflected a background understanding, not traceable to statute, that the objects of regulation should ordinarily be permitted to raise the question whether there was legal authorization for intrusion on common-law interests. This understanding, part of the private-law model and emphasized in the New Deal period, was probably a product of a constitutional concern. If those seen as the objects of regulation were prohibited from seeking judicial review to protect liberty or prop28. Id. 
1985). 
reflects a striking contrast here. See, e.g., Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 107 S.Ct. 750, 758 n.16 (1987) (explicitly distinguishing existence of standing under APA from existence of implied cause of action); California v. Sierra Club, 451 U.S. 287 (1981) (no implied cause of action under section 10 of Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act of 1899); Transamerica Mortgage Advisors, Inc. v. Lewis, 444 U.S. 11 (1979) (no implied cause of action for damages under section 215 of Investment Advisors Act of 1940). It may be possible to explain this difference in standards by reference to the nature of the remedies being sought. Suits brought under the APA attempt to nullify administrative action; implied causes of action are frequently damage actions. This explanation fits well with Transamerica, in which the Court implied an equitable remedy for rescission, but refused to permit a damage action to go forward. Transamerica,444 U.S. at 18-24. On some of the difficulties with implied causes of action for damages, see Stewart & Sunstein, Public Programs and Private Rights, 95 Harv. L. Rev. 1193, 1289-1315 (1982). erty interests against unauthorized executive action, a serious constitutional question would be raised under both the due process clause and 
In contrast, no similar question was thought to be raised by a measure preventing statutory beneficiaries from seeking judicial relief. Their interests were legal gratuities."3 In the modern period, however, serious constitutional problems might also be raised by congressional efforts to deny standing to those seeking governmental assistance in preventing illegality by third parties.3 4 
Despite these complications, there was in this period a close association between the existence of an implied cause of action and the existence of standing. The question of standing turned on whether Congress had explicitly or implicitly granted the plaintiff a right to bring suit, at least if the notion of implicit grant is understood with the foregoing qualifications.35 That question was in turn informed largely by background understandings about the circumstances in which judicial relief should be available. 
In 1946, Congress codified the various bases for standing outlined above in section 702 of the APA: "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof."a The reference to legal wrong was meant to include '32. See Fallon, Of Legislative Courts, Administrative Agencies, and Article III, 101 Harv. L. Rev. 915, 954-56 (1988) (discussing article III); Hart, The Power of Congress to Limit the Jurisdiction of Federal Courts: An Exercise in Dialectic, 66 Harv. L. Rev. 1362 (1953) (discussing due process clause and article III). 

distinction between the objects and beneficiaries of regulation has become problematic and largely anachronistic. See infra notes 62-63 and accompanying text. In this respect, the constitutional questions raised by a denial ofjudicial review and a denial of standing are quite similar. See Fallon, supra note 32, at 963-67; cf. Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., 455 U.S. 422, 430-31 (1982) (discussing "new property" cases putting statutory benefits on the same footing as common-law interests). Consider also the idea that under modem law, a "separate indication of congressional intent to make agency action reviewable under the APA is not necessary; instead, the rule is that the cause ofaction for review of such action is available absent some clear and convincing evidence of legislative intention to preclude review." Japan Whaling Ass'n v. American Cetacean Soc'y, 478 U.S. 221, 231 n.4 (1986). 
A central flaw in Hart, supra note 32, is its dependence on an anachronistic distinction between coercive and noncoercive governmental action. Id. at 1383. Hart suggests that whether there is a constitutional right to judicial review depends on whether or not the government is acting coercively, and he defines coercion by reference to commonlaw categories. Id. at 1387-1401. But in the post-New Deal era, such ideas cannot be sustained. Indeed, reliance on pre-New Deal understandings of legal rights pervades Hart's dialogue. 
Surrogate for Claim for Relief, 83 Yale L.J. 425, 451-55 (1974); Currie, Misunderstanding Standing, 1981 Sup. Ct. Rev. 41, 42-44. 
harm to common-law, statutory, and constitutional interests; in the setting of administrative law, the first two were by far the most important. The "adversely affected or aggrieved" language was designed to allow for surrogate standing if the organic statute provided such standing. 37 There was no clear indication, in the text or history of the APA, whether and when the beneficiaries of regulation might have standing to vindicate legal requirements 3 8-though they too could easily be thought to suffer from a legal injury in the form of harm to their statutorily protected interests. 
In the 1960s, courts interpreted the statutorily protected interest aspect of the legal-wrong test in order to reach precisely this concluinjury-in-fact standard like that subsequently adopted in Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 152-53 (1970). The text and history of the APA suggest that it was intended instead to incorporate the framework deicribed above, supra text accompanying notes 27-35. For this reason, the treatment in Davis, The Liberalized Law of Standing, 37 U. Chi. L. Rev. 450, 452-53 (1970), is off the mark. 
reading. 
The phrase "legal wrong" means such a wrong as is specified in section 10(e). It means that something more than mere adverse personal effect must be shown in order to prevail-that is, that the adverse effect must be an illegal effect. Almost any governmental action may adversely affect somebody-as where rates or prices are fixed-but a complainant, in order to prevail, must show that the action is contrary to law in either substance or procedure. Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, Administrative Procedure Act: Legislative History, S. Doc. No. 248, 79th Cong., 2d Sess. 276 (1946) [hereinafter APA Leg. History]. It is notable in this regard that the drafters of the APA expressly conflate the issue of standing with the merits. Id. at 212; see also id. at 368-69 (agencies "may not willfully act or refuse to act .... They may not take affirmative action or negative action without the factual basis required by the laws under which they are proceeding .... Legal wrong means action or inaction in violation of the law or the facts."); id. at 308-11 (noting that the "adjective 'legal' is a limiting adjective"). 
Consider also the analysis in the highly influential report of the Attorney General's Committee on Administrative Procedure: 
The standing may be conferred by statute; but it frequently is not so conferred in specific terms. The question is then whether the person has otherwise a private right not to have the administrative body act in the allegedly unlawful manner.... Whether a particular person shall have the right to contest administrative action ... is a question of law and policy dependent on a number of variable factors. Consideration, though not conclusive, has been given, for example, to the nature and extent of the person's interest, and the character of the administrative act, whether it commands conduct by the person, permits conduct by his rival, withholds a service or benefit which the Government is free to withhold, and so forth.... Except in special cases, when special considerations require a contrary holding,judicial review within the usuallimits is appropriate whether the applicant seeks protection of a constitutionalright or of a statutory or common-law right, privilege, or bounty. 
Att'y Gen. Comm. on Admin. Procedure, Final Report: Administrative Procedure in Government Agencies, S. Doc. No. 8, 77th Cong., 1st Sess. 84 (1941) [hereinafter Att'y Gen. Rep.] (emphasis added). 
standing to beneficiaries); see also infra notes 45 & 50 (same). sion, allowing regulatory beneficiaries to vindicate claims of administrative illegality. Thus, for example, viewers of television, victims of housing discrimination, and users of the environment were able to bring suit because their interests were statutorily protected.3 9 This conclusion was a natural and unsurprising interpretation of the legalwrong test, since beneficiaries, at least as clearly as competitors, were intended to be protected by regulatory statutes.40 Here too there was a connection between the question of standing and the existence of an implied cause of action; the existence of a statutorily protected interest was thought to create a legal wrong under the APA. 4 1 The existence of a common-law interest became a sufficient but not a necessary condition for legal protection.4 2 Eventually, the law no longer distinguished sharply between the interests of regulatory beneficiaries and those of regulated industries. 
The shift of the 1960s and 1970s was attributable to a general consensus that, from the standpoint of the New Deal period, was quite puzzling. According to the emerging view, a belief in the rule of law was entirely compatible with a system of administrative regulation. Legal controls on regulatory agencies seemed well adapted to or even necessary for the successful implementation of statutory programs. Judges and others who rejected common-law baselines in general were thus well disposed toward legal intervention. In their rejection of the use of 

of an interest protected by statute need not imply a correlative right to bring an action to vindicate that interest. Some of the recent cases involving implied causes ofaction make this point dear. See cases cited supra note 31. 
liberty and property interests during the same period. Originally those interests were defined by reference to the common law. In the late 1960s and 1970s, however, statutorily protected interests assumed constitutional status. See Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593, 599-603 (1972) (professor's interest in position under de facto tenure program is property interest); Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 260-66 (1970) (due process requires that welfare recipient be afforded evidentiary hearing before benefits can be terminated). Here too, courts made inroads on a private-law model of public law, and for many of the same reasons. The distinction between common-law and statutory interests does, however, persist in other areas of the law. See Commodity Futures Trading Comm'n v. Schor, 478 U.S. 833, 854 (1986) (noting that existence of interest protected at common law is relevant to availability of article III tribunal); Comment, Sovereign Immunity and Entitlement Benefits, 56 U. Chi. L. Rev. (forthcoming 1989) (discussing relevance of common-law interest in sovereign immunity doctrine). common-law baselines in the law of standing,4 3 they were conforming to the understandings that gave rise to regulation in the first place; but the new synthesis reflected a firm rejection of the New Deal belief in an inevitable disjunction between the realm of law and the realm of administrative government. The consequence Was that judicial checks became a significant part of the network of controls on administrative behavior, controls that were designed to promote as well as to check regulatory intervention. 44 
Three particular ideas played a role in this shift. The first was an understanding that congressional purposes could be defeated not only by overzealous regulation, but also by unlawful failure to regulate or agency hostility to statutory programs. 45 If conformity to law was a goal of administrative law, there was no reason to distinguish between the beneficiaries and the targets of regulation. Far from being incompatible with the administrative process, some measure ofjudicial supervision appeared to be a means of promoting agency fidelity to statutory purposes. 
The second idea derived from widespread (though not monolithic) evidence of the influence of regulated industries over regulatory programs.4 6 In the face of such evidence, it was most peculiar to suggest that regulated industries, and not regulatory beneficiaries, should have access to court. Political remedies were no more obviously available to regulatory beneficiaries than to regulated entities; indeed, the beneficiaries faced especially severe problems of political organization. 4 7 If an agency failed to implement a statutory program to the legally required degree, it was often unrealistic to expect the political process to provide relief. In any case, the possible availability of political remedies was not thought to be a reason to deny standing to regulated entities. In both cases, judicial review was a means of promoting agency conformity to the commands of the legislative process. 
The final idea was that from the standpoint of the legal system, the claims of regulatory beneficiaries were of no less importance than those of regulated industries. The interests of victims of discrimination, pollution, unfair labor practices, securities fraud, and other statutory harms seemed no less deserving of legal protection than the commonlaw interests that had served as the traditional predicate for judicial review. This conclusion was a natural-indeed inevitable- outgrowth of the New Deal, which arose from a belief that the common-law catalogue of interests was inadequate.48 
The conclusion that statutory and common-law interests should not be sharply distinguished seemed irresistible if importance was assessed by reference to the beliefs of Congress, which, after all, created the statutory programs. The limitation of standing to those having traditional common-law interests at stake appeared to depend on an anachronistic conception of legal rights traceable above all to the discredited jurisprudence of Lochner v. New York. 4 9 The attack on common-law baselines thus merged with an attack on the belief that administrative autonomy was the most promising institutional mechanism for producing the appropriate level of regulatory control. 
It would have been possible for courts to use these ideas to build on the legal-wrong test in such a way as to grant statutory beneficiaries broad standing to bring suit. Because regulatory programs quite generally, and indeed by definition, reflect a desire to protect beneficiaries, allegations of inadequate regulatory action might always be thought to create a liegal wrong, and therefore standing, within the meaning of the Schlozman &J. Tierney, Organized Interests and American Democracy 341-46 (1986); Stewart, supra note 1, at 1684-87. A particular difficulty here stems from the collectiveaction problems that impose severe transaction-cost barriers to organization on the part of beneficiaries. See R. Hardin, Collective Action 53-54 (1982); M.Olson, The Logic of Collective Action 22 (1971). 

Fallon, supra note 32, at 963-67; Meltzer, supra note 4, at 304. This is the central error in Scalia, supra note 5, at 894, which argues that standing should be limited to those who have at stake "individual rights." See infra notes 182-88 and accompanying text. APA. 50 This conclusion, in fact reached in many lower court decisions in the 1960s, 51 would have had the advantage of promoting fidelity to the text and purposes of the governing provision of the APA. It would also have tied the problem of standing to the question whether Congress had explicitly or implicitly conferred on plaintiffs a right to bring suit. 
The Supreme Court, however, took a different route to the revision of standing doctrine. In its decision in Association of Data Processing Service Organizationsv. Camp,5 2 the Court abandoned the previous framework altogether, signalling a significant departure from the private-law underpinnings of previous law. The Court replaced the legal interest test with a factual inquiry into the existence of harm; the existence of a "legal" interest was utterly irrelevant. 53 What was relevant was whether there was an injury in fact that was "arguably within the zone" of interests protected by the statutory or constitutional provision at issue.5 4 The Court therefore interpreted the APA to grant standing even if the particular substantive statute did not confer on plaintiffs a right to bring suit and indeed even if there was no legal interest at all.5 5 
The "arguably within the zone of interests" requirement responded to some of the same concerns as the legal-interest test, and it too called for a degree of entanglement between standing and the merits; but the requirement was, by design, quite lenient, and involved only a brief examination of the statute to see if the plaintiff's interests were entirely far afield from the statutory purposes. 56 Notably, however, Data Processingwas styled as an interpretation of the APA. As such, it the part of regulatory beneficiaries. The influential and contemporaneous Attorney General's Committee noted that judicial review "is adapted chiefly to curbing excess of power, not toward compelling its exercise." Att'y Gen. Rep., supra note 37, at 76. But it added that "if the denial[ofaction]is based on an erroneousinterpretationof law,judicialreview is available to remove at least that barrier." Id. at 86; see also supra note 37 (legislative history of APA). Note also that the APA defines "agency action" to include "failure to act," 5 U.S.C.  551(13)(1982), and authorizes courts to "compel agency action unlawfully withheld or unnecessarily delayed," Id.  706(1). The contrary position is presented in Scalia, supra note 5, at 887-88, but the position is insufficiently attentive to the context and history of the APA. Cf. Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 828-35 (1985) (holding agency inaction presumptively unreviewable, but apparently allowing review to overcome errors of law). 

standing is different."). 

denies a right of review if the plaintiff's interests are so marginally related to or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it cannot reasonably be assumed that Congress intended to permit the suit."). The Supreme Court has never denied standing for failure to meet the "arguably within the zone" test. was incorrect; 57 but in actual effect, it could be interpreted so as not to depart substantially from the original APA framework. 58 
Data Processingresponded to a belief that the private-law model no longer worked in public-law cases. 59 Why this is so is a complex matter.6 0 A principal reason was that the private-law inquiry into whether A has violated a duty owed to B does not quite capture the dynamics of public-law cases, in which disputes cannot so readily be understood in terms of clear rights and duties. Often administrative disputes do not have a bipolar structure: there may be many people on one or both sides of the dispute, and the agency may be authorized to consider numerous factors, no one of which is controlling. Since a number of factors are relevant, and none decisive, the right-duty relationship between the government and any particular legal complainant is not crisp and bilateral. It is important not to overstate this point. In public-law cases, there are rights and duties too. The failure to consider a relevant factor, or the consideration of an irrelevant factor, might well be thought of as a breach of a legal duty owed by the government to the complainant. But the inquiry into consideration of relevant factors does not have a clear parallel in private-law actions. 
Moreover, once public-law plaintiffs are authorized to appear in court, they do not argue that the government has breached a duty owed to them-at least not in the common-law sense-but instead that the government has behaved unlawfully. 61 In this respect, public law has for a long time split the question of standing and the merits. 
Even under Data Processing, there remained a bow in the direction of dispute-settlement, for the requirement of an injury in fact eliminated those plaintiffs with purely ideological claims. 62 But the Court moved dramatically in the direction of a standing doctrine that no Processing with grant implied by legislative history of APA); supra notes 36-37 and accompanying text (legislative history of APA). 
to allow standing, not for all those "affected," but for competitors and regulatory beneficiaries. This test in substance replicated the expansion of the legally protected interest model in the late 1960s and early 1970s, which built on the legal-wrong standard repudiated in Data Processing. See supra notes 38-42 and accompanying text. 78-79 (1978) (plaintiffs need not show a nexus between injury to them and intended scope of constitutional right at stake). There are, however, prudential limitations on the ability of one person to raise the interests of another. See generally Monaghan, Third Party Standing, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 277 (1984) (discussing the expansion and problematic nature of discretionary judicial limitations on third-party standing doctrine). 
claim is. There is no prelegal category of ideological claims; to say that a claim is ideological is to say that no legal right is at stake. That question will depend in turn on the substantive law. See infra notes 205-32 and accompanying text (discussing article III). longer owed its shape to common-law categories, or distinguished between the rights of regulated entities and regulatory beneficiaries. 
Indeed-and this is the central point-that very distinction depended on a conceptual foundation that had become anachronistic precisely because it was dependent on common-law baselines. Whether someone is the object of regulation or its beneficiary cannot be decided without an independent theory outlining what it is that-govemment ordinarily or properly does. Regulated entities are themselves the beneficiaries of statutory limits on agency power-and of the common lawinsofar as those sources of law protect them from public or private incursions into their legally created spheres. The beneficiaries are the objects of regulation insofar as positive law authorizes such intrusions and affords them less protection from private conduct than they would like.63 Indeed, the very term "statutory beneficiary," as conventionally used, assumes that the common law is the ordinary backdrop or the usual state of affairs, and that departures from that state should be understood as providing special benefits and special burdens. It is not surprising that assumptions of this sort became impossible to sustain in the wake of the New Deal attack on the common law. 
Notwithstanding these considerations, the Data Processingdecision was justifiably subject to powerful criticism. 64 First, an effort to build on the legal-wrong standard probably would have been superior to the injury-in-fact approach. All of the foregoing ideas could have been accommodated within the legal-wrong standard. That standard accurately captures the original meaning of the APA, and it has the further advantage of deriving standing doctrine from congressional purposes in enacting regulatory legislation.65 The legal-wrong test also has the significant virtue of dissolving the distinction between beneficiaries and regulated entities by making it clear that statutes provide the only workable metric for deciding whether there is a judicially cognizable injury. Whether there is such an injury cannot be decided in the abstract, without regard to what the law provides. The legal-wrong test does not build into the inquiry a distinct, extralegal category of beneficiaries. In this respect, it was the injury-in-fact test that was anachronistic, precisely because it suggested that there was a prelegal category of injuries-a point that has turned out to have considerable importance. 66 In addition, and more generally, the injury-in-fact requirement it63. SeeJ. Vining, supra note 1, at 102-03. 
Processingas an "unredeemed disaster"). 
at 43-44 (describing legal-wrong test in original understanding of APA); Stewart, supra note 64, at 1569 (characterizing legal-wrong standard as providing "ample flexibility for recognition of emerging societal interests through judicial expansion of the statutorily protected-interest test"). 
self was criticized as a holdover from private-law ideas from which Data Processinghad to some degree escaped. 6 7 That requirement, and standing limitations generally, are often quite sensible,68 but they have been justified on the basis of policies that actually have little or nothing to do with standing at all. Standing limitations are said to ensure that lawsuits are concrete rather than hypothetical or remote.69 But the injuryin-fact requirement and other limitations on standing do not promote concreteness; indeed, the problem of concreteness has nothing to do with the question of standing. Whether a plaintiff is able to point to an injury peculiar to him is a question independent of the concreteness or abstraction of the dispute. For example, the dispute in Sierra Club v. Morton 7 0-the principal modem example of a case denying standing on injury-in-fact grounds-was hardly hypothetical or remote.7 1 Standing limitations are also said to be a way of ensuring sincere or effective advocacy. 7 2 But institutional litigants not having injury in fact are particularly likely to be strong advocates. 7" It is expensive to initiate a lawsuit, and those who do so without meeting the standing requirements are especially committed. 74 
Notwithstanding these problems, the Data Processingapproach appeared for a long time to generate a body of standing doctrine that had a large measure of coherence, at least under the APA.7 5 As the law developed, courts did not sharply distinguish between statutory beneficiaries and regulated class members, thus largely eliminating the asymmetry built into previous law.7 6 This development served to remove a skewed set of incentives for administrators who, under the previous regime, could be subject to a lawsuit in the event of overzealous enforcement action, but would be immunized from legal controls if they furnished insufficient protection. 77 There is powerful evidence that the recognition of standing for regulatory beneficiaries has been important in bringing about agency compliance with law. 78 At the same time, the doctrine has excluded merely ideological interests and the interest in law enforcement for its own sake. 79 
A principal goal of the Data Processingapproach was to achieve a large degree of clarity and predictability. And for a period, the injuryin-fact requirement seemed to operate in a reasonably straightforward fashion. It should be clear, however, that an assessment of whether the plaintiff has suffered injury in fact could not be the only question for purposes of standing. In an integrated economy, an enormously wide variety of people are affected by an agency's decision to act or not to 
provide a legitimate reason for agency inaction. The fact that agencies must allocate their limited resources to those problems that seem most pressing, however, has implications for reviewability rather than for standing. See Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 831 (1985); Sunstein, Reviewing Agency Inaction After Heckler. v. Chaney, 52 U. Chi. L. Rev. 653, 683 (1985). 
in many statutes. See, e.g., Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, 30 U.S.C.  1270 (1982); Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 42 U.S.C.A.  6305 (West 1983 & Supp. 1988); Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.  7604 (1982). 
Regulatory Program of the U.S. Gov't 213-14, 432-34, 469 & 492 (Apr. 1, 1986-Mar. 31, 1987) (reflecting agency initiatives, resulting from judicially imposed deadlines in such areas as environmental and labor law); see also United Steelworkers of Am. v. Pendergrass, 819 F.2d 1263 (2d Cir. 1987) (requiring Secretary of Labor to publish standards for providing employees with information about hazardous chemicals, resulting in 29 C.F.R.  1915.99, 1917.28, 1918.90 (1988)); Public Citizen Health Research Group v. Tyson, 796 F.2d 1479 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (finding that OSHA failed to set proper exposure limits for ethylene oxide, resulting in 29 C.F.R.  1910.1047 (1987)); International Union, United Auto., Aerospace, & Agric. Implement Workers of Am. v. Donovan, 590 F. Supp. 747 (D.D.C. 1984) (requiring OSHA to reconsider decision not to issue temporary standards regarding workplace exposure to formaldehyde, resulting in 29 C.F.R.  1910.47 (1987)). 
enforcement for its own sake," must, however, be based on the relevant statutes; the characterization cannot be made in the abstract. By conferring a legal right, a statute might convert an ideological interest into a legal one. See infra notes 205-32 and accompanying text. act.8 0 The decision of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) whether a particular company violated an environmental statute, and should face civil and criminal penalties, will have consequences "in fact" for workers and employers in many other companies as well-not to mention consumers generally. 
In Data Processing,the Court could not have meant to suggest that all affected workers, employers, and consumers could challenge all EPA decisions. In order to produce sensible results, courts had to build into the new framework some distinction between direct and indirect consequences of agency decisions, or between legally cognizable injuries and harms that Congress could not have intended to be vindicated in court.8 1 In this sense, the injury-in-fact test was (and is) quite malleable, and the standing determination inevitably depends on a range of considerations that the notion of injury in fact, by itself, cannot capture. 
In these circumstances, the "arguably within the zone" test, though appearing unwieldy, served in practice as a lenient and workable threshold inquiry, capturing the understanding that those whose interests were entirely afield of statutory purposes could not bring suit. The test thus operated as a check against suits brought by people with interests unrelated to the statutory scheme.8 2 And the injury-in-fact test itself, in its early period, appeared to allow suits by regulatory beneficiaries and by adversely affected competitors, but not to allow standing for those whose interests were only indirectly and incidentally affected.8 3 Thus, the new standing doctrine seemed as if it might serve the function, intended by the Court in Data Processing, of ensuring that jurisdictional inquiries were reasonably simple and crisp,8 4 and did not unduly complicate the case before courts reached the merits. 
Data Processing was part of a set of developments that began to point the way toward an independent public law.8 5 Such developments effect" inJ. Vining, supra note 1, at 32. 
able to invoke "public values"). 
that: [i]n cases where the plaintiff is not itself the subject of the contested regulatory action, the test denies a right of review if the plaintiff's interests are so marginally related to or inconsistent with the purposes implicit in the statute that it cannot be reasonably assumed that Congress intended to permit the suit. Id. at 757. 
need to be unpacked. 
77 (S. Schlesinger ed. 1982) (emphasizing importance of simplicity in determining venue). 
liberty or property, see supra note 42; the refusal to distinguish between deregulation and regulation, see Motor Vehicles Mfrs. Ass'n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 tory beneficiaries to require greater regulatory protection attempt to vindicate injuries that ought to be cognizable politically but not through the judiciary. There is in this respect a clear connection between the causation requirements and certain conceptions of judicial restraint and separation of powers. The recent cases might be understood as an effort to narrow the judicial role in actions brought by statutory beneficiaries-often having numerous members-to compel government action against private parties. The causation requirements are one of several devices by which to accomplish this goal. 144 
The underlying concern, captured in Allen v. Wright,14 5 is that while courts should protect the objects of regulation, they should be reluctant to compel the executive branch to undertake enforcement action to vindicate the general or societal interests of regulatory beneficiaries. In this view, suits brought to challenge "the particular programs agencies establish to carry out their legal obligations"1 4 6 should not bejudicially cognizable. The distinctive judicial role is the protection of traditional or individual rights against governmental overreaching. 147 This claim purports to derive strength from the constitutional provision, invoked in this way in Allen and another recent decision of the Court, 148 that confers on the President, not the judiciary, the authority to "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed."' 49 
The recent standing requirements belong in the same category as other recent decisions restricting judicial intrusions into administration, with respect to both substance' 5 0 and procedure.i 5 1 They reflect a form of judicial skepticism about both government regulation and court entanglement in executive functions. The congruence of these kinds of skepticism has been critical in the cases. The two have been combined in no other recent period. 152 
There is a commonality between the New Deal approach and still tentative developments in current law, and it lies in the belief that administrative regulation, grounded as it is in technocratic expertise and political accountability, is incompatible with judicial oversight. The difference is that the New Deal view was rooted in hospitality toward regulatory intervention and fear of politically motivated invalidation, by the courts, of desirable administrative programs, whereas the modern developments are based on hostility to intervention and fear ofjudicially compelled regulation. But in either case, the doctrine of standing serves to minimize the occasions for legal intervention into the regulatory process, and thus to limit the strain between what are regarded as, two distinct mechanisms for social ordering. Understood against this background, the causation requirements are a means of ensuring against the perceived excesses of Data Processingin allowing judicial redress of what might be seen as essentially political grievances.' 53 That rationalization, however, is ultimately unpersuasive. 
III. PUBLIC LAW AND STANDING 
As a general rule, the question for purposes of standing is whether Congress has created a cause of action.' 5 4 A congressional resolution of the standing issue is almost always authoritative. It is in this sense, enthusiasm about regulation; among conservatives, a minority in that period, skepticism about regulation led to enthusiasm for the judiciary; and in the 1960s, liberal judges combined hospitality toward regulation with enthusiasm for an aggressive judicial role. See Sunstein, supra note 21, at 437-41. The general phenomenon is remarked on in Note, Intent, Clear Statement, and the Common Law: Statutory Interpretation in the Supreme Court, 95 Harv. L. Rev. 892, 910-12 (1982). See generally Sunstein, Statutes and the Regulatory State (Sept. 1988) (unpublished manuscript on file at the Columbia Law Review). 
"political," not because of the absence of legal constraints, but because the injury is different from what is typical at common law. Whether a grievance is political depends on the underlying statute; the question cannot be answered in the abstract. See infra notes 229-30 and accompanying text. Moreover, the political question doctrine-not standing-is the appropriate tool for ensuring that courts do not hear cases involving issues not suited to the judiciary. See Henkin, Is There a "Political Question" Doctrine?, 85 Yale LJ. 597 (1976) (suggesting political question applies where there are no legally cognizable standards). Properly understood, the principles of standing deal with appropriate plaintiffs, not with issues beyond judicial competence-though the two ideas have not been kept entirely separate in practice. See, e.g., Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 751 (1984) (suggesting that issues ofstanding must be considered in context ofseparation of powers). 
and only this sense, that standing limitations are part of the "case or controversy" requirement of article III; and it is in this sense that standing doctrine serves an important separation-of-powers function. 
In many standing cases, however, the question whether Congress has created a cause of action cannot be answered simply. The legislature cannot be expected to resolve that question in every setting. The APA is of course controlling in most administrative law cases, and interpretation of the standing requirements of the APA is therefore the central question. Probably the best approach here would have been to use the legal-wrong test as it had been developing before Data Processing, focusing attention on whether the plaintiff's interest was protected by the underlying substantive statute. 155 The law has taken a quite different direction, however, and it is possible to understand the current injury-in-fact test as an interpretation of the APA that does relatively little violence to the underlying purpose of that statute. The principal function of the requirement of injury in fact-insofar as it provides a limitation on standing-is to decrease the likelihood that outsiders or intermeddlers t 56 will be able to disrupt mutually beneficial arrangements. In this respect, the requirement of injury in fact-rooted in the APA, not article III-promotes autonomy and self-determination on the part of litigants. 15 7 and standing). In some cases, moreover, the issue is whether the Constitution itself creates a right to bring suit. See infra note 208. 

describe some people as "intermeddlers" and others as "injured"; there is no extra-legal way to make that determination, or to do so without invoking controversial substantive considerations. 
(1972), the Court refused to recognize standing in an action brought by an environmental organization whose members had not claimed use of a recreational preserve threatened with an allegedly unlawful development project. Id. at 735. The Court's conclusion was correct, for if none of those affected by the creation of a development in the preserve was willing to come forward, a group of outsiders probably should not be permitted to do so-at least as a matter of interpretation of the APA and other relevant statutes. Cf. Brilmayer, The Jurisprudence of Article III: Perspectives on the "Case or Controversy" Requirement, 93 Harv. L. Rev. 297, 310-15 (1979) (discussing autonomy and self-determination as animating concerns of article III). A different result might be appropriate if it could be shown that those directly affected were unwilling to bring suit for reasons other than contentment with the status quo. See L. Tribe, supra note 15,  3-19. 
At least ordinarily, the fact that the law prohibits certain activity is not a sufficient reason to permit a suit by outsiders. Agencies quite properly use prosecutorial discretion to allocate resources among various problems; some of those problems may have comparatively weak claims to the public fisc. If no one directly affected by government action is sufficiently concerned to bring suit, the usual assumption-subject to congressional override-ought to be that third parties should not be permitted to do so. Note, however, that concepts like "bystander" and "outsider" are artifacts of preexisting ideas about who should be able to bring suit and that all of the foregoing concerns are subject to congressional revision. See infra notes 205-32 and accompanying text. Congress 
The causation requirements present different issues. Standing by themselves, they are natural corollaries of the injury-in-fact requirement and unobjectionable as such. But aside from their manipulability, the central problem is that in the suits in question here, the relevant harms are quite generally probabilistic or systemic. The purpose of the regulatory program is to redress harms of precisely that sort.' 5 8 It would be a large mistake to conclude that such harms are not judicially cognizable. Nineteenth century conceptions of injury should not be used to resolve standing issues in administrative law. Those conceptions have no place in regimes in which the legal injury is often of a different order. A system in which regulatory harms were not judicially cognizable would tend to allow regulated industries, but not regulatory beneficiaries, to have access to court-thus imposing a perverse set of incentives on administrative actors by inclining them against regulatory implementation when it is legally required. 5 9 Such a result would tend to defeat congressional purposes. 160 Nothing in article III, the APA, or the governing statutes justifies this result. 
In cases brought under the APA, then, courts should generally allow standing to plaintiffs who seek to redress systemic or probabilistic harms. On this view, there will remain a role for the causation requirements,161 but the role will be the limited one suggested by the best of the Supreme Court's decisions on the point.' 62 
It should come as no surprise that the causation requirements are highly manipulable. Judgments about whether or not causation is speculative depend on no clear metric. It is difficult to make systematic the inquiry into whether government action against a third party is likely to affect behavior in ways that will help a particular class of plaintiffs. Thus, the Court has found that the causation requirements were met when the connection between the injury, the defendant's conduct, and could therefore reject the outcome in SierraClub by granting standing if it so chose; and the best argument against the result in Sierra Club would be that the relevant statutes should have been interpreted to create a cause of action for the plaintiffs. 
supra note 4, at 304 ("The common law understanding of injury, however, is not well suited to deal with the distinctive problems of modern governments, which can cause serious harm of a systemic or probabilistic kind that does not fit into the common-law mold of identifiable injury to identifiable individuals."). 
suits by beneficiaries). 
article III was whether there was an invasion of a legal right. That question is analogous to the inquiry recommended here. See Winter, supra note 8, at 1395-96. 
causation as a limiting requirement). 
the relief sought were no clearer than in Linda R.S., EKWRO, and Allen v. Wright.' 63 After these decisions, the precise nature of the causation requirements is quite obscure. 164 
In particular, the causation requirements, as sometimes applied, threaten to make standing issues turn on considerable discovery, factfinding, and, worst of all, judicial speculation on the precise effects of regulatory initiatives. All this is a significant disadvantage over the pre-DataProcessingapproach, which depended on legal issues that could be resolved on the basis of the pleadings without complex factual inquiries. The new law of standing has in this respect come to be less crisp and certain than the previous regime-precisely the opposite of what the Data ProcessingCourt intended. 
A large amount of doctrinal confusion is the consequence. The opinions of the en banc court of appeals in the Thomas case provide the most conspicuous example. In that case, standing was made to turn on an extraordinarily complicated inquiry into the real-world impact of fuel economy credits on automobile manufacturers.16 5 There is something seriously wrong with standing principles that produce so high a degree of confusion in what is, after all, a jurisdictional determination. Moreover, the relevant decisions have not turned on causation alone, notwithstanding their rhetoric. The inquiry into causation is in part a disguise for other sorts of considerations-prominently including the view that Congress could not have intended to grant standing to plaintiffs whose access to court would interfere with executive prerogatives about implementation.' 6 6 
The manipulable nature of the inquiry into causation appears in a less obvious and more important place as well. The central problem in the causation cases is not whether there is a causal nexus among injury, remedy, and illegality; it is how to characterize the relevant injury. Whether the injury is due to the defendant's conduct, or likely to be (1978). In Duke Powerthe plaintiffs complained that the Price-Anderson Act encouraged the building of a nuclear power plant in their vicinity. Id. at 69. The Court concluded that the various environmental and aesthetic consequences of thermal pollution were sufficient to qualify as injuries "in fact." Id. at 73-74. But the claim of a causal connection was quite speculative; it was hardly certain that such effects would occur, and their consequences for any particular plaintiff were highly uncertain. Other cases allowing standing despite relatively attenuated chains of causation include Heckler v. Mathews, 465 U.S. 728, 737-38 (1984); Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228, 239-42 (1982); Bryant v. Yellen, 447 U.S. 352, 366-68 (1980); Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 261-64 (1977); and United States v. SCRAP, 412 U.S. 669, 687-90 (1973). 
The Supreme Court, 1981 Term-Foreword: Public Law Litigation and the Burger Court, 96 Harv. L. Rev. 4, 20-22 (1982); Fallon, supra note 5, at 37 n.201. 
per curiam, No. 85-1515 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 16, 1988) (en banc). 
remedied by a decree in his favor, depends on how the injury is described. In EKWRO, for example, the plaintiffs might have characterized their injury as an impairment of the opportunity to obtain medical services under a regime undistorted by unlawful tax incentives. In Allen v. Wright, the plaintiffs themselves argued that their injury should be characterized as the deprivation of an opportunity to undergo desegregation in school systems unaffected by unlawful tax deductions. 167 Thus recharacterized, the injuries are not speculative at all. 168 If described at a certain level of generality, the causation requirements are comfortably met in both cases. It is for this reason that in CenterforAuto Safety v. Thomas, much of the dispute-under the rubric of causationactually turned on whether the injury to the opportunity to purchase fuel-efficient cars was a legally cognizable one. 
The device of recharacterization of the injury may seem artificial, but it is at work in at least one Supreme Court decision. In Regents of the 
Bakke's standing. There was no showing that Bakke would have been admitted to the medical program of the University of California at Davis if the affirmative action program were invalidated. The Court responded that "even if Bakke had been unable to prove that he would have been admitted in the absence of the special program, it would not follow that he lacked standing.... The trial court found such an injury, apart from failure to be admitted, in the University's decision not to permit Bakke to compete for all 100 places in the class, simply because of his race."1 7 0 The Court thus concluded that the interference with the opportunity to compete was the relevant injury, and that the causation requirements were met with respect to that injury.1 71 For regulatory harms as well, the central question is whether an increased risk or diminished opportunity is legally cognizable, or whether particular plaintiffs must instead show that there is a substantial likelihood that particular harm will come to them as individuals. 
The causation issues could, in short, turn entirely on whether plaintiffs are permitted to characterize the relevant harm broadly rather than narrowly. A relatively broad characterization has been critical not only in Bakke, but in a number of lower court decisions as well.1 7 2 But 
pregnant at time of court review, "pregnancy ...provides a classic justification for a conclusion of nonmootness"), and Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1, 10 (1972) (finding no legally cognizable injury as a result of data-gathering activities of Army), pose similar issues. 

F.2d 1570 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (granting standing to community health center that characterized its injury as impairing "opportunity to compete"); Autolog Corp. v. Regan, 731 the Supreme Court has given little or no guidance for resolving the problem of characterization. 
On one view, the problem should be solved by looking at the nature of the interest protected by the relevant statutory or constitutional provision. The harm might be characterized broadly if the relevant source of law is designed to prohibit the injury thus characterized. A related route would be to ask straightforwardly whether Congress intended to confer on the plaintiff a right to bring suit. There are significant advantages to such an approach, and to some degree it is endorsed in current law. 17 3 
But the DataProcessingCourt interpreted the APA to confer a cause of action on those harmed by agency behavior, thus separating the issues of standing and the merits; 1 74 and this interpretation was intended precisely to allow a brisk threshold determination, one that would not call for elaborate statutory construction. On the other hand, it is impossible in the hardest cases to decide standing issues without asking whether the governing substantive statute is designed to protect the plaintiffs; in those cases, some such inquiry is necessary because by itself, the injury-in-fact test is too open-ended and malleable in an integrated economy. Insofar as they act as crude surrogates for this inquiry, the causation requirements confirm this proposition. 
A large part of the solution lies in a recognition that the problem of standing is generally for legislative resolution, and that if Congress chooses to create regulatory systems to prevent probabilistic or systemic injuries, the usual rule ought to be that courts should permit litigants suffering such injuries to bring suit. Nothing in article III or the APA justifies a sharp split between injuries of the nineteenth-century variety and injuries that regulatory systems are designed to prevent. The question whether there is a "case or controversy" within the meaning of article III depends largely or entirely on positive law, not on the nature of the injury. 175 Moreover, a prohibition on standing in regulaF.2d 25, 28-31 (D.C. Cir. 1984) (loss of employment opportunity as injury in fact); International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union v. Donovan, 722 F.2d 795, 809-10 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (granting standing to organizations challenging rescission of restrictions on homework); National Coalition to Ban Handguns v. Bureau of Alchohol, Tobacco & Firearms, 715 F.2d 632, 633-34 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (granting standing to organization challenging issuance of firearms dealers' licenses). Compare Center for Auto Safety v. NHTSA, 793 F.2d 1322, 1334-35 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (recognizing denial of opportunity to purchase as cognizable injury) and Center for Auto Safety v. Thomas, 847 F.2d 843, 849-50 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (en banc) (Wald, CJ.), vacated per curiam, No. 85-1515 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 16, 1988)(en banc) (same) with NHTSA, 793 F.2d at 1343-44 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (narrowly characterizing relevant injury) and Thomas, 847 F.2d at 886 (Silberman, J.) (injury to consumers is not constitutionally cognizable). 
'174. Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 153 (1970). The zone test also implicated the merits, but because of its leniency, the entanglement was not severe. See supra note 56 and accompanying text. 
tory cases would represent a partial return to the private-law model of the 1950s and 1960s, allowing regulated entities, but not regulatory beneficiaries, to bring suit. Such a result would skew regulatory incentives against implementation, thus tending to defeat congressional purposes and expectations. 
It follows that the Centerfor Auto Safety cases were quite easy. Congress expressly conferred standing on the plaintiffs to redress regulatory harms-"any person who may be adversely affected"-and there was no need for elaborate speculation about the precise effects of administrative controls. Even if the cases had not involved a specialized standing provision and had arisen under the APA, the same result would be appropriate. The regulatory harm provided the necessary injury in fact, and with respect to that harm, there was no problem with causation. It also follows that EKWRO and Allen were wrongly decided as general standing cases, although EKWRO may have been correctly decided because the area of taxation presents special reasons for caution. 176 
To say this is hardly to suggest that courts should abandon the causation requirements and the instincts that underlie them. Standing should be denied in three categories of cases brought under the APA. The first includes cases in which even broadly characterized injuries do not meet the causation requirements. Suppose, for example, that the plaintiffs are able to characterize their injuries in probabilistic or systemic terms, but those injuries are not likely to be redressed by a ruling against the defendant. 17 7 A denial of standing in such cases is a natural implication of the injury-in-fact requirement that the Court has found in the APA. If the harm, however characterized, is not likely to be redressed by a ruling for the plaintiffs, it is appropriate to conclude that there is no injury in fact. Judicial relief should be unavailable on the same theory as in Sierra Club v. Morton,17 8 in which the plaintiffs did not allege that they were actual or prospective users of the park in question. 
The second category includes cases in which the injury, once 
recharacterized, the connection between the relief sought and the plaintiffs' injury was extremely loose. For other possible examples, see Community for Creative NonViolence v. Pierce, 814 F.2d 663, 666-70 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (denying standing to homeless people seeking to challenge a report on the homeless); American Legal Found. v. FCC, 808 F.2d 84, 89-92 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (denying standing to organization, which, although having no members but only supporters, attempted to challenge FCC failure to investigate network broadcasting concerning the CIA); California Ass'n of the Physically Handicapped v. FCC, 778 F.2d 823, 825-27 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (denying standing to association challenging transfer of ownership of television network stock on grounds that stock transfer was unconnected with network's employment of physically handicapped or network's failure to use methods of making broadcasts accessible to the hearing impaired). 
recharacterized, is so generalized or diffuse that all or almost all citizens are affected in the same way. 179 Recharacterized injuries may become so open-ended that they are no longer properly treated as injuries at all; here the proper analogy is to taxpayer or citizen standing. In such circumstances as well, the case is quite similar to Sierra Club v. Morton, and in the absence of a clear statement from Congress, standing should be unavailable. The APA is properly interpreted to forbid standing in such cases, even if the principle is understood as subject to legislative override. This category is relatively small, however, as Bakke, Duke Power, and the Centerfor Auto Safety cases reveal. It is critical not to use the prohibition on citizen or taxpayer standing to support a broader, and indefensible, view that disallows standing when a large number of people are affected. 
Finally, and most importantly, standing should be denied to those seeking to redress regulatory harms when there is good reason to believe that Congress intended not to allow the suit to go forward. The presumption here should be in favor of standing, since in DataProcessing the Court interpreted the APA as creating a general background rule in favor of standing for those harmed and arguably within the zone of protected interests.18 0 Sometimes, however, that rule will be rebutted by the statutory language or structure in particular cases, as the Court found in Block v. Community Nutrition Institute.'8 ' By itself, the injury-in179. The Court's decision in SCRAP may be incorrect because the case falls in this category. SCRAP, 412 U.S. at 686-88. In Diamond v. Charles, 476 U.S. 54 (1986), the Court properly denied standing to a doctor who attempted to defend a state statute limiting abortion. The doctor claimed, in relevant part, that his injury consisted in a smaller number ofchildren available for his medical practice. Id, at 66. But if injuries of this sort sufficed, all or almost all citizens could defend restrictive abortiQn statutes, Notably, however, the DiamondCourt recognized that the Illinois legislature might grant standing even in such cases. Id. at 65 n.17; see also Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 107 S. Ct. 750, 754 n.7 (1987) (recognizing that Congress may either grant or withhold standing); EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26, 41 n.22 (1976) (legislature may grant standing, but "'plaintiff still must allege a distinct and palpable injury to himself, even if it is an injury shared by a large class of other possible litigants' ") (citations omitted). 
In CenterforAuto Safety v. Thomas, Judge Silberman attempted to assimilate the case of consumer standing to the case of a harm applying to all citizens and all taxpayers. 847 F.2d 843, 886 (D.C. Cir.) (Silberman, J., concurring), vacated per curiam, No. 851515 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 16, 1988) (en banc). But the cases are distinct. The plaintiffs in CenterforAuto Safety v. Thomas consisted of a subclass of the citizenry made up of people who sought to purchase fuel-efficient cars; that subclass is sufficiently well-defined for purposes of standing. Indeed, it is no different in principle from a class of employers seeking to avoid regulatory controls. 
(1970). 
standing). The results in Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984), and especially EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26 (1976), might be defended on this ground, by reference to the peculiar nature of standing in tax cases. See supra notes 105-07 and accompanying text; see also infra notes 205-32 and accompanying text (discussing article III). On the background assumption in favor of standing for those actually harmed, see Clarke, 107 S. Ct. at 755 n.9. fact test is too open-ended to produce sensible results in an integrated economy. Millions of people are affected "in fact" by many agency decisions. In these circumstances, the application of the test in the hardest cases will inevitably depend on a judicial perception of whether the injury is direct or incidental, and that perception should be based on a reading of congressional purposes. The causation requirements have been made to do much of the work of restrictions on standing when such restrictions are a plausible understanding of legislative will. That issue should be approached more directly. If EKWRO was rightly decided, it was because the tax statutes should have been interpreted so as to deny standing, not because of a problem with causation; and if people now thought to be indirectly or incidentally harmed by regulatory action or inaction are to be denied standing, it is because the denial is a sensible reading of congressional purposes in enacting regulatory legislation. 
The usual solution, then, is that the intended beneficiaries of regulatory programs should be permitted to bring suit to vindicate statutory requirements. In some circumstances, suits will be brought by people not within the zone of protected interests, or-as in Block and the tax context of EKWRO-there will be some other indication that Congress did not intend the suit to go forward. Most actions brought by beneficiaries to redress regulatory harms will not, however, fall within these categories, and the general rule of Data Processingwill control. 
The recent standing decisions are rooted in part in views about separation of powers. These views are quite distinct from notions of causation, standing by themselves. Three central ideas support the separation-of-powers concerns. The first is a belief that courts should protect individual rights rather than general social interests; the second invokes the "take Care" clause to argue against judicial interference with executive implementation; the third emphasizes the availability of the political process to protect interests in regulatory enforcement. These ideas are interrelated. None of them, however, supplies a sufficient reason for a refusal to treat probabilistic or systemic harms as judicially cognizable, or indeed for a general reluctance to hear actions brought by beneficiaries to bring about regulatory intervention. 
ambiguity in the view that courts should protect only traditional or individual rights. In particular, it is not clear whether standing is to be eliminated whenever many people are affected by the decision, or instead when an interest in regulatory protection-an interest not protected at common law-is at stake. If numbers are the crucial concern, standing would be foreclosed not only for regulatory beneficiaries, but also in cases in which many people or businesses are the object of government control. Such cases provide the staple of administrative law; consider, for example, a carcinogen regulation that affects numerous industries and plants. No one would argue that, in cases of this sort, affected industries should be deprived of access to judicial review to test the question of legality. Such a result would mean quite generally that the rulemaking activity of federal agencies could not be subject to challenge from the objects of regulation. For this reason, the claim that courts should protect only traditional or individual rights cannot be made in terms of numbers alone.' 8 2 
It is quite plausible to suggest that citizen or taxpayer standing ought to be unavailable, certainly in the absence of clear congressional authorization.18 3 A rule of that sort can be supported by the basic consideration that underlies the injury-in-fact requirement. People ordinarily treated as bystanders ought not to be allowed to disrupt mutually advantageous relations, 8 4 and in any case political remedies are most reliable when all citizens are affected in the same way. This assumption is part of the set of prudential limitations on standing' 8 5 -judge-made clear statement principles that are subject to congressional override. l8 6 To say that citizen or taxpayer standing should be unavailable is not, however, to say that when large numbers of people are affected by agency action, they should be remitted to political remedies, whether they are beneficiaries or objects of regulation. In both cases, the plaintiffs are seeking to require administrators to comply with statutory requirements; in both cases, the plaintiffs represent a subcategory of the citizenry; and in both cases, judicial relief should be available to bring about conformity to the law. i8 7 Nothing in article III argues against 686-88 ("To deny standing to persons who are in fact injured simply because many others are also injured, would mean that the most injurious and widespread government actions could be questioned by nobody. We cannot accept that conclusion."). 
subject to the usual qualification: the question whether someone is a bystander cannot be decided prelegally, but is instead a function of the governing legal rules. 
and State, Inc., 454 U.S. 464, 474-75 (1982) (listing prudential limitations). 
limitations subject to congressional override). 
class ofconsumers ought not to have standing to challenge regulatory action that makes certain products available at'higher cost or not available at all-even if the relevant action is unlawful, and even if Congress has expressly granted standing in such cases. 847 F.2d 843, 886 (D.C. Cir.) (Silberman, J., concurring), vacated per curiam No. 851515 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 16, 1988) (en banc). The underlying reasoning is obscure. The rule against taxpayer or citizen standing is prudential in character, and the grant of standing to classes of consumers is designed to vindicate statutory requirements against administrative illegality. It is true that all citizens are in a sense consumers, id., but in the relevant cases a subgroup of consumers seeking to purchase a particular product is contending that the agency has violated statutory requirements. It is no more plausible to deny standing because the relevant consumers are numerous than it is plausible to this view, and the APA is best interpreted to grant standing in both cases, even if the class of plaintiffs is quite large. 
An alternative view would not emphasize numbers, but would instead distinguish sharply between the injuries of regulated entities and those of regulatory beneficiaries. But this view, depending as it does on nineteenth century conceptions of legal harm, cannot be sustained.'8 8 Congress has abandoned those conceptions, and in light of that abandonment, the interests of beneficiaries are no more "general" or "societal," and no less individual, than those of regulated entities. 
distinction between regulated entities and regulatory beneficiaries with a reference to the "take Care" clause.' 8 9 On one view, the clause makes it problematic for courts to compel executive implementation, rather than to prevent agency action. In the former case, it might seem that courts are usurping the President's power to "take Care" that the laws are faithfully executed. 
The "take Care" clause, however, is a duty, not a license. 190 The clause requires the President to carry out the law as enacted by Congress. It does accord to the President-and no one else-the authority to control the execution of the law when Congress has not spoken, and that authority will involve a measure of discretion. But the President's discretion, and the "take Care" clause in general, do not authorize the executive branch to violate the law through insufficient action any more than they authorize it to do so through overzealous enforcement.' 9 1 
If administrative action is legally inadequate or if the agency has violated the law by failing to act at all, there is no usurpation of executive prerogatives in ajudicial decision to that effect.' 92 Such a decision is necessary in order to vindicate congressional directives, as part of the judicial function "to say what the law is.' 9 3 The "take Care" clause deny standing to the objects of carcinogen regulation because the relevant industry has many members-or because the ultimate objects of regulation are consumers in that setting as well. 
depends on an anachronistic conception of injury, is inconsistent with congressional directives, and creates odd incentives for administrators); infra notes 205-32 (discussing article III). 
Const. art. II,  3, cl. 4. 
Miller, The President and Faithful Execution of the Laws, 40 Vand. L. Rev. 389, 396-97 (1987). 

Garland, Deregulation and Judicial Review, 98 Harv. L. Rev. 505, 562-63 (1985). Those problems, however, do not bear on the issue of standing and should be taken care of under a separate line of analysis. See Fallon, supra note 5, at 22-47, for a detailed discussion. 
and concerns of separation of powers argue in favor of rather than against a judicial role when statutory beneficiaries challenge agency behavior as legally inadequate. 
claims of statutory beneficiaries are properly handled in the political process and not in the judiciary. To be sure, judicial review must be seen as only a part of the network of controls on administrative action. It is a large mistake to focus exclusively on the courts.1 9 4 In these cases, however, the claim is that a regulatory agency has violated a statute. Arguments that invoke the primacy of the democratic process call for judicial involvement. The plaintiff is seeking to compel the executive to comply with the political resolution as it is expressed in law. In this sense, the problem of standing presents distinctive considerations in the statutory realm. Nor is there a reason to distinguish between these claims and the legal claims of regulated industries, which are of course protected through the judiciary; a system that made the courts available only to the latter would be hard to defend. 
In addition, the cases at issue involve legal, not political, claims-a point often missed in the opinions.' 95 If the argument is genuinely political in character, the plaintiff will lose on some ground other than standing-either because there is no plausible claim on the merits, or because the decision is committed to agency discretion by law.195 It is true that cases of this sort will often involve a wide range of interests and a number of affected parties. That fact should not, however, obscure the point that the plaintiff's objection is that the agency has violated a congressional directive; there are legally cognizable standards by which to resolve that issue. 19 7 Far better devices than standing are that the quotation from Allen v. Wright, see supra note 142 and accompanying text, is largely a muddle. The question in that case was not whether courts should be " 'continuing monitors of the wisdom and soundness of Executive action,' "Allen, 468 U.S. at 760 (quoting Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1, 15 (1972)); it was whether the agency's policies violated the governing statute. See id. at 784 (Stevens, J., dissenting). 
Controlling the Federal Bureaucracy 159-60 (1987); Sunstein, supra note 21, at 463-78. 
843, 882-83 (D.C. Cir.) (Silberman, J., concurring), vacated per curiam, No. 85-1515 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 16, 1988) (en banc). 
the generalized character of their claims. See supra note 179 and accompanying text. 
statutory realms. It is at least plausible to invoke such limitations as a prudential notion designed to limit use of the Constitution to challenge legislative or executive behavior. See A. Bickel, supra note 20, at 116-27 (judiciary's self-restraint in not granting standing reduces clash between judiciary and other branches and preserves its power). Such limitations received much of their impetus from efforts to insulate New Deal programs from intervention from ajudiciary perceived to be hostile to regulation. See supra notes 20-25 and accompanying text. It is far less plausible to invoke prudential concerns as a reason to shield administrative agencies from congressional limitations. 
The best argument in this connection would emphasize that governing legal stanavailable for reducing inappropriate judicial intrusions in such cases, including, most prominently, deference on the merits. 
The most general point is that there is no incompatibility between a system of administrative regulation and a continued regime ofjudicial control of administrative illegality. 198 Some of current law reflects an emerging but still tentative belief-reminiscent of the New Deal-in administrative autonomy from judicial intrusions, a belief that is supported by similar references to agency expertise and accountability. 199 Here, however, the skepticism about judicial intrusion is typically associated with fear that courts will compel rather than proscribe administrative regulation 2 0 0-a peculiar reversal of the New Deal concern that courts would invalidate, on ideological grounds, necessary administrative action. 
From the standpoint of the separation of powers, this skepticism is as myopic as its New Deal predecessor. There is no inconsistency between adherence to law and administrative regulation, even if legal intrusions occasionally produce pathologies. 20 Statutory requirements will sometimes call for or proscribe agency action. Under the APA, suits by those with a legal interest or an injury in fact as understood here-including both beneficiaries and regulated entities, if anachronistic concepts of this sort are to be used-should therefore be permitted. 
It is, moreover, possible to read the recent cases relatively narrowly. Both EKWRO and Allen involved efforts by one taxpayer to litigate the tax liability of another. In neither case, moreover, were the injuries characterized as regulatory harms. Bakke, 20 2 the Centerfor Auto Safety cases, 20 3 and other decisions 20 4 suggest that under some constidards are often ambiguous and suggest that in the absence of injury to an object of regulation, outcomes should be the product of the political process, as reflected in informal interactions involving the executive branch, legislative authorities, and affected groups. This argument is, however, hard to defend when there is an injury in fact to a regulatory beneficiary who is within the zone of protected interests. See supra notes 182-88 and accompanying text (criticizing distinction between objects and beneficiaries of regulation). 
of the regulatory process, and here there is considerable room for substantive regulatory change and reform of the approaches of reviewing courts. See Mashaw & Harfst, supra note 132, at 312-16 (criticizing judicial review of rulemaking in NHTSA context); Stewart, supra note 87, at 683-85 (suggesting market incentives replace legal regulation in certain settings). 

beneficiaries. 
legalism); Stewart, supra note 87, at 673-78 (same). 
tutional and statutory provisions, the device of recharacterization is appropriate. There is thus reason to believe that the causation requirements will not signal a significant departure from the understandings that underlay the rejection of private-law notions of standing. 
Because references to article III have played a prominent role in recent standing decisions, it is useful to conclude with a brief treatment of the relationship between the causation requirements, the characterization of injuries, and the case or controversy requirement of article 111.205 
The connection between standing limitations and article III is far from clear. Article III limits federal 'courts to cases or controversies, but this limitation does not explicitly require that plaintiffs have a particular stake in the outcome. A case or controversy might exist quite apart from whether there is an injury, legal or otherwise, to the complainant. To explore the problem, it is useful to distinguish among three conceptions of the relationship between article III and standing requirements. The first view would allow Congress to create judicially cognizable injuries whenever it chooses; the second would interpret article III to require a traditional private right; the third would impose some limitations on congressional power to create judicially enforceable rights, but would allow courts to redress regulatory harms of the sort involved in the Centerfor Auto Safety and similar cases. 
On the first view, article III requires a case or controversy, but whether there is a case or controversy is something on which, with respect to standing, article III is silent. The existence of a case or controversy with respect to standing is a question of positive law and therefore for congressional resolution. Whether there is standing depends on whether positive law has created it by granting a cause of action or a legal right or immunity to the particular plaintiff. On this view, article III does require standing in the form of a legally cognizable injury; but article III does not say whether there is a legal injury in a particular case. The existence of standing, like the existence of property, depends on what the law provides. 20 6 Whether there is a "case or of the "personal stake" element of the article III "case or controversy" requirement in Flast v. Cohen); Currie, Judicial Review Under Federal Pollution Laws, 62 Iowa L. Rev. 1221, 1225-47 (1980) (surveying requirements for judicial review under Glean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act); Currie, supra note 103, at 183-85 (criticizing Court as "unnecessarily stingy" in denying plaintiffs standing in EKWRO); Fallon, supra note 5, at 47-59 (arguing in favor of broad congressional power to create legal rights and therefore standing);Jaffe, supra note 8, at 1037-39 (arguing for a broader definition of "case or controversy"). 
ripeness, mootness, and advisory opinions. The latter requirements are not wholly within congressional control, though the legislative power to define injury includes some controversy" is not answered by article III, but instead by Congress and the Constitution in creating legal rights and obligations. 
On this view, moreover, the existence of standing and the existence of a cause of action present the same basic question. And in this respect, the requirement of standing serves an important separation-ofpowers function, by ensuring that it will be Congress, rather than the courts, that will decide who may bring suit against the government. This view has two principal implications. The first is that litigants do not have standing unless Congress or the Constitution has granted them a right to bring suit. This view draws considerable support from the first hundred and fifty years or so of the republic. 20 7 It also receives significant though not unanimous support from the recent cases. 20 8 power over these requirements as well. What is distinctive about standing is that its existence depends on the creation of a legal right. While there may be some limitations on congressional power to create standing, those limitations, if they exist, are quite insubstantial. See infra notes 221-32 and accompanying text. In all of these settings, however, the New Deal reformation has large implications; but the general relationship between justiciability and the rise of the administrative state is beyond the scope of the present discussion. 
requirement); Jaffe, supra note 8, at 1035 (arguing in favor of private attorneys general); Winter, supra note 8, at 1394-1409. 
Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 372-73 (1982). But see Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984); EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26 (1976). 
When the objects of regulation are seeking to test the question of authorization, it is plausible to understand previous doctrine as having been rooted in a belief that the due process clause implicitly furnishes a cause of action to bring suit. It was on this understanding that courts permitted regulated entities to challenge unlawful administrative incursions on their interests. This reading of the cases raises interesting questions about more modern and more controversial cases in which plaintiffs claim that a constitutional provision implicitly creates a cause of action. See, e.g., Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents of Fed. Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388, 390-92 (1971). The difference is that in some of the most controversial of the modern cases, damages are often sought, and it may be less clear that plaintiffs are seeking to fend off unauthorized governmental intervention; but that distinction is quite thin. 
On this view, moreover, some of the cases involving standing to assert constitutional claims raise the question, not whether there is injury in fact, but whether the relevant provision creates a cause of action. Flast v. Cohen, 392 U.S. 83 (1968), would be understood as recognizing an implied cause of action under the establishment clause when certain conditions are met. Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State, 454 U.S. 464 (1982), denied a cause of action when those conditions were not met. Bivens, Flast, and Valley Forge thus raise closely related questions. Furthermore, the struggle over the characterization of the plaintiff's injury in cases involving constitutional claims might be understood as part of an effort to define the circumstances in which constitutional provisions implicitly create causes of action. In addition, the manipulable character of the causation requirements in constitutional cases might be defended on the basis of the (controversial) claim, made most notably in A. Bickel, supra note 20, at 115-27, that courts use doctrines of justiciability so as to control the amount and timing of their intervention into the democratic process. The discussion in the text, however, deals with the question whether and when the ConstituThe second implication is that if Congress has granted such a right, there is no problem under article III. 
Notably, the pre-Data Processingview of standing largely incorporates this understanding of article 111.209 The legal-interest test reflects a conception of standing that draws an inference of congressional intent to allow the plaintiffs' action to go forward on the basis of the congressional desire to protect their interests in the regulatory process. 
There is much to be said in favor of this view of article 111.210 Insofar as it suggests that the problem of standing is largely within congressional control, it seems to be correct as a matter of both history and logic. The basic position has, moreover, been accepted explicitly or implicitly in a number of recent decisions by the Supreme Court.2 1 1 Those decisions recognize that the problem of standing is, in administrative-law cases, governed by the APA, 21 2 and that Congress can create standing if it chooses. 2 13 In this view, Congress can create a legal injury where none had existed before. Consider the fact that the Freedom of Information Act creates a cause of action for "any person, 2 14 and that the injury, thus defined, has raised no constitutional problem. 21 5 Consider also the legislative creation of citizens' suits under various statutes 216 and the creation of legal injuries quite foreign to the common law. 2 17 tion permits Congress to create a cause of action, not with the quite distinct question whether the Constitution creates a cause of action of its own force. 

question as whether there is private right of action); Fallon, supra note 5, at 30-34 (Congress can "adjust doctrines ofjusticiability to allow private parties to enforce constitutional rights"). 
(1986); Havens Realty Corp., 455 U.S. at 373 ("The actual or threatened injury required by Art. III may exist solely by virtue of 'statutes creating legal rights, the invasion of which creates standing .......")(quoting Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614, 617 n.3 (1973)); Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 155-56 (1970). 

U.S. 153, 164 n.15 (1978) (statute allows "any person" to commence a civil action to enjoin any individual or government agency that is alleged to be in violation of the Endangered Species Act of 1973); Trafficante v. Metropolitan Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205, 209-10 (1972) method of obtaining compliance with the Civil Rights Act of 1968) supra note 5, at 48-54 (recognizing broad congressional power to create legal rights and therefore standing). 

validity of congressional grant of standing in FOIA cases). 
 1270 (1982); Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 42 U.S.C.A.  6305 (West 1983 & Supp. 1988); Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.  7604 (1982). 

For the most part, the question of standing therefore involves the meaning of congressional enactments. 2 18 The Data Processing requirement of "injury in fact" has confused this point. But it is notable that the Supreme Court has also said that this requirement is a creation of Congress in enacting the APA, emphasizing that the APA generally creates standing for those whb are harmed, and that there need be no separate indication of congressional intent to create a cause of action.2 1 9 The downfall of the legal interest test in Data Processingis thus an interpretation of the APA, 220 and the problem of standing in this sense remains within congressional control. 
resolution might be thought to run into two sorts of constitutional objections. First, the denial of standing, like the denial ofjudicial review, 22 1 might sometimes raise serious problems under the due process clause or article III. If, for example, Congress provided that those subject to environmental regulation could not seek review of the regulation, a serious problem would arise under the Constitution. In the modem period, the same proposition may sometimes hold for regulatory beneficiaries. 22 2 From this direction, one can find a limitation, even if a relaof Fair Housing Act of 1968 "establishes an enforceable right to truthful information concerning the availability of housing"); Trafficante, 409 U.S. at 212 1968 creates right to protection against housing discrimination) 
the problem in Data Processingas "basically one of interpreting congressional intent"); id. at 755 n.9, 757, 758 n.16 (emphasizing that availability of standing is different from availability of implied cause of action because of broad purposes of standing provision of APA). 

accompanying text. 

into constitutional obstacles if the benefit is individual rather than collective. The issues would be (a) whether the due process clause requires judicial review of the administrative determination and (b) whether article III requires some role for a federal court in supervising the administrative decision. See Fallon, supra note 32, at 963-67; cf. Webster v. Doe, 108 S. Ct. 2047, 2051-52 (1988) (construing CIA statute so as to permit judicial review of constitutional claims); id. at 2058-60 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (arguing that there is no general right to judicial review); Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254, 260-61 (1970) (welfare benefits qualify as property for purposes ofprocedural due process). 
If the answer to either question is in the affirmative, a legislative repeal of the standing provisions of the APA, or a general effort to insulate administrators from judicial review, would run into serious constitutional difficulty-unless heavy reliance is placed on the distinction between legislative and adjudicative determinations. Compare BiMetallic Inv. Co. v. State Bd. of Equalization, 239 U.S. 441, 445 (1915) (taxpayer has no due process right to a hearing when tax is part of general statute within state power) with Londoner v. Denver, 210 U.S. 373, 385 (1908) (when state legislature commits the tively unimportant one in practice, 223 on the claim that the question of standing is for congressional resolution. 
The second constitutional objection is that the grant of standing might sometimes be thought to raise questions under article III-an objection that can be generalized into a second and different view of the relationship between article III and standing requirements. On this view, article III does impose substantive limitations on the sorts of injuries that can be redressed in federal court. Only injuries to nineteenth century individual rights-those that are, or that resemble, commonlaw harms-can be remedied by the judiciary. Congress is without power to allow federal courts to remedy certain sorts of injuries, even if it attempts to create a cause of action to do precisely that. This view takes various forms. 224 In all of those forms, however, the central point is plain: article III allows federal courts to vindicate some injuries and not others, and the line between them depends on traditional conceptions of what constitutes a legal harm. 
Some of the Court's decisions offer support for this view, appearing to conflate APA and constitutional standards, 22 5 to require a judicially approved injury in fact no matter what Congress has said, and at least to imply that the Constitution disallows standing even if Congress has created it.226 For this reason, it is controversial to claim that there are no limitations on congressional power to grant standing. To be sure, any such limitations should come up infrequently even if they exist. But on one view, the requirement of an injury in fact stems from determination of the tax to a subordinate body, taxpayer has due process right to a hearing). 
There would be no anomaly in a constitutional order that permitted Congress to grant standing freely but limited its power to deny it. A principle of that sort is rooted in the idea, with powerful roots in current law, that whether there is a legal "case" is a function of positive law, but that there are constitutional limits on Congress's power to authorize administrative officials to make unreviewable decisions about legal rights. But a detailed exploration of these complex issues is beyond the scope of the present discussion. 
entities and beneficiaries, means that the constitutional objection will come up quite rarely, if at all. 
remedy probabilistic or systemic harms, or that courts may redress only injuries of the sort cognizable at common law, or, more narrowly, that article III forbids Congress from conferring on citizens a right to vindicate merely ideological claims. On the latter view, Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727 (1972), is properly decided as a matter of article III, but Congress has the constitutional power to overrule the decisions in, for example, Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984), EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26 (1976), and Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S. 490 (1975). 
412 U.S. 669 (1973). But see Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 107 S. Ct. 750 (1987). 
however, quite ambiguous on this point. See supra note 208. article III; it forbids courts to redress or prevent regulatory harms; and the requirement cannot be overcome by statute. 
That view is, however, misguided. 22 7 The best interpretation of article III would recognize that Congress has the authority to define legal rights and obligations, and that it may therefore, by statute, create an injury in fact where, as far as the legal system was concerned, there had been no injury before. Article III does not require an injury in fact, even if the APA does, and article III certainly does not require a traditional private right. Article III requires a case or controversy, a concept that depends on the acts of Congress. Many of the Court's decisions appear to recognize this point.2 28 
In this respect, the question whether an injury is merely ideological or instead legal is one of positive law; there is no pre- or post-legal metric for distinguishing between the two. This view draws support from the original understanding of the case-or-controversy requirement.2 29 It also draws support from the view, prominent in the postNew Deal period as well as in the founding era, that whether there is a case or controversy, or a legal injury and legal right, cannot be understood independently of what the law provides. The modem network of legal rights may or may not closely resemble the sorts of interests protected at common law, and nothing in the Constitution requires that they do so. There is much to be said, then, in favor of the view that article III does not limit Congress' power to grant standing, and that the only limitations, grounded in article III and the due process clause, are those that prohibit Congress from denying standing in certain cases. The contrary position is based on a peculiar and quite modem revisionist reading of the Brandeis-Frankfurter effort-itself revisionist-to immunize administrative regulation from judicial control. 23 0 
Like the second view, and unlike the first, the third approach reads article III as imposing substantive limitations on the sorts of injuries that plaintiffs may invoke; but it would allow courts to redress injuries that do not in any sense resemble those recognized at common law. On this view, Congress could not enact a statute providing, for example, that all citizens may bring suit to redress all official illegality. The requirement of an injury in fact is thus constitutional in status; it is not solely an interpretation of the APA; and merely ideological or law enforcement interests cannot be converted into legal harm by legislative at 827; Fallon, supra note 5, at 30-34; Stewart, supra note 1, at 1735-42 (all resolving the question in the same way as the text). 

832-35 (arguing against requirement of personal stake); Jaffe, supra note 8, at 1034 (same). 
text. fiat. 23 1 On the other hand, this third view would allow systemic or probabilistic harms to be redressed if Congress has created a regulatory system to reduce or eliminate those harms. If article III is to be understood as imposing substantive limitations on the sorts of injuries that may suffice for federal jurisdiction, this third position is preferable to the second-even though, for reasons suggested above, the best view is that article III permits Congress to create standing as it chooses. 
It would be ironic indeed if article III were interpreted to preclude federal courts from compelling regulatory agencies to adhere to the will of Congress by undertaking enforcement action to the degree or of the nature that statutes require. Such an interpretation would be reminiscent, above all, of the early period of administrative law, when constitutional provisions were similarly interpreted so as to frustrate regulatory initiatives in deference to private-law understandings of the legal system.2 32 
CONCLUSION 
The rise of administrative regulation was a deliberate rejection of common-law principles. In particular, regulatory regimes often repudiated common-law baselines for distinguishing between inaction and action, or neutrality and partisanship. In these circumstances, it is not surprising that the principles governing legal control of administrative behavior have largely abandoned common-law categories, allowing courts to remedy violations of statutorily protected interests. 
Recent decisions by the Supreme Court and some lower courts, however, threaten to reintroduce a sharp distinction between the interests of regulatory beneficiaries and those ofregulated entities, a distinction that would move the law not only toward the period before Data Processing, but toward anachronistic understandings that restricted the category of legally cognizable interests to nineteenth century private rights. The recent use of the causation requirements has been justified as an inference from the system of separation of powers, but it is more realistically understood as an outgrowth of a private-law model of public law, one that stems not from a belief in judicial restraint in the abstract, but instead from hostility to suits brought by beneficiaries of regulatory programs to ensure fidelity to statute. The reintroduction of such hostility would not only be inconsistent with a wide range of cases pointing in the direction of an independent public law; it would also contradict the text and history of article III, fly in the face of congressional understandings and expectations, and skew administrative incentives in undesirable directions. 
however, supported by judicial acceptance ofvarious provisions furnishing citizens' suits against public and private actors. See supra note 77. 

Such a step should be firmly resisted. For the most part, the question of standing is for legislative resolution. Because the constitutional constraints are thin, the law of standing has generally depended on congressional intent, which must sometimes be extrapolated on the basis of background understandings about the circumstances in which judicial relief ought to be presumed to be available. 
In the 1970s, the Supreme Court interpreted the APA as granting standing to almost all those actually harmed by administrative illegality2 3 3 -an interpretation that departed from the original understanding of the APA, but that can be understood in a way that is largely consistent with the basic purposes of that statute, and that placed the problem of standing in the control of Congress, where it largely belongs. Neither the APA nor article III need be interpreted to make commonlaw conceptions of injury controlling in public-law cases. The development of a set of independent, principles of public law is a large task indeed; but in the context of itanding, a revival of private-law ideas, coexisting with administrative regulation, would be singularly illconceived. 
those whose interests were entirely far afield of the statute and (b) the injury-in-fact test had to be interpreted in such a way as to exclude suits by those incidentally or indirectly harmed. 
