KEY: DP = DE = PS = CS = 
Peter Strauss** 
Cass Sunstein*** DP: Before you get your chance at questions, Peter said enough to provoke a request from Cass Sunstein for three minutes of rebuttal time, which I have granted. 
CS: I was uncharacteristically cautious, wasn't I? The three major cases that divide contemporary ideas about administrative law have to be Chevron,1 State Farm,2 and Heckler v. Chaney,3 right? Chevron on deference to agency determinations of law, State Farm on the hard look doctrine, Heckler v. Chaney against agency inaction. I think Chevron's analysis was badly off, State Farm was basically right, and I think Heckler v. Chaney points in the wrong direction in drawing this sharp distinction between action and inaction. In understanding why I think that, I think Peter is exactly right in pointing to the systemic ex ante effects of judicial review. 
Most of the real world is affected by these three cases not because of "bubbles" and passive restraints and drugs being injected and people are going to be executed as a result-those are important, yes, but administrative law now is done day to day in the shadow of these three cases. That's the systemic ex ante effect and that is huge. Now, Don's data are extremely interesting and important. When thinking about the impact of judicial review, one wants to think also about the systemic ex ante effect. 
t George W. Hutchinson Professor of Law, Southern Methodist University. B.S. 1965, Lehigh University; J.D. 1972, University of Virginia. 
* Professor of Law, Yale Law School. ** Betts Professor of Law, Columbia University School of Law. 
*** Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
One need look no further than the Mashaw and Melnick studies, 4 which showed that the allocation of authority internal to the agency is dramatically affected by judicial determinations of this sort. In the OSHA and EPA cases, the most important thing is not whether the remand comes up the same way next time; it's that it has a ripple effect on what the agency does every day afterwards. The decision will still be political; most of these cases will never get to court, but their political character will be affected very dramatically by the existence of the previous case. The OSHA decision in Benzene 5 had effect not only on what OSHA does, but on what the EPA does and on what the FDA does. A lot of federal regulatory policy is affected by this case, and it has nothing to do with ex post litigation at all. I think in that respect, Peter hasn't taken far enough his initial correct insight about the systemic effect of judicial review. 
Now, one wants to ask, is this a good systemic effect or a bad one? That's a complicated issue. The two things one wants to think about are legality and the real world. There is a lot to be said for the claim that both legality and the real world are made better, are better served, by aggressive judicial review of administrative action. 
One very quick way to make this point is to look at what's happened under President Reagan's Executive Order No. 12,291.6 That is not quite a substitution of political controls for legal controls; that's complementary and not exclusive. The Executive Order is done in the shadow of the hard look doctrine. You can't read the annual regulatory program of the President without seeing the omnipresence of both legality requirements and rationality requirements. If you talk to anyone involved early on or today in the OMB process, their eyes are on the statute books and on rationality, and that owes a whole lot to the hard look doctrine and to what preceded Chevron. The reason I have enthusiasm for State Farm and skepticism about Chevron is because what those cases, if rightly decided, will do, is to ensure that you get the analysis first and the conclusion second, rather than vice-versa. My fear is that the abandonment of aggressive judicial review-the continuation of Chevron, which says that those limited by authority judge the scope of the limitation, an idea extraordinarily foreign to our traditions-and abandonment of State Farm, the consequence of those things simultaneously will be to permit conclusion first and analysis second, which serves neither legality nor the real world very well. 
DE: I like Chevron, I don't like State Farm, and I tend not to like Heckler. I think the key difference between Cass and me in this area is that I tend to incline more toward Peter's view of preferring alternatives to courts as reviewing institutions. I don't think the executive order process exhausts the potential creativity for devising a lot of other alternatives to court to perform some of these functions. But I would take issue with the assertion that we know that the effects of judicial review on the administrative process and on the internal deliberations within agencies are huge. I know about some of these articles that give Bill Pedersen's 7 and Shep Melnick's8 and I think to a lesser extent Jerry Mashaw's 9 view-I think I read Mashaw's study very differently, Cass. I see [it] as being essentially a political process that drives that shift, in which the courts and the visibility that courts bring to particular proceedings play a role, but I think it's a misreading of what's really going on in both Melnick's and Mashaw's work to suggest that the courts are producing this effect. I think it's much more of a total political context within which the regulatory action is taking place. 
PS: I agree with a good deal of what Cass Sunstein has said, but want to call attention to an unstated premise in his analysis. To the extent his argument was that legality and the courts are particularly important in keeping the President's political controls under control, I would agree. He and I, as you may know, cooperated in the past on a study aimed in that direction. 10 But keeping the President an honest political broker is a different proposition from taking over supervision of political outcomes at the agency level, and that's where I tend to be cautious. In part this is because if we are going to be candid we have to measure our ideal of an apolitical judiciary against the reality of some politicization. One of the realities that you'll find in Dick Pierce's analysis in the Duke Law Journal1 is that the D.C. Circuit opinions are not only activist, and thus dismissive of agency outcomes, but also very readily explained on the basis of politics. They are sharply divided along political lines. From the very outset, when the great Chief Justice outlived his party for more than three decades, we have known that judges may be only our longest lived [Vol. 1989.-551 and least responsible politicians. One of the situations that faces the country today and may be endemic for our future is that we have a Republican presidency and a Republican judiciary lined up against a Democratic Congress. That may suggest that legality is too simple an expression for understanding judicial behavior. Might one argue, for example, that an allegiance between President and judiciary against Congress provides some means for understanding the judiciary's increasing taste for plain meaning approaches to statutory interpretation? 12 To the extent that we imagine judicial review as delivering political services, rather than defending individual rights, judges' political characteristics biecome perhaps especially problematic. Judicial perpetuation of values that the people are free to choose and have left behind has again and again been a source of difficulty for the courts. It is, in this context, a source of concern about hard look. 
The other thing that might be said about State Farm is simply that, given the underlying politics, that particular holding may in fact represent the courts checking the President as much as it does the courts checking the agency. 
DP [to the audience]: Now you get your chance. 
QUESTION: I have a question for Cass. I have to, first of all, agree. I don't like Heckler; I don't like Chevron; and I like State Farm. But I wonder how you can conclude that close judicial scrutiny makes agencies put analysis first and conclusions second as opposed to conclusions first and more careful analysis that supports the conclusions later. CS: That's a good question. The answer is, once you start to analyze a problem, then you start to think about it differently, often. This is something that should be studied empirically, but you can show actually that it has sometimes happened. One example is the airbags problem itself. When you know, as I know personally because I was there, when the Reagan Administration came in, passive restraints, anything having to do with that was top of the hit list-that is, on a literal hit list-and that was not an analyzed conclusion, that was an irrebuttable presumption. Now, once the courts said "that's out," it didn't happen that a better justification just came up, it was that the problem was revisited. I'd be very interested in seeing from the Elliott and Schuck study 13 how often this happens. What I do know, is that it happens sometimes, and in a way that really matters. I believe that something similar happened with regulation of lead; it was in the early days of the EPA. There was a decision made; Judge Leventhal sent it back; it tuined out there was a very elementary error that was quite arguably politically driven, a very different result eventually came out. Even if that example is a little off, it happens enough. Everyone can probably see it with himself; it is not the case that once one is forced to analyze a problem, the conclusion comes first always; the fact that you have to do the analysis might make the conclusion softer or different. 
DE: Just to answer that one question, in the data that I showed there, it shows that about 35-40% of the time, when a case is sent back to an agency, the agency really does reassess and make a major change. I think that's a good deal more than I expected before we did the study, but it leaves the question, is the glass half empty or half full? I think neither very simplistic view that agencies never rethink, are never affected, nor that they always respond to courts, is correct. It's someplace in between in the 35-40% range, but that's something. That does promote a major reevaluation. We also looked for factors other than the judicial review, that might explain the turnaround and they really didn't exist. It seems to be that the second look-not the hard look but the second look-does in fact empirically, in a substantial but not a majority of cases, promote a real rethinking. 
QUESTION: I'd like to think that rethinking is most likely when a court sends something back to an agency and says "You've gotten it wrong." I'm thinking more in terms of the systemic ex ante problem: knowing that the judicial review will occur, will that really change the conclusion of the agency? DE: 
PS: In my experience, the answer is yes, but that's old and limited experience. 
QUESTION: This is addressed to everybody, but perhaps particularly Cass and Peter. Isn't it the case, or could it be the case, that hard look and increased presidential or political controls are consistent, and that the latter, political controls, could be enhanced, perhaps thereby reducing the likelihood of reversals or the need for hard look? CS: Yes. I am a real enthusiast for Executive Orders 12,29114 and 12,49815. Peter and I have written on that together, 16 but I am not an enthusiast for the abandonment of the hard look doctrine, as a result. I think they fit together beautifully and they are necessary correctives to the abuses of the other. 
PS: If we can isolate for a moment the effect of hard look review on internal agency process from the effect of hard look review on the presidential process, and I'm not sure that that could be done, then I would prefer to see that impact on internal agency process disappear, or at least be subdued in comparison to what results from the presidential process. That is to say, if one has a President in fact supervising agency priorities-and it is just that process that makes me as enthusiastic as Cass is for [Executive Orders] 12,291 and 12,498-then that aspect of hard look tends to make courts ask: "Did you get this exactly right?" 
For example, in the air bags case, the court of appeals, in one of its early rulings, sends back a complex rulemaking because General Motors hadn't quite got the dummy's neck right. 17 A court is just too prone to misunderstand the problem as it was before the agency and to lead to the kind of flyspecking that, on my reading of the Mashaw and Harfst study of NHTSA administration,'8 is indeed a principal part of their account of regulatory failure. So to the extent that one sees now in place a pretty decent presidential process for insisting that agencies have regulatory priorities and think about how much they're going to accomplish through this regulation rather than that regulation, I'm prepared to see the courts let go. 
QUESTION: Comment on two of the three panelists. It seems to me that there's a lot of focus on what the agencies and the President want the policies to be at the agency and a bit of a slighting of what Congress wanted the policies to be. I was at the EPA during all the early 1970s, and was a colleague of Bill Pedersen and my experience was that it was cases such as the Kennecott case' 9 in 1972 that allowed lawyers in the EPA General Counsel's office to bring some element of Congress's legal controls .to bear and time after time, what we saw when the packages came up from the program offices of the EPA was shoddy work, reflecting more of the attitude of the EPA engineers of what they wanted to do, and relatively little attention to rational-by "rational," I mean even good math-rulemaking, and certainly no attention to legal requirements. And it was Kennecott that gave us and a few other lawyers the ability to send the package back and say "We can't defend this. At least do it right and correct the math while you're at it." CS: This is why I think that what I see as the conventional separation of powers analysis of Chevron is off. Chevron sees the opposition between court and agency and says that one ought to favor the agency because it's accountable. In a case in which the question is the meaning of a statutory term, I think you rightly point out that it is not court vs. agency, but Congress vs. agency, and this is why a certain form of the hard look doctrine can be a great friend of legality, and of, I think, ordinary conceptions of the separation of powers. 
DE: Well, I think the effect that you describe at EPA of strengthening the hand of the lawyers as opposed to the engineers or the programmatic people is probably in fact one of the effects that aggressive judicial review has. I wish I could find something to disagree with Peter Strauss about, because I normally like to disagree with Peter. 
It's probably helpful that in my experience in the early period, in 1972, at EPA, I'm not at all convinced that environmental laws that are designed and run primarily by lawyers are a good thing. And I think that the over-judicialization of the regulatory process and the dominance of lawyers in policymaking positions within agencies, EPA in particular, is probably an illustration of the kind of thing that we would be better without, at least in the second generation. Picking up on the point about how these things change over time, maybe we needed some legalism in the early 1970s, but I think maybe now it's a different time, it's a different enterprise for the regulatory state and maybe there needs to be a change. PS: If I can make what I think is the same point in a slightly different way, you did not face 12,291, and the kind of aggressive OMB oversight of agency fact-thinking processes that now occurs. Hal Bruff, sitting in the front row, has just published for the Administrative Conference a fine study of that subject that will appear in George Washington Law Review 20 soon. You should all read it; it is very much along the lines we've been talking about-that is, it recognizes the need for more controls of the President's control of the process. But I think one needs to go back to Kennecott and reexamine it in terms that now recognize significant political controls by the President and structural controls by the President. In some ways this is why I like Sierra Club v. Costle21 so much, and in part why I like Chevron: Chevron recognizes that courts are not alone in the business. The other reason why I like Chevron, and I've written at some length about this22 so I think I can say it very briefly, is [V/ol. 1989:551 that we still have only one Supreme Court, and we have 168 court of appeals judges. If the notion is that any time a court of appeals looks at a complex statutory question, it gets it right and it gets it the same way that all the other court of appeals judges in this country are going to get it, and it gets it with a full understanding of the agency program and the way in which its readirig of the statute will impact on that program, that is not a notion with which I can easily agree. That's not to say that there isn't a large role for the courts to pursue in enforcing legality. At the very least, at what is described as Chevron step 1, the courts are to ask what could the statute mean, and step in when the agency action stands outside of any possible meaning for the statute; and courts probably should look with the kind of cautionary regard that Cass also suggests for those cases in which what the agency is doing is plainly enlarging its own power. Nonetheless, a realistic look at what mode of control is going to produce cheap and effective government to the extent we want government here, won't always choose the courts. 
QUESTION: If I could make just one follow-up about 12,291, I certainly don't know how it's working, inside the agencies, because I'm not there-it may be working rationally, technocratically, perfectly. But we did have 3171-... which extended until the day after the Carter administration took office on January 21, 1977. What that involved was very strong OMB control, supervision, bargaining with other agencies, and basically, in my opinion, and in the opinion of most people at EPA, was very much political, it was not at all directed toward improving the performance [of the agencies] now 12,291 and all the other processes now are doing all those things, but one has to wonder if somebody couldn't press the question whether they are masks for a political process as well. PS: 
CS: When you think of 12,291, a lot of it is excellent. But keep in mind, this is President -Reagan's regulatory program, which has very deeply held political biases, some of which I think are great, some of which are not so great. OMB control maybe helps technocracy, maybe not. OMB's focus, I assure you, and I know something about this, is not first and foremost on legality. And to the extent that it's not first and foremost on legality, Chevron is no help. 
DE: Well, let me respond to [the question] of how we assess how good a job the courts are doing, you know, compared to what? When Peter says I wasn't there, that's right as far as the agency is concerned, but I was there as a law clerk on the D.C. Circuit in the mid '70s, when we decided cases like the Ethyl23 case and the Vermont Yankee 24 case, and I can tell you that my perception is that the judges and law clerks did not really penetrate deeply into the facts and understand the consequences. In that sense I think Shep Melnick's book 2 s is really quite accurate and one of the pieces that Peter Schuck and I hope to do as an outgrowth of this study is to compare agency responses to remands from courts as opposed to agency responses to the EPA science advisory board. The working hypothesis is that precisely because the EPA science advisory board, which is composed of a group of outside scientists, can penetrate more deeply and more credibly into the bad math that the people at the program office do, that agencies are much more likely to respond in a real way when that kind of credible reviewing institution questions their conclusions than when a court does. 
Just one little story about that: in the Vermont Yankee case, and in the Baltimore Gas and Electric case, 26 among other things, Judge Bazelon, for whom I was working, got the half life of plutonium wrong by a factor of 10. Now, this is a quite inessential element of the case, but you can imagine this going back to the scientists at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and their saying, "This bozo doesn't even know what the half-life of plutonium is." I don't have that data yet, at some point I'd like to have it, I think that looking at "leave agencies alone" or have hard look by courts and lawyers, is to create false oppositions in my view. I think that we need to be thinking in the future more creatively about what the right type of reviewing institutions are in various areas rather than just pushing courts, which were, after all, just around; a kind of bricolage process in which you take what's available and press it into service to perform a new function. If you sat down to design a reviewing institution for EPA, the D.C. Circuit is never what anyone would design. It just happened to be there, and you use it, and so on. 
PS: I was at the NRC at precisely the time when Don was where he was. Perhaps all I'll say is that the impact of that Court of Appeals opinion on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was to subtract, let's say roughly 10 man-years of effort from whatever else the Nuclear Regulatory Commission was able to do during the relevant period-of time. QUESTION: [There's one thing that I want to point out.] You have to include Congress's relationship with courts [which is] central to the courts' objectives. Now on to another point of the equation, I think the question to ask is how do you [consider the] impact of Congress's relationship with the executive branch. We now know [that] Congress is much more productive today than the executive branch. The Executive is behind. The theory now in which control lies [with the Executive]. I think it would be particularly useful to evaluate the errors of different courts and [think] about the methods that one uses for delegation. PS: That's an excellent point, and is reflected in the kind of thing you've pointed out to me in private discussions in the past; that, in fact the nature of what Congress is doing today is often extraordinarily precise delineation of what the agencies are expected to do rather than the broad delegations that may have characterized, say, the 1930s or even other periods of time when the presidency and the Congress were in the same political hands, and whether that is a product of what's expected from the agencies or what's expected from the courts is a nice issue. But clearly part of the political control equation, and part of the legal control equation has also to look at the Congress and the impact on that relationship. 
DP: 
REGULATORY STATE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................ 
A. The Problem ........................................................... 
B. Interpretive Principles .................................................. PAGE V. CONCLUSION .............................................................. 
APPENDIX: INTERPRETIVE PRINCIPLES, OLD AND NEw ............................ 
that "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job."' 
that it understates the difficulty of interpretation,the indeterminacy of both the language and the will of the citizens, and the resulting discretion of the judge. Similarly, a vigorous debate continues over the proper role of the traditional sources of statutory interpretation- the text, the legislative history, the purpose of the enacting Congress, and the structure of the statute. Professor Sunstein suggests that both the conventional understandings of interpretationand the recent critiques are seriouslyflawed. Because interpretationinevitably involves the applicationof "backgroundnorms" - often controversial, value-laden, and not found in any text - the traditional theories are incomplete. These theories, however, properly stress the democratic primacy of Congress. When congressional instructions are clear and do not create absurdity, courts should follow them. Often, however, the instructions are ambiguous, and judges must choose from a number of possible background norms. 
Suggesting that many disputes over statutory meaning are in fact disagreements over appropriatebackground norms, ProfessorSunstein contends that the debate should center on whether the proposed norms express a good understanding of constitutional values; are properly responsive to contemporary institutional arrangements involving the making, monitoring, and enforcement of law; and are sensitive to the aspirationsand functions as * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to many colleagues and friends for their help with this essay. Bruce Ackerman, Akhil Amar, Douglas Baird, Jack Beermann, Frank Buckley, Frank Easterbrook, Jon Elster, Richard Epstein, William Eskridge, Richard Fallon, Philip Frickey, Stephen Gilles, Don Herzog, Stephen Holmes, Donald Horowitz, Benjamin Kaplan, Larry Kramer, John Langbein, Howard Latin, Larry Lessig, Jon Macey, Geoffrey Miller, Martha Minow, Richard Posner, Susan Rose-Ackerman, Frederick Schauer, Richard Stewart, Geoffrey Stone, David Strauss, Lloyd Weinreb, Robin West, James Boyd White, and John Wiley offered valuable comments on all or parts of the manuscript. I am also grateful to participants in helpful workshops at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, the University of Michigan, New York University, Princeton University, Tulane University, and the University of Virginia. D. Gordon Smith, Gamhk Markarian, and Catherine O'Neill provided research assistance and useful comments. Finally, I am grateful to the Law and Government Program of the University of Chicago for generous support. 
Some of the material in this Article is also included, in different form, as parts of chapters 4 and 5 in C. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION: CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT AND THE REGULATORY STATE (forthcoming I9go). 
1 I HOLMES-LASKI LETTERS 249 (M. Howe ed. 1953). ['9ol. 103:405 well as the shortcomings of regulatory statutes. Professor Sunstein concludes by outlininga series of norms - some based on current interpretivepractices, others reflecting his own normative vision. All the norms are designed to focus disputes over statutory meaning more sharply on the underlying issues and to deepen understandingof the regulatory state. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
TN the early part of the twentieth century, courts often treated Iregulatory statutes as foreign substances. 2 Starting from principles of laissez-faire, judges saw statutory protections of workers, consumers, and others as unprincipled interest-group transfers supported by theories that were at best obscure and often disingenuous. 3 By contrast, judge-made doctrines of property, contract, and tort seemed to create a system with integrity and coherence. 
The role of the courts in this period was one of damage control. The most important organizing principle for interpretation was that regulatory statutes should be construed narrowly - so as to harmonize as much as possible with principles of private markets and private rights. 4 This approach grew out of the idea that courts should narrowly construe statutes in derogation of the common law.5 
The New Deal period marked an enormous change in the size and character of the national government. 6 The decade between 193o and 2 See, e.g., B. CARDOZO, THE PARADOXES OF LEGAL SCIENCE 9 (1928) ("The truth is that many of us, bred in common law traditions, view statutes with a distrust which we may deplore, but not deny."). 
3 See, e.g., United States v. Elgin, J. & E. Ry., 298 U.S. 492 (1936); FTC v. Eastman Kodak Co., 274 U.S. 619, 623-25 (1927); FTC v. American Tobacco Co., 264 U.S. 298, 305o6 (1924); FTC v. Gratz, 253 U.S. 422, 427-28 (1920). 
4 See, e.g., cases cited supra note 3; F. FRANKFURTER & N. GREENE, THE LABOR INJUNCTION 165-82 (1930) (exploring the federal courts' nullification of the Clayton Act); see also Pound, Common Law and Legislation, 22 HARV. L. REV. 383, 387-88, 4o6-07 (I9o8) (criticizing use of interpretive principles that are out of touch with contemporary social and economic thought); Pound, Courts and Legislation, 7 AM. POL.-ScI. REV. 361, 374-75 (1913) (same). 
This principle of narrow construction, like many others of the past and present, was not always invoked explicitly. Often it operated invisibly or in the background. When interpretive principles are not referred to expressly, their use is often reflected in the court's treatment of the statutory language. See infra pp. 437-41; see also infra pp. 464-66 (discussing when controversial substantive and institutional norms should be applied). 
5 See, e.g., Shaw v. Railroad Co., 1oi U.S. 557, 565 (1879); Johnson v. Southern Pac. Co., 117 F. 462, 466 (8th Cir. 2902), rev'd, x96 U.S. I (1904); see also Fordham & Leach, Interpretation of Statutes in Derogationof the Common Law, 3 VAND. L. REV. 438, 450-5I & nn.7374 (i5o) (listing cases in which courts ignored statutes instructing them not to construe statutes narrowly). 
6 On the pre-New Deal developments, see S. SKOWRONEK, BUILDING THE NEw AMERICAN STATE: THE EXPANSION OF NATIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE CAPACITIES, 1877-1920 (1982). 1940 saw the creation of as many agencies - seventeen - as had been created in the entire period between the framing of the Constitution and the close of the nineteenth century. 7 During the "rights revolution" of the 196o's and 1970's, the national government substantially increased its regulatory responsibilities by moving to protect the interests of consumers, the national environment, and victims of discrimination. 8 The emergence of the regulatory state represents a shift in both the substance of law and the institutions through which law is made and enforced, 9 and the sheer volume of federal statutes and regulations has dramatically changed the business of the federal courts.' 0 In particular, the work of federal judges has increasingly involved the interpretation of federal enactments. 
The demands of the modern administrative state ultimately made it impossible for courts to sustain a theory of interpretation rooted in nineteenth-century common law. As a result, interpretive practices have changed. Courts have often repudiated private-law baselines for interpreting public law and have been less antagonistic to regulatory statutes.11 
In many respects, however, the theory and practice of public law have not outgrown the understandings that underlay the initial period of judicial antagonism. 12 That period is unmistakably recalled by 7 See FINAL REPORT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S COMMITTEE ON ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 7-I1 (1941). 
s For comparisons between the New Deal and the rights revolution, see R. HARRIS & S MILKIS, THE POLITICS OF REGULATORY CHANGE 53-96 (x989); and Vogel, The "New" Social Regulation in Historicaland Comparative Perspective, in REGULATION IN PERSPECTIVE 155 (T. McCraw ed. I98I). 
9 See generally Sunstein, ConstitutionalismAfter the New Deal, ioi HARV. L. REV. 421, 437-46 (1987) (discussing substantive and institutional reform in the New Deal period). 
10 The proliferation of statutes in modern law has been widely observed both on the bench, see, e.g., R. POSNER, THE FEDERAL COURTS 53, 83-84 (1985); Traynor, Statutes Revolving in Common Law Orbits, 17 CATH. U.L. REV. 401, 402 (1968) (observing that cases "increasingly involve the meaning or applicability of a statute"), and in academia, see, e.g., G. GILMORE, THE AGES OF AMERICAN LAW 95 (1977) (describing an "orgy of statute making"). Recent statistics confirm these intuitions. In 1985, for example, nearly 20% of all civil filings involved four regulatory areas - social security, labor, tax, and civil rights. See ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, FEDERAL JUDICIAL WORKLOAD STATISTICS at a-16 to a-17 (1985) (table C-3). Moreover, because most commercial disputes have been absorbed into the regulatory arena through the Uniform Commercial Code, and because "contract cases" account for nearly 40% of all filings, see id., the federal courts probably hear many more statutory than common law claims. 
11 See, e.g., Switchmen's Union v. National Mediation Bd., 320 U.S. 297 (1943) (denying judicial review of agency decision); Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402 (1941) (deferring to agency interpretation of law). 
12 Over 8o years ago, Roscoe Pound voiced similar complaints about the persistence of judicial adherence to common law principles. See Pound, Common Law and Legislation, supra note 4, at 385-86; accord Landis, Statutes and the Sources of Law, in HARVARD LEGAL ESSAYS 213, 213 (1934). recent suggestions that courts should indulge a presumption in favor of private ordering and should interpret regulatory statutes so as to intrude minimally on the private market. 13 The nineteenth-century view that regulatory statutes should be viewed against a background of common law property and contract rights and hence as naked wealth transfers also finds a modern home, in the increasingly prominent idea that statutes should be seen as unprincipled "deals" among self-interested private actors. 14 Similarly, those who emphasize the findings of public choice theory would treat statutes as lacking coherent normative underpinnings.' 5 
The initial judicial skepticism about the legitimacy and' coherence of statutory law is also recalled by both poles of the contemporary debate over the possibility of constrained or objective legal interpretation. At one extreme, some courts and observers see the text or "plain meaning" of statutory language as the exclusive or principal guide to meaning. 16 At the opposite extreme, other commentators claim that legal terms are quite generally indeterminate 7 or have the meaning that those with authority choose to impose on them.' 8 Despite their differences, the two camps share a number of assumptions. Both treat regulatory statutes as an undifferentiated and unprincipled whole, without distinct and accessible purposes. Because members of both camps see no way to mediate the sharp ideological disagreements that sometimes underlie interpretive disputes, some are driven to the 13 See, e.g., J. RABKIN, JUDICIAL COMPULSIONS: How PUBLIC LAW DISTORTS PUBLIC POLICY (1989); Easterbrook, Statutes' Domains, 5o U. CHI. L. REV. 533, 544-5I (1983). Many recent decisions appear to respond to a principle in favor of private ordering. See, e.g., Independent Fed'n of Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 109 S. Ct. 2732 (1989) (discussed below in note 305); Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 109 S. Ct. 2115 (1989) (discussed below at pp. 484-85); Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985); Grove City College v. Bell, 465 U.S. 555 (1984); Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. I, 24-25 (i98i) (discussed below at pp. 500-02). 
14 See Easterbrook, The Supreme Court, z983 Term - Foreword: The Court and the Economic System, 98 HARV. L. REV. 4, 15 (1984). 
'S For a discussion of public choice theory, see Plott, Axiomatic Social Choice Theory: An Overview and Interpretation,in RATIONAL MAN AND IRRATIONAL SOCIETY? 231 (B. Barry & R. Hardin eds. 1982). See generally K. ARROW, SOCIAL CHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES (1951); J. BUCHANAN & G. TULLOCx, THE CALCULUS OF CONSENT (x962). The treatment in H. HART & A. SACKS, THE LEGAL PROCESS (tent. ed. 1958), runs into severe problems because of its failure to appreciate the difficulties raised by work of this sort. My ultimate goal, however, is to revive important elements of the treatment in The Legal Process, rather than to celebrate its demise or to emphasize its occasional nalvet6 about politics and interpretation. 
16 This view is currently enjoying a renaissance in the courts. See cases cited infra note 29; see also Easterbrook, supra note 13 (advocating a presumption against applying a statute unless it expressly addresses the issue in question). 
17 See, e.g., R. UNGER, KNOWLEDGE AND POLITICS 88-oo (1975). 
18 See, e.g., S. FISH, DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY 87-102 (1989); S. FISH, IS THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?: THE AUTHORITY OF INTERPRETIVE COMMUNITIES 338-55 (i980) [hereinafter S. FISH, Is THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?]. pretense that words quite generally have "plain meanings," others to the uninformative view that meaning is a function of authority, others to the demonstrably false claim that statutes are usually indeterminate in meaning, and still others to the open-ended suggestion that statutes should be interpreted so as to be "reasonable" or "the best that they can be." 1 9 In the face of contentions of this sort, debates about statutory interpretation, in and out of the judiciary, often dissolve into fruitless and unilluminating disputes about the constraints supplied by language "itself" (as if such a thing could be imagined). 
My project is to develop a theory of statutory construction that not only sheds light on current practices but also might claim to be worthy of adoption. In carrying out that task, it is first necessary to set out the proper relationships among the traditional sources of interpretation, including text, structure, purpose, intent, and history. A large part of the solution, however, lies in the identification and development of interpretive principles with which to approach regulatory statutes. 20 The meaning of a statute inevitably depends on the precepts with which interpreters approach its text. Statutes do not have pre-interpretive meanings, and the process of interpretation requires courts to draw on background principles. These principles are usually not "in" any authoritative enactment but instead are drawn from the particular context and, more generally, from the legal culture.2 1 Disagreements about meaning often turn not on statutory terms "themselves," but instead on the appropriate interpretive prin19 See R. DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 337-38 (x986) (arguing that judges should interpret statutes "in the best light overall"); Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 VAND. L. REV. 395, 399 (1950) (suggesting that courts interpret statutes to "make sense"). 
20 It is important to emphasize that my approach is directed to regulatory statutes. I refer to other measures, including criminal law, largely by way of analogy. Much of the discussion, however, bears on statutory interpretation in general. 
21 The illuminating treatment in Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Interpretation,137 U. PA. L. REV. 1007 (i989), presents a number of these background norms, including the idea that courts should defer to administrative interpretations of law if Congress has not clearly addressed the issue, see Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984); that criminal statutes should be construed in accordance with the "rule of lenity," see Eskridge, supra, at 1029; and that statutes and treaties should be construed favorably to Indian tribes, see id. at 1047. 
Eskridge's treatment is flawed, however, by the implicit assumption that the role of "public values" in interpretive disputes is to add to ordinary interpretation, or to bend the meaning of statutes in various directions. See id. at 1045-47. For reasons suggested below, see infra pp. 416-25, ordinary interpretation is also pervaded by "public values"; the dichotomy between interpretation that rests on fidelity to text and interpretation that is based on extratextual values greatly oversimplifies the problem and is in important respects a false one. ciples. Courts sometimes make the governing norms explicit, but frequently leave them unarticulated and latent. The principles are often misdirected or at least controversial. 
In these circumstances, it is important to identify the prevailing principles and to subject them to scrutiny. The ultimate task is to develop norms of statutory interpretation that grow out of, and do not collide with, the basic purposes of the constitutional framework, of contemporary institutional arrangements, and of modern social and economic regulation. Above all, it is important to develop principles that improve the performance of modern government, and that are not based on pre-New Deal understandings, which seem to have overstayed their welcome. 
To carry out this task, it will be necessary to develop distinctive understandings about both the nature of legal interpretation and the character of modern public law. Because interpretation is a function of background norms and cannot proceed without them, theories about statutory "meaning" cannot be separated from theories about how the modern regulatory state does and should operate. When interpretive norms are contested, and when neither the Constitution nor the Congress has specified the proper norms, there is no alternative but to base the inevitably value-laden choice among them on their role in improving or impairing governmental performance. 
In the course of the discussion, I reject a number of generally accepted understandings about statutory construction: o courts must always adhere to the original meaning of the statute, or the original intent of the enacting legislature; o courts are or can be mere agents of the Congress; o statutory meaning remains constant over time; o statutory meaning is equivalent to legislative intent; o controversial views about public policy are never and should never be part of statutory construction; o canons of construction, or background interpretive norms, are an outmoded and unhelpful guide to the courts. 
All of these aspects of the conventional wisdom, I suggest, are inconsistent with actual judicial behavior. Moreover, they provide incomplete instructions and often produce perverse results. 
The discussion proceeds in three stages. Part II rejects the usual understandings of how courts do and should construe statutes. It also suggests the proper uses of the traditional sources of interpretation: text, structure, purpose, congressional intent, and legislative history. The recent emphasis on the primacy of the text is a step in the right direction, but structure, purpose, intent, and history sometimes help to clarify ambiguities or to prevent unnecessary or unintended irrationality and injustice. I also suggest that the traditional sources offer incomplete guidance and that their incompleteness reveals the inevitable failure of the agency conception of the judicial role. At the same time, I reject the view that statutory disputes produce "indeterminacy" in most or all cases and the related idea that such disputes are resolved on the basis of conventions that are not subject to evaluation. Finally, I criticize, though on quite different grounds, the use of certain widelyheld extratextual norms to resolve statutory disputes: private autonomy, deference to agency interpretations, and conceptions of statutes as "deals." 
Part Ill attempts to understand statutory construction by means of a general defense of the much-maligned "canons" of construction, understood as background principles designed to help discern statutory meaning. I defend the use of such principles by disaggregating their various functions and by suggesting that the use of background norms is desirable and in any case inevitable. I also suggest that several current substantive norms can be supported through an understanding of the ways in which they incorporate constitutional principles, promote deliberation in government, and respond to New Deal reforms of the legal system. 
Part IV proposes a series of interpretive principles for judicial adoption in the regulatory state. I argue that many such principles, whether existing in current law or proposed here, can be defended by reference to constitutional norms; that others are based on assessments of the performance of various governmental institutions; and that still others are an effort to counteract some of the failings in regulatory systems. A general purpose of Part IV is to describe and defend principles that will serve the purposes of deliberative government and, in particular, will alleviate rather than aggravate the defects in modern regulatory programs. 
Although these suggestions are designed principally for reviewing courts in hard cases, their implications extend to administrative agencies attempting to implement statutes, and to Congress in its efforts to design and reform social and economic regulation. Debates over statutory meaning are often disputes over interpretive principles; these debates reflect broader divisions over the nature and performance of the regulatory state and, indeed, about the character of American democracy and constitutionalism as a whole. 22 
22The study of statutory construction is therefore one part of a more general effort to understand the performance of modern regulatory institutions - an effort that will ultimately make it necessary to focus more on Congress, the President, and the bureaucracy than on the courts. For discussion in this vein, see J. MAsHAW & B. HARFST, THE FREEDOM MACHINE (forthcoming 19go); C. SUNSTEIN, cited above in note *; and Rubin, Law and Legislation in the Administrative State, 89 CoLuM. L. REv. 369 (1989). II. STANDARD 
APPROACHES TO STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 
In the conventional account, the tools of statutory construction are language, structure, and history. The weight of each of these has been sharply contested, especially in recent years. 23 Disputes over questions of this sort have produced a range of approaches to statutory construction, all with support in the case law. Each, however, is flawed. My purpose here is to explain how these approaches fail, both as positive accounts of how courts in fact approach statutes and as normative theories of interpretation. 
This Part is divided into three sections. The first deals with theories that see courts as agents of the legislature and that charge courts with the duty to implement legislative decisions. These theories fail because they ignore the inevitable use of interpretive principles in the process of construction. Arguing that it is possible to choose among interpretive principles, the second section rejects both conventionalist accounts of meaning and the view that statutory interpretation produces "indeterminacy. '24 The third section considers three prominent approaches that do invoke supplemental principles; it suggests that these approaches also fail, largely because the relevant principles are difficult to defend. 
23Compare Hirschey v. Federal Energy Regulatory Comm'n, 777 F.2d x, 7-8 (D.C. Cir. i985) (Scalia, J., concurring) (criticizing use of legislative history) and B. ACKERMAN & W. HASSLER, CLEAN CoAL/DIRTY AIR 1o8-o9 (198i) (same) with Farber & Frickey, Legislative Intent and Public Choice, 74 VA. L. REV. 423 (x988) (arguing in favor of attention to legislative history). 
24 All interpretation involves the application of norms. Some of these "norms" are not open to change or even to discussion. There is a difference, at least in principle, between the sorts of understandings that make ordinary words intelligible and the sorts of interpretive principles that give meaning to statutory gaps or that resolve cases that are otherwise in equipoise - as, for example, in the norms in favor of state autonomy or judicial review. Participation in the set of practices that make ordinary words intelligible is probably best conceived of not as interpretation but as understanding. See L. WITTGENSTEIN, PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS ยง 2O, at 81 (G. Anscombe trans. 1972) (discussing a way "of grasping a rule which is not an interpretation, but which is exhibited in what we call 'obeying the rule' and 'going against it' in actual cases" (emphasis in original)). This point holds even though one's participation in those practices is conditional on a wide range of background understandings that are not "part" of words "themselves." 
The distinction is important because it is sufficient, for purposes of background understandings of this sort, that there be a social consensus on their behalf. Communication is possible only because of that consensus. But with respect to interpretive principles that are part of interpretation - for example, the idea that silence on the question of federal preemption means that state law continues to exist - a consensus may be inadequate if there are no good arguments on behalf of that consensus. In these latter cases, interpretive principles are at least in theory subject to evaluation and to replacement by alternatives. A pervasive problem with conventionalist accounts of meaning is that they treat all interpretation as akin to the sorts of understandings that make ordinary words intelligible. See infra pp. 442-43 (discussing conventionalism). I am grateful to Thomas Nagel for help with this point. 
According to the most prominent conception of the role of courts in statutory construction, judges are agents or servants of the legislature. 25 On the agency view, courts should say what the statute means, relying on its language, structure, and history. Background norms, policy considerations, indeed all "outside sources," are immaterial. The judicial task is to discern and apply a judgment made by others, most notably the legislature. 
The agency view is usually defended by a claim of judicial legitimacy.2 6 In a democratic system, with an electorally accountable legislature and separated powers, it is said to be the appropriate and indeed constitutionally prescribed role of the courts to apply legislative commands; it is thus impermissible for them to invoke considerations that cannot be traced to an authoritative text. The claim of illegitimacy is buttressed by (and perhaps reducible to) a range of prudential considerations: the use of outside sources will tend to increase judicial discretion, decrease legislative attentiveness, produce uncertainty, and risk usurpation by judges of powers reserved for legislative and executive actors. 27 Justice Holmes provided a particularly crisp expression of the agency view: after describing a regulatory statute as "foolish," he added, "if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell I will help them. It's my job." 28 
The agency view appears in several competing forms, and much of the history of statutory construction consists of shifts and disputes among the various possible sources of the instructions of the courts' "principal," the legislature. I discuss several variations here. 
i. Textualism. - It is sometimes suggested that statutory language is the source of judicial power and the only legitimate object of judicial concern. Textualism appears to be enjoying a renaissance in a number of recent cases, 2 9 and perhaps in the academy as well, 30 partly because of dissatisfaction with alternative interpretive strategies, taken up below, which counsel courts to rely on "purpose" or to produce "reason" in regulatory regimes. 3 1 
Several considerations argue in favor of textualist strategies. First, textualism contains an important and often overlooked truth. Statutory terms are the enactment of the democratically elected legislature and represent the relevant "law." Statutory terms - not legislative history, not legislative purpose, not legislative "intent" - have gone through the constitutionally specified procedures for the enactment of law. Second, resort to the text promotes goals associated with the rule of law: citizens have access to the statutory words and can most readily order their affairs in response to those words. Third, the words of a statute, considered in light of widely shared conventions about how they should be understood, often have only one plausible interpretation, or at least sharply constrain the territory of legitimate disagreement. Finally, an emphasis on the primacy of the text serves as a salutary warning about the potential abuses of judicial use of statutory "purpose" and of legislative history. 32 
Some textualists emphasize the "plain meaning" or dictionary definition of statutory terms; others are more sensitive to the particular settings. In its purest form, however, the textualist approach is inadequate. The central problem is that the meaning of words (whether "plain" or not) depends on both culture and context. Statutory terms are not self-defining, and words have no meaning before or without interpretation. 33 To say this is emphatically not to say that words 452-53 (1987) (Scalia, J.,concurring in the judgment). In Green v. Bock Laundry Mach. Co., 1o9 S. Ct. I98I (i989), however, all nine Justices refused to follow the dictionary meaning of the text because it would have produced an absurd result. See id. at 1984-85; id. at 1994 (Scalia, J., concurring); id. at i995 (Blackmun, J., dissenting); see also Public Citizen, lo9 S. Ct. at 2565-67 (I989). 
30 For example, once-Professor and now-Judge Easterbrook has defended textualism with insight and vigor. See, e.g., Easterbrook, supra note 13. 
31 As we will see, strategies of that sort were suggested by commentators who disregarded or downplayed the existence of controversy about what "reason" required or about the "purposes" of statutory regimes, and who failed to come to terms with the existence of sharp, ideologically based disagreements on such questions. See infra pp. 426-28, 435-36. Textualism relies on firm linguistic anchors to control ideological divisions. It is here that there is a commonality between those who believe that legal interpretation is inevitably indeterminate - because of ideological strife - and those who, embracing textualism, do so for essentially the same reason. 32 See infra pp. 427-28 (purpose), 429-31 (legislative history). 
33 Consider Learned Hand's view: "Words are not pebbles in alien juxtaposition; they have only a communal existence; and not only does the meaning of each interpenetrate the other, but all in their aggregate take their purport from the setting in which they are used . .. ." NLRB v. Federbush Co., 121 F.2d 954, 957 (2d Cir. 194); see also Shell Oil Co. v. Iowa Dep't of Revenue, log S. Ct. 278, 281 & n.6 (I989) (quoting Federbush). 
The dependence of meaning on culture and context is a conventional point in both AngloAmerican and Continental philosophy. See, e.g., L. WITTGENSTEIN, supra note 24 (AngloAmerican version); H. GADAMER, TRUTH AND METHOD (trans. 2d ed. 1975) (Continental 
INTERPRETING STATUTES, used in statutes or elsewhere can mean anything at all. 34 But it is to say that statutory terms are indeterminate standing "by themselves," and, even more important, they never stand by themselves. The significance of congressional enactments necessarily depends on the context and on background understandings about how words should be understood. Moreover, reliance on ordinary or dictionary definition, without reference to context, will sometimes lead to interpretive 3 5 blunders. 
Usually the context does not prevent reliance on ordinary meaning, and usually the background principles are so widely shared - for example, that Congress is speaking in English, that Congress is not joking or attempting to mislead, that statutes have purposes, or that judges should not decide cases simply according to their predilections - that they are invisible. Even in easy cases, however, courts must resort to background principles. For example, the question whether the enactment of federal environmental statutes preempts all of state tort law is an easy one, not because of the statutory text "itself," but because of shared understandings about the limited preemptive effect of federal enactments. 36 version). For legal writing on the inadequacy of textuaism, see R. DICKERSON, THE INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF STATUTES 217-27 (1975); S. FISH, Is THERE A TEXT IN THIS CLASS?, supra note 18, at 356-7r (discussing law as well as literature); H. HART & A. SACKS, supra note I5, at 1I5o-58; 9 J. WIGMORE, EVIDENCE ยง 2470, at 234-38 (J. Chadbourn ed. ig8i); Fish, Don'tKnow Much About the Middle Ages: Posneron Law and Literature, 97 YALE L. J. 777, 778-80 (1988); Frank, Words and Music: Some Remarks on Statutory Interpretation, 47 COLUM. L. REV. 1259, 1263-64 (I947); Horack, The Disintegrationof Statutory Construction, 24 IND. L.J. 335, 338 (I949). 
34 But see, e.g., Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Interpretivism and Neutral Principles, 96 HARv. L. REV. 781, 8r9 (1983) (arguing, unpersuasively, that a good lawyer can always find an argument for the result he wants). 
35 Courts have conspicuously rejected literalism on many occasions. See Missouri v. Jenkins, 109 S. Ct. 2463, 247r (r989) (holding that "attorney's fee" should be read to include award of paralegal fees); and Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 429 n.2, 433 (1983) (observing that under ยง 1988, which provides attorney's fees to the "prevailing party," prevailing plaintiffs may recover if they prevail on any significant issue, but defendants may recover only if the plaintiff's suit was groundless) (dictum); United States v. Colon-Ortiz, 866 F.2d 6, iI (ist Cir. 1989) (refusing to adhere to an obvious drafting error); In re House Bill No. 1,291, 178 Mass. 605, 6o N.E. 129 (IgoI) (holding that a requirement in the Massachusetts Constitution of a "written vote" allows a voting machine involving no writing); Riggs v. Palmer, IIs N.Y. 506, 22 N.E. 188 (1889) (refusing to allow a testator's murderer to recover under the will); R. DICKERSON, supra note 33, at 23o. For other examples, see note 44 below. 
36 See R. STEWART & J. KRIER, ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND POLICY 440-41 (1978); see also Mansell v. Mansell, 109 S. Ct. 2023, 2027-28 (1989) (observing that Congress must specifically preempt state law, especially in the area of domestic relations); Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 108 S. Ct. 1350, 1353 (1988) (requiring evidence of clear and manifest congressional purpose to preempt state law regarding gasoline price regulations); Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, 471 U.S. 707, 715 (I985) (discussing the assumption that states' powers to regulate health and safety are not preempted by congressional acts). Similarly, a law that says nothing about whether administrative action is reviewable is 
Those who accept textualist approaches might agree that the meaning of words is partly a function of the context and of background norms about how texts should be approached. Indeed, we may define an easy case as one in which the context produces no dispute and there is a consensus about the governing norms. 3 7 In many hard cases, however, the source of the difficulty is that the particular background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. Textualism or "plain meaning" approaches can resolve these questions only by covertly introducing background principles, which are often controversial. 
Consider the question whether a statute creating a regulatory agency to police racial discrimination in employment implicitly authorizes victims of discrimination to bring private suits against employers who allegedly have engaged in discrimination. If the statute and its history do not resolve the question, the introduction of background norms is necessary to discern the meaning of the statute. It should thus be unsurprising that judges skeptical about implied causes of action have relied not on statutory "text" but instead on a highly controversial background assumption, traceable to a particular, contestable understanding of separation of powers, that only the legislature may create such rights, and that statutory silence should be assumed not to do So. 38 Without that assumption or a different one, statutory silence on the existence of an implied cause of action has no meaning. 
Background norms are ubiquitous in any legal system, and indeed in grammar itself; they are necessary to make reliance on "text" an intelligible concept. These considerations account for the pervasive difficulties with textualist approaches to statutory construction: ambiguity or vagueness, overinclusiveness, underinclusiveness, delegation or gap-filling, and changed circumstances. 
(a) Ambiguity or Vagueness. - The most familiar problem with textualism is that statutory language is sometimes ambiguous or vague. To say that courts should rely on the words or on their unambiguous, not because of the text "itself," but because of the strong presumption, created by courts but now widely shared, in favor of judicial review of administrative behavior. See infra PP. 475-76. 
37 Cf. Schauer, Easy Cases, 58 S. CAL. L. REV. 399, 413-14 (x985) (suggesting that easy cases arise when the relationship between legal norms and human behavior is uncontroversial). 
National Fed'n of Fed. Employees, Local 1263, 109 S. Ct. 1282, 1286 (x989) (describing a "canon" of construction against implied causes of action); Thompson v. Thompson, io8 S. Ct. 513, 520-23 (1988) (Scalia, J., concurring); Cannon v. University of Chicago, 441 U.S. 677, 730-31 ( SHAPIRO, HART AND WECHSLER'S THE FEDERAL COURTS AND THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 943-50 (3d ed. 1988) (recounting the changes in the Supreme Court's treatment of implied causes of action). ordinary meaning - the plain meaning approach - is unhelpful when statutory words have more than one dictionary definition, or when the context produces interpretive doubt. It is not clear, for example, whether the term "feasible" contemplates a cost-benefit analysis, or whether a prohibition of "discrimination" bars voluntary race-conscious measures designed to counteract the effects of past and present discrimination against blacks. 39 In both of these cases, moreover, it is uncertain whether the language should be taken to refer to the original meaning of those words for the enacting legislature (assuming that idea can be made intelligible in light of the problems of aggregating the views of numerous actors) or should instead take account of contemporary understandings of what the words mean. Indeed, it is not even clear what bearing the desires, or interpretive instructions, of the enacting legislature should have for judicial interpretation. By itself, textualism cannot answer these questions. Nor can the agency conception of the judicial role resolve such problems. 
(b) Overinclusiveness.40 - If textualism is taken, as it often is, to call for reliance on the literal4 1 language of statutory words - their dictionary definition or meaning in ordinary settings - it will sometimes suggest an outcome that makes little or no sense. For example, suppose that a state law says that no vehicles are permitted in public parks, and a city proposes to build in a park a monument consisting of tanks used in World War l.42 The literal language must yield, for the statute could not reasonably be taken to forbid a monument, which causes none of the harms the statute could be thought to prevent. 
A passage from Wittgenstein indicates the basic difficulty: "Someone says to me: 'Shew the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order?"43 The example shows that sometimes the best interpretation of a textual command is one that runs counter to its apparent literal meaning - even if the author did not have in mind the case at issue, or make a judgment about how that case should be resolved. 
39See, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607 (198o) (plurality opinion) (interpreting "feasible"); United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 201-02 (,979) (rejecting an interpretation of "discriminate" that would bar affirmative action). 
40 "Overinclusiveness" and "underinclusiveness," as used in the text, refer to the fact that the best interpretation of a word, all things considered, sometimes calls for a restriction on or a departure from a word's dictionary meaning. 
41 The notion of "literal" meaning is a crude one. It usually refers to the meaning of words in "most" contexts, but because meaning is a function of context, it is wrong to suggest, as the concept of "literal meaning" does, that words have context-independent meanings. 42 This famous example comes from H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAw 121-32 (1961). 43 L. WITTGENSTEIN, su ra note 24, at 33. 
Courts encounter the problem of overinclusiveness frequently. 44 The Supreme Court recently held that a statute exempting state and local public housing obligations "from allt taxation . . . imposed by the United States" should not be interpreted to include an exemption from federal estate tax. 4 5 The Court held that the exemption did not mean what it appeared to say in light of the contemporaneous understanding that an excise tax was not ordinarily comprehended within the category of "taxation. '46 As another example, suppose that the legislature has said that an employer may discharge an employee "for any reason." Is the employer thereby authorized to fire workers who have refused to commit crimes on his behalf ? If a state law says that one spouse will inherit from another "in all circumstances," may a husband who has murdered his wife make a claim against the estate? 47 These are examples of what might be described as the overinclusiveness of a prominent version of textualism:48 the possibility that statutory language, read without sufficient regard to context or its intended field of application, will reach situations that it could not reasonably cover. 
(c) Underinclusiveness. - Although it arises less frequently, there is also a possibility that textualism will be underinclusive. Justice Holmes warned that "[c]ourts are apt to err by sticking too closely to the words of a law where those words import a policy that goes beyond them."'49 A particular difficulty here is that a statute may be 44See, e.g., Public Citizen v. United States Dep't of Justice, 1o 9 S. Ct. 2558, 2573-74 (1989); California Fed. Say. & Loan Ass'n v. Guerra, 479 U.S. 272, 284 (1987); Kelly v. Robinson, 479 U.S. 36, 43-44 (1986); O'Connor v. United States, 479 U.S. 27, 31 (1986); Offshore Logistics, Inc. v. Tallentire, 477 U.S. 207, 220-21 (1986); United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193, 201 (979); United States v. American Trucking Ass'ns, 310 U.S. 534, 543 (194o); Armstrong Co. v. Nu-Enamel Corp., 305 U.S. 315, 333 (1933); Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States, 143 U.S. 457, 459 (1892); Perry v. Strawbridge, 209 Mo. 621, io8 S.W. 641 (1go8); see also Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 568-75 (1963) (finding that despite the interstate compact's express inclusion of the "Colorado River System," Arizona could not be forced to give up water from a portion of that system entirely within its borders because legislative history shows Congress intended to include mainstream water only). 45 See United States v. Wells Fargo Bank, io8 S. Ct. 1179, i182, 2284 (2988). 46 See id. at 1182. 
47See Riggs v. Palmer, 225 N.Y. 5o6, 22 N.E. x88 (1889); see also Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 429 n.2, 433 (1983) (discussed above in note 35). 
48 See, e.g., Public Citizen v. United States Dep't of justice, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 2573-74 (2989) (Kennedy, J., concurring in the judgment); Riggs, 115 N.Y. at S16, 22 N.E. at 191 (Gray, J., dissenting). 
49 Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 469 (1928) (Holmes, J., dissenting). See, e.g., Missouri v. Jenkins, 209 S. Ct. 2463, 2471 (2989) (holding that "attorney's fee" should be read to include award of paralegal fees); Friedrich v. City of Chicago, 1989 U.S. App. LEXIS 16693 (No. 88-3043, 7th Cir. Oct. 31, 1989) (Posner, J.) (holding that although ยง x988 specified recovery for an "attorney's fee," a proper interpretation of Congress' instructions allows no distinction between paying for an attorney and paying for an expert witness). "evaded" by private ingenuity. The literal language of the statute does not cover the situation, but because the private conduct causes all of the harms that the statute could be thought to prevent, courts sometimes hold a statute applicable notwithstanding its literal terms. 50 The problem of evasion should not be an excuse for judicial stretching of statutes (to be sure, a most ill-defined concept in this setting), but the problem has elicited judicial responses in a number of areas, most notably taxation. 5 ' 
(d) Delegation, Gaps, and Implementing Rules. - The incompleteness of textualism is most conspicuous when Congress has explicitly or implicitly delegated lawmaking power to the courts or when Congress has simply left a gap. In cases of delegated power or gap-filing, the problem is not that words are susceptible to more than one construction, but instead that the words necessarily require courts to look to sources outside of the text.5 2 
The Sherman Act, for example, raises a serious gap-filling problem. The language of the Act does not answer the question of what practices amount to "conspiracies in restraint of trade." The legislative history is suggestive but unclear,5 3 and the courts have inevitably taken the Act as a delegation of policymaking power pursuant to quite open-ended criteria.5 4 Similarly, section I983 s5 is silent on many im50 See, e.g., Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 8o9 (2d Cir. 1934), aff'd, 293 U.S. 465 (x935). 
S See, e.g., Commissioner v. Court Holding Co., 324 U.S. 331 (i945); Goldstein v. Commissioner, 364 F.2d 734 (2d Cir. I966); Helvering v. Gregory, 69 F.2d 809. Outside the area of taxation, there are many examples as well. See, e.g., cases cited supra note 49; Stoner v. Hudgins, 568 S.W.2d 898, 902-03 (Tex. Civ. App. 1978) (holding that despite a narrow verbal construction, a statute providing for credit against damages for advance payments made to tort claimants should be read to mean that the credit should be applied after the damage award is reduced to account for comparative negligence). See generally Isenbergh, Musings on Form and Substance in Taxation (Book Review), 49 U. CHI. L. REv. 859 (1982). Johnson v. Southern Pac. Co., 1I7 F. 462 (8th Cir. 1902), rev'd, 296 U.S. i (29o4), which held that the term "cars" in a statute requiring cars on common carriers to be equipped with automatic couplers did not extend to locomotive engines, is persuasively criticized by Hart and Sacks on the ground that the literalist court interpreted the statute too narrowly. See H. HART & A. SACKS, supra note 15, at 1173-74. 
52 The problems of delegation or gap-filling must be distinguished from a "gap" that is best taken as a legislative decision not to prohibit conduct or not to change the status quo. Here silence is a straightforward absence of law, and one that allows private coilduct to go on as before. This latter sort of gap - which is essentially an exclusion or exemption from a statute - is confused with the sort of gap that requires judicial elaboration of the law in Easterbrook, cited above in note i3; and OFFICE OF LEGAL POLICY, U.S. DEP'T OF JUSTICE, USING AND MISUSING LEGISLATIVE HISTORY: A RE-EvALUATION OF THE STATUS OF LEGISLATIVE HISTORY IN STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 100-04 (1989) [hereinafter USING AND MISUSING LEGISLATIVE HISTORY]. The confusion produces a version of the old idea that statutes in derogation of the common law must be narrowly construed. 
53 See i P. AREEDA & D. TURNER, ANTITRUST LAW io6, at 14-16 (1978). 54 See, e.g., National Soc'y of Professional Eng'rs v. United States, 435 U.S. 679, 688 (1978). 55 42 U.S.C. ยง 1983 (i982). portant questions, including available defenses, burdens of pleading and persuasion, and exhaustion requirements. Because of the textual silence, judges must fill the gaps. To this extent, the statute delegates power to make common law. 56 
Judicial implementation of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of I96457 can be understood in similar terms, though this example is more controversial. The basic prohibition of "discrimination" provides no guidance on the role of discriminatory effects, the appropriate burdens of proof and production, and the mechanisms for filtering out discriminatory treatment. Judicial answers to these questions sometimes purport to be relatively mechanical responses to congressional commands,5 8 but in fact they amount to judge-made implementing devices that reflect the judges' own, inevitably value-laden views. In light of the existence of textual gaps on many questions, this approach is hardly an embarrassment or a usurpation, but instead an inevitable part of interpretation. Much of the law of title VII is an unavoidable, and therefore legitimate, norm-ridden exercise in developing gap-filling rules.5 9 In this respect, the Sherman Act and title VII are closely analogous. 
When the language of a statute does not specify its implementing rules, textualism is incomplete: courts must look elsewhere. When Congress has delegated power or left a gap, the line between interpreting and creating federal common law60 becomes quite thin. 
(e) Changed Circumstances. - The discussion thus far has assumed that circumstances have not changed significantly since the statute was enacted. Textualism becomes even more problematic 56 The C6urt has sometimes indicated that gaps should be filled by reference to the common law of the time. See, e.g., City of Newport v. Fact Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S. 247, 258 (ig8i); Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 318 (I975). Frequently, however, it has filled gaps in accordance with its own views about how best to implement the statute - an approach that is probably consistent with the drafters' own understanding about how courts would act. See 
and Economic Analysis, 1987 SUP. CT. REV. 249, 263-66. 
57 42 U.S.C. ยงยง 2oooe to 2oooe-17 (1982 & Supp. V 1987). 
58 See, e.g., Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (x98x); McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 8oo-o (1973); Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 402 U.S. 424, 431 (197I). 
59 See, e.g., Independent Fed'n of Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 109 S. Ct. 2732, 2737-38 (1989) (deciding that, under title VII, attorneys' fees may not be awarded against nonfrivolous intervenors, largely because of courts' perceptions about the social consequences of such a rule). 
60 Federal common law is usually thought to involve judicial lawmaking when little or no guidance has been supplied by the legislature. See Friendly, In Praise of Erie - And of the New Federal Common Law, 39 N.Y.U. L. REV. 383, 410-1I (2964). Statutory interpretation, by contrast, is usually thought to involve a decision about the meaning of ambiguous enactments. For the reasons stated in the text, this distinction is far too simple. when time has affected the assumptions under which the statute was originally written. Changed circumstances may produce ambiguity or interpretive doubt in the text where neither existed before. 
Consider the Delaney Clause, which forbids the use as food additives of substances that "induce" cancer. 61 The Delaney Clause was enacted at a time when carcinogenic substances were difficult to detect and all detectable carcinogens were extremely dangerous. These facts, however, no longer hold true, and under current conditions the Delaney Clause almost undoubtedly increases health risks by keeping relatively safe substances off the market and by forcing consumers to resort either to noncarcinogenic substances that pose other risks or to substances that were approved by earlier administrators using the cruder technology of their day. Because the factual premises under which the enacting Congress operated are now demonstrably false, might the word "induce" allow the government to exempt from regulation carcinogens that pose trivial risks? 62 Similarly, would a "public policy" exception to the charitable deduction in the Internal Revenue Code require the government to deny the deduction to schools that engage in racial discrimination, even if those who enacted the Code many decades before believed that such discrimination was perfectly consistent with public policy?63 In short, it is by no means obvious that the statutory text should be understood in accordance with its "original meaning," even if that concept were unproblematic. 64 
The discussion thus far suggests two principal points. First, and most fundamentally, there is no such thing as an acontextual "text" that can be used as the exclusive guide to interpretation. In easy cases, interpretive norms - on which there is wide or universal consensus - and context both play a part in the process of ascertaining statutory meaning. Because such norms are so widely shared, they are invisible and are not an object of controversy. Only in these cases can meaning ever be said to be "plain." With these qualifications, textualism is generally appropriate. In hard cases, however, courts must resort to a highly visible background norm, 65 or a con61 See 21 U.S.C. ยง 348(c)(3)(A) (1982). 62 See infra pp. 496-97. 63 See infra note ioo (discussing Bob Jones University v. United-States, 461 U.S. 574 (I983)). 64 Indeed, I will be offering reasons to suggest that it should not, be. See infra pp. 493-97; accord Aleinikoff, UpdatingStatutory Interpretation,87 MICH. L. REV. 20 (1988). 
65 In hard cases, a claimed reliance on the text often disguises the actual basis for decision, which does not turn on text at all. In these cases, discretion is inevitable. For a powerful demonstration in the context of environmental law, see R. MELNiCK, REGULATION AND THE COURTS: THE CASE OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT 371 (2983), which shows that the constant resort to statutory text in cases in which text is at best indeterminate can lead judges to act on the basis of unarticulated and uninformed policy considerations. in areas of economic regulation, such as banking and agriculture. 3 36 It also informs the courts' approach to the Robinson-Patman Act 337 and their effort to understand the Sherman Act as an attempt to promote consumer welfare rather than as protection of small business as such. 33 8 When a public purpose is palpably absent, this principle should be unexceptionable. 3 39 
(j) Requiring Proportionality. - Another interpretive principle would understand statutes to impose benefits roughly commensurate with their costs, unless there is a clear legislative statement to the contrary. This proportionality norm, implicit in several recent cases, 340 draws on an understanding of likely legislative purpose and on perceptions about regulatory failure. Statutes often fail because of excessive controls or inadequate implementation, 3 41 and courts should generally assume that Congress wants to avoid those problems and therefore intends agencies to impose regulations after a balancing process. 34 2 As we have seen, the absence of a proportionality principle 336 See, e.g., Securities Indus. Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 821 F.2d 81o (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 483 U.S. loo5 (1988); Investment Co. Inst. v. FDIC, 815 F.2d 1540 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (per curiam), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 847 (1988); Securities Indus. Ass'n v. Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., 807 F.2d 1052 (D.C. Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 483 U.S. OO5 (1987); Investment Co. Inst. v. Conover, 790 F.2d 925 (D.C. Cir.), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 939 (1986); Langevoort, supra note 8o, at 701, 725-33. 
338 See id. at 72-89; Business Elecs. Corp. v. Sharp Elecs. Corp., 1O8 S. Ct. 1515, 151924 (1988); Broadcast Music, Inc. v. CBS, 441 U.S. i, 19-22 ( GTE Sylvania, Inc., 433 U.S. 36, 51-59 (1977). 
339 This principle must not, however, be confused with the unjustifiable idea that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed; it is not a license for grudging interpretation of statutes that promote noncommodity values or that embody public-spirited redistribution, as suggested in Easterbrook, cited above in note 13, at 539-43. This is also a problem with the otherwise excellent treatment in Macey, cited above in note i59. As the experience of the early part of this century reveals, it is not for courts - in the process of statutory construction - to take a side in the regulatory debate that runs in the face of a legislative judgment. Courts should therefore attempt to discern a public-regarding purpose and give the benefit of every doubt to the legislature. But sometimes such purposes are not even plausibly at work. Of course, some difficult line-drawing problems will exist. 
340 See, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 652 (198o) (plurality opinion) ("[Tihe mere possibility that some employee somewhere in the country may confront some risk of cancer is [not] a sufficient basis for the exercise of the Secretary's power to require the expenditure of hundreds of millions of dollars to minimize that risk.'); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Thomas, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (en banc) (calling for consideration of feasibility). 
341 See J. MENDELOFF, Supra note 224, at 1-12. 
342 Consider, for example, Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987). In that case, the court concluded that ยง 112 of the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. ยง 7412 (1982), which requires emissions standards that provide "an ample margin of safety," permits the Administrator to consider cost and technology despite the statute's failure to refer expressly to those factors. The decision is best understood as founded on a background principle of proportionality, one that Congress may eliminate only through a clear statement. may produce harmful systemic consequences as well as overregulation. Ironically, it will also produce severe underregulation. Moreover, bureaucratic self-interest or factional pressures sometimes incline agencies toward overzealous enforcement, which Congress is unable routinely to monitor or remedy. The proportionality norm is reinforced as well by interpretive norms calling for legislative deliberation. It leads to narrow construction of statutes enacted as a result of interestgroup pressure or as myopic or impulsive reactions to short-term problems. 
The difficulty with this principle is that there is no uncontroversial metric with which to measure social costs and social benefits. If courts understand benefits and costs technically - as in the economic formulation - and make the assessment turn on private willingness to pay, they will undervalue aspirations and nonmarket values and ultimately undermine statutory goals. 34 3 The very decision to create a regulatory system often reflects a rejection of private willingness to pay as the criterion of social choice. Many statutes are designed to transform rather than to implement preferences, to redistribute resources, or to reflect the outcome of a deliberative process about relevant public values. 3 44 Moreover, a statute that protects (for example) endangered species may have symbolic or aspirational benefits. The various values that are served by regulatory programs should be treated hospitably. 
For these reasons, the proportionality principle is most useful for cases of economic regulation. It becomes most workable when it is clear, by reference to a widely held social consensus, that the social benefits are small in comparison to the social costs. Even in cases of public aspirations or nonmarket values, the proportionality idea should be invoked when the disadvantages of regulation seem to dwarf the advantages, at least when the statute is ambiguous. 345 (k) Allowing de Minimis Exceptions. - It follows from the proportionality principle that regulatory statutes should ordinarily be understood to contain de minimis exceptions. In such cases, the costs of regulation outweigh the benefits, which are by hypothesis insubstantial. Moreover, the failure to allow de minimis exceptions will 343 See, e.g., Anderson, Values, Risks, and Market Norms, 17 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 54 (1988); see also Dworkin, Is Wealth a Value?, 9 J. LEGAL STUD. 191, 2o6-2 (198O) (arguing that wealth maximization in itself is not a value). 
344 Thus, title VII is partly an effort to transform preferences; the minimum wage has redistributive purposes; the Clean Air Act is partly an outcome of a deliberative process. On these and other regulatory functions, see C. SUNSTEIN, cited above note *, chs. 1-2. 
345 This principle casts in doubt the outcome in Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978), which held that the Endangered Species Act blocked construction of a dam that would destroy the habitat of the snail darter. See also R. DWORKIN, supra note x9, at 347 (concluding that Tennessee Valley Authority was wrongly decided). probably decrease rather than increase health and safety.3 4 6 Administrators should be allowed to refuse to impose costly regulations for highly speculative or minimal gains. 34 7 Many courts have reached precisely this conclusion. Indeed, courts should probably require such exceptions in the absence of an explicit statutory text or plausible substantive justifications 348 to the contrary. 
the Occupational Safety and Health Act illustrate the basic framework. The pertinent language of the statute34 9 directs OSHA to promulgate the standard that "most adequately assures, to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard . . . for the period of his working life."'35 0 The statute also contains a general definition of "occupational safety and health standard," which says that the term refers to measures that require "conditions ... reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment and places of employment."'35 ' 
Institute,352 the Supreme Court invalidated an OSHA regulation of benzene. Although the precise consequences of the regulation were sharply contested, there was evidence that the regulation would impose enormous costs in exchange for small or speculative gains. OSHA itself concluded that its regulation would require capital investments of $266 million, first-year operating costs of $187 to $205 [VOL. 103:405 million, and recurring annual costs of $34 million.35 3 Contemporary scientific knowledge appeared to preclude a clear prediction of significant benefits, which in the Court's view "may be relatively small. '35 4 
A plurality of the Court concluded that the definitional clause required OSHA to establish a "significant risk" before regulating a toxic substance. The plurality justified its conclusion by referring to the Act's definition of occupational safety and health standards as those "reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment. 355 In the Court's view, a standard was not "reasonably necessary or appropriate" if OSHA was unable to demonstrate a significant risk. 
There was, however, little direct basis in the text or history of the Act for the plurality's conclusion. Congress did not explicitly require OSHA to show a "significant risk." The plurality found that such a requirement was implicit in the definitional clause, but it is very unusual to read a definitional clause, ordinarily carrying no weight, as creating a substantive limitation on administrative power. The clause is more plausibly treated as having no substantive content, or as having substantive content defined by other provisions of the Act. It is even more unusual for the Court to look to a definitional clause when the definition, so interpreted, contradicts a far more specific substantive provision, which in this case says that toxic substance standards must ensure "to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity. '35 6 The reference to "no employee" seems to suggest that the statute forbids OSHA from permitting risks from toxic substances even if only one or a few workers would suffer "material impairment of health." The judicially created "significant risk" requirement, by contrast, forbids regulation unless enough workers will be affected to make the benefits of regulation significant. Nothing in the legislative history supports the Court's interpretation of the definitional clause, and indeed the history argues against that interpretation. 35 7 
Unable to point to a solid textual basis for its "significant risk" requirement, the plurality invoked a clear-statement principle: In the absence of a clear mandate in the Act, it is unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to give the Secretary the unprecedented power over American industry that would result from the Government's view . . . . Expert testimony that a substance is probably a human carcinogen ... would justify the conclusion that the substance poses some risk of serious harm no matter how minute the exposure 353 See id. at 628-29. 354 Id. at 630. 355 Id. at 638 (discussing 29 U.S.C. ยง 652(8)). 356 29 U.S.C. ยง 655(b)(5) (1982) (emphasis added). 3S7 See American Petroleum, 448 U.S. at 708-13 (Marshall, J., dissenting). and no matter how many experts testified that they regarded the risk as insignificant. That conclusion would in turn justify pervasive regulation limited only by the constraint of feasibility. ... [T]he Government's theory would give OSHA power to impose enormous costs that might produce little, if any, discernable benefit.35 8 
The plurality further suggested that the government's interpretation would give the Secretary of Labor "open-ended" policymaking authority that might amount to an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.3 59 
The plurality's conclusion in American Petroleum is difficult to defend in either formalist or textualist terms. The "significant risk" requirement has no textual basis, at least not in any ordinary sense; it was a judicial creation. It would therefore be possible to caricature the result in the case as an impermissible judicial rewriting of the statute. 360 But the conclusion in the case was nonetheless sound. A realistic interpretation of the statutory language would recognize that it was not addressed to the problem at hand. It is simply a myth to suggest that the Congress that enacted OSHA focused on the question of imposing enormous expenditures to redress trivial risks - recall Wittgenstein's game of dice. Despite the broad-language of the toxic substances provision, Congress simply did not deal with the problem. 
In these circumstances, the plurality's opinion can be seen as invoking several of the substantive norms defended above. The case provided an excellent setting for the application of the principle calling for de minimis exceptions to social and economic regulation. An exclusive focus on the one or two employees who suffer "material health impairment" as a result of a lifetime of exposure would in the long run produce less, not more, protection of workers. 3 61 If OSHA must regulate to the point of feasibility in the face of trivial risk, the Department of Labor will be reluctant to embark on any regulation at all. 
Moreover, the proportionality principle and the background norm counseling avoidance of irrationality both argue in favor of the plurality's reading. The beneficiaries of OSHA regulation are well-organized and able to protect themselves in the implementation process. 358 American Petroleum, 448 U.S. at 645 (plurality opinion). 
359 See id. at 651-52. In his concurring opinion, Justice Powell, advocating an interpretation of the Act that would call for cost-benefit balancing, suggested that "a standard-setting process that ignored economic considerations would result in a serious misallocation of resources and a lower effective level of safety than could be achieved under standards set with reference to the comparative benefits available at a lower cost." Id. at 670 (Powell, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). 
360 Similarly, a background principle in favor of interpreting words in accordance with their plain meaning would point toward acceptance of the government's position. See id. at 688 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 
361 See supra p. 480. There was therefore a ready political corrective both to the plurality's conclusion, if it was contrary to public consensus, and to inadequate implementation in general. For all these reasons, the plurality correctly interpreted OSHA to require a showing of a significant risk as a predicate for regulation. 362 
In American Textile Manufacturers Institute v. Donovan,3 63 the Supreme Court decided a question left open in American Petroleum: whether the OSHA statute required cost-benefit analysis. In arguing that it did, the industry contended that the word "feasible" required OSHA not only to show a significant risk, but also to demonstrate that the benefits of regulation justified the costs. "Feasibility," in the industry's view, contemplated a balancing of costs and benefits. The government contended that once OSHA had shown a significant risk, it could regulate to the point where the survival of the regulated industry would be endangered by additional controls. For the government, the term "feasibility" did not connote cost-benefit balancing, but instead meant "possible." 3 64 
In accepting the government's argument, the Court relied on the dictionary definition of "feasible" to conclude that the term meant "'capable of being done, executed, or effected,"' rather than justified by a balancing of costs and benefits. 3 65 This literal approach to the statute was not entirely unreasonable. The structure of the toxic substances provision - consider the "no employee shall suffer" language - is in considerable tension with the industry's construction. Moreover, Congress has sometimes used the term "feasible" as a selfconscious alternative to "cost-benefit" balancing, 366 and that fact argues against the view that the two terms have the same meaning. But the same principles that support the decision in American Petroleum cast serious doubt on American Textile Manufacturers. 
Notwithstanding the statute's language, it is probably unrealistic to believe that Congress actually focused on, and resolved, the ques362 A different result might be appropriate if the scientific evidence were uncertain. If a significant risk were impossible to show because the data were unclear, perhaps employers, rather than workers, should bear the burden of medical uncertainty. The plurality did not make clear how such considerations would bear on the problem of carcinogen regulation if they had been squarely confronted by OSHA. 
363 452 U.S. 490 (i981). 364 See id. at 494-95. 
365See id. at 508-09 (quoting WEBSTER'S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 831 (1976)). 
366 In construing feasibility, courts have not weighed the benefits of the practice against its costs but inquired instead whether the regulation would prevent the industry from functioning. See National Cottonseed Prod. Ass'n v. Brock, 825 F.2d 482, 487 (D.C. Cir. 1987) ("[A] standard is economically feasible if the cost of compliance does not threaten the 'competitive structure or posture' of the industry." (quoting Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. Hodgson, 499 F.2d 467, 478 (D.C. Cir. 1974))). 
tion whether to favor the government's approach over some kind of balancing of costs and benefits. The question never arose during the debates. The general and more fundamental problem is the basic irrationality of a system in which OSHA is required to find a significant risk, but is prohibited from undertaking cost-benefit analysis. Whether a risk is "significant" depends in large part on the costs of eliminating it. A relatively small risk might justify regulation if the costs are also small, but a larger risk might best be left unregulated if the costs are enormous. A rational system of regulation looks not at the magnitude of the risk alone, but assesses the risk in comparison to the costs. 
These considerations would deserve little weight if the statute unambiguously dictated a contrary result, but the word "feasible" is flexible enough to accommodate a proportionality requirement. By refusing to read the statute in this way, the Supreme Court has contributed to the irrationality of the Occupational Safety and Health Act - an irrationality that has harmed workers, employers, consumers, and the public at large. 3 67 
When circumstances change, statutory interpretation becomes especially difficult. Older statutes may depend on factual assumptions that no longer hold, or may conflict with more recent statutes, thus producing inconsistency and incoherence in regulation. This problem is complicated by the fact that the statutory term may have been clear when enacted, and at that time it may have been inappropriate to invoke controversial substantive norms to interpret, it; but changed conditions can render a term ambiguous and thus make it appropriate to apply conspicuous or controversial norms. Because it represents a recurring hard case for statutory interpretation, the confrontation between statutory terms and new or unforeseen contexts deserves separate treatment. 
In cases of changed circumstances, statutory construction appears informed by an effort to ensure integrity and coherence in the law by "updating" obsolete statutes - or, to put it less contentiously and probably more accurately, by interpreting them in a way that takes account of changing conditions. 36 Here courts reject the idea that the original understanding of its audience or authors exhausts the meaning of a statute. There are good reasons to permit courts to go beyond the original understanding in the face of dramatically changed 367 See Rose-Ackerman, supra note 292, at 360-66. 368 See Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation, 135 U. PA. L. REV. 1479 (198 7). circumstances, at least when the statutory text is ambiguous. 36 9 Such an approach is likely to produce greater coherence in the law; to reduce the problem, pervasive in modern government, of regulation by measures that are badly out of date; and to lead to a legal system that is both more rational and more consistent with democratic norms. 370 It is tempting but inadequate to say that the legislature should respond to the problem of changed circumstances. The question is what the statute means in those circumstances, and that question must be answered by those who interpret it, including the courts. This claim does not, of course, mean that changed circumstances should be understood to authorize courts to amend or rewrite statutes, but it does mean that "meaning" is itself a function of those circumstances.3 71 
The problem of changed circumstances presents questions not only of statutory meaning in new settings, but also of implicit interpretive instructions: how would Congress have wanted courts to approach its enactments in the face of obsolescence or changed circumstances? There will rarely be a direct answer to this question. As in constitutional law, the problem of changed circumstances requires courts to decide whether the content of legal rules should change when there have been changes in law, policy, and fact. At the very least, courts should answer in the affirmative 3 72 when a statute contains an openended term like "public policy" or "psychopathic '3 73 that invites interpretations that change over time; when statutory language already contains an ambiguous term ("feasible") whose meaning depends on current conditions; 374 or when the statute contains a phrase ("induce cancer") that has been rendered ambiguous because of changed circumstances. 3 75 
Even when no clear interpretive instructions allow a judge to adapt statutory terms to new conditions, courts may do so when those conditions have rendered a statute ambiguous. This problem typically occurs in three ways. First, the factual assumptions underlying the 369 See Aleinikoff, supra note 64, at 56-61; Eskridge, supra note 368, at 1497-539; see also Israel, Gideon v. Wainwright: The "Art" of Overruling, z963 Sup. CT. REV.211, 219-23 (noting that changed circumstances have traditionally provided a rationale for departing from stare decisis). 
370 See sources cited supra notes 224-28. 
371 Dean Calabresi has argued that courts should have the power to invalidate obsolete statutes and to return them to the legislature for reconsideration. See G. CALABRESI, supra note 82, at 163-66. A judicial role of this sort would be extremely controversial, and properly so. The principal problem posed by obsolescence or changed circumstances is that it complicates ordinary interpretation. 
372 See R. DWORKIN, supra note ig; Eskridge, supra note 368, at 1538-44. 373See Aleinikoff, supra note 64, at 47-54. 314 See suraPP. 492-93. 371See infra PP. 496-97. original statute may no longer be valid. For example, statutes regulating broadcasting were enacted with the understanding that because of the limitations of the spectrum, few broadcasting licenses would be available. In the face of new technology and the rise of cable television, that assumption has become hopelessly unrealistic. 
Second, a statutory provision may no longer be consistent with widely held social norms. In such cases a court must ask whether this change so alters the landscape that a reading of the statute that does not accord with the original understanding of its authors is justified - a question the enacting legislature may well have intended courts to answer in the affirmative. 
Third, the legal background may have changed dramatically as a result of legislative and administrative innovations. A statute enacted in 1935 may have ignored environmental considerations widely recognized in statutes enacted after I96O. The question is whether the change in the legal background has consequences for interpreting the 1935 statute. 
Judicial responses to all three kinds of obsolescence are not difficult to find. The first kind has resulted in aggressive construction, particularly in banking and broadcasting. 376 In light of the changed nature of the relevant markets, it is implausible to resolve ambiguities by examining Congress' intent at the time of enactment. Such an approach would be a recipe for absurdity, and absurdity would hardly promote legislative purposes. 
The second form of obsolescence is reflected in judicial construction of statutes of the 192o's and 1930's so as to require old-line agencies to take account of environmental concerns. In this context, the legal backdrop has changed so dramatically that seemingly straightforward interpretation of the old statutes would be undesirable. 377 The same point helps to explain the courts' narrow construction of provisions of the UCC not anticipating the revolution in the law of products liability.3 78 The Court's decision in Bob Jones can be understood in similar terms. Changing legislative and judicial developments had made racial discrimination inconsistent with "public policy" in the r98o's, even if no such inconsistency existed when the charitable deduction was first enacted. 
Decisions reading ambiguous statutes to require regulatory agencies to consider costs and benefits illustrate the third form of judicial response to obsolescence. 379 The Court may also have been reflecting 376 See Langevoort, supra note 80. 
377 See, e.g., Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Conm'n, 354 F.2d 6o8 (2d Cir. 1965), cert. denied, 384 U.S. 941 (1966). 
378 See Peters, Common Law Judging in a Statutory World: An Address, 43 U. PTT. L. REV. 995, ioio (1982). 
379 See supra note 340. contemporary values in reading the Sherman Act as an effort to promote consumer welfare. 38 0 The underlying argument would be that a welfare-based interpretive principle is the only basis for a judicially administrable standard, and that such a principle conforms best to current understandings about a well-functioning antitrust law.38 1 
Several substantive norms apply to cases of obsolescence. Obsolete statutes are by hypothesis inconsistent with other regulation or with the current legal framework. They may also have pernicious, if unintended, systemic effects. If the text allows, courts should attempt to harmonize such statutes with current circumstances. 
We might explore the problem of obsolescence in more detail by examining the Delaney Clause. As noted above, the clause prohibits the sale of food additives that "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal" or are found "after tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce cancer in man and animal." 382 As we have seen, the drafters of the clause believed that few additives caused cancer, and that those that did so were extremely dangerous. By the I98o's, however, it was clear that many substances were carcinogenic, but that a number of them created exceptionally minor risks. 38 3 
These developments severely undermined the assumptions of the Congress that enacted the Delaney Clause. Indeed the clause, read literally, appeared quite perverse in many of its applications because it banned substances that posed no real risk to health. Having been forbidden to use food additives posing a de minimis risk of cancer, 380 See, e.g., R. BoRm, supra note 337, at 72-89. A similar method was at work in King v. Smith, 392 U.S. 309 (1968), in which the Supreme Court invalidated a state rule depriving women of welfare benefits whenever they lived with a man - even if cohabitation occurred as rarely as once a month. Although there had been a steady trend in the direction of eliminating moral requirements for welfare recipients, and although the "man-in-the-house" rule had been widely condemned as irrational, punitive, and probably both sexist and racist in operation, the Court was unable to point to any statutory provision that unambiguously invalidated the state rule. The decision in King v. Smith amounted to an aggressive reading of the statute to conform to what the Court understood to be the current (and well-founded) national consensus. 
381 See R. BORK, supranote 337, at 72-1,5; R. POSNER, ECONOMIc ANALYSIS OF LAW 26597 (3d ed. 1986). 
382 21 U.S.C. ยง 348(c)(3)(A) (1982). 383 Albert Kolbye argues: [A]nalytical chemists can now detect a whole new galaxy of low levels of substances in food. Previously the limits of qualitative identification and quantitative measurement were in the parts per thousand range: today parts per trillion are not uncommon and in some instances routine. This represents a millionfold increase in our ability to detect 'chemicals' in food. 
Kolbye, Decision-MakingIssues Relevant to Cancer-InducingSubstances, in REGULATORY AsPECTS OF CARCINOGENESIS AND FOOD ADDITIVES: THE DELANEY CLAUSE 93, 94 (F. Coulston ed. 1979); see also Merrill, supra note 81, at 15-16 (discussing these technological advances). manufacturers instead used additives that caused more serious risks of other diseases - thus creating what was quite possibly a significant increase in illnesses and deaths from food additives. In response, the FDA - invoking background principles against obsolescence and in favor of rationality and de minimis exception - interpreted the clause to permit the exemption of trivial risks. The claim, in short, was that changed circumstances made the word "induce" ambiguous. The FDA said that it would approve food additives that posed a de minimis risk of cancer. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia held that the FDA's position was unlawful. 384 In that court's view, the Delaney Clause was unambiguous on the point. Read in context, however, the statute's meaning was far from clear. Because Congress did not focus on the question of de minimis risks in its original enactment, a de minimis exception would not have defeated Congress' will. The factual background against which the Delaney Clause was written was so different from the present circumstances that the statutory terms "induce cancer" must be treated as ambiguous. The word "induce" should be read in its setting: whether a substance "induces" cancer within the meaning of the clause might well be a function of the degree of risk that it poses. We have seen that where there has been no clear legislative statement, agencies should be free to create de minimis exceptions to regulation. In these circumstances, interpretation of the clause to permit such exceptions seems consistent with permissible understandings of statutory construction, and quite sensible to boot. The D.C. Circuit's decision to the contrary was therefore misguided. 
It will not have escaped notice that the interpretive principles I have proposed will sometimes conflict with one another. For example, the principle favoring state authority might collide with the principle favoring disadvantaged groups, and the presumption against amendment through the appropriations process might contradict the principle in favor of generous construction of statutes protecting nonmarket values. The examples could easily be multiplied. The possibility of conflict renders the basic approach vulnerable to a neo-realist objection that, in practice, the interpretive norms will provide contradictory guidance for the judiciary. 
Principles of harmonization and priority can in fact be developed to resolve cases of conflict. To make this claim is not, however, to say that the application of interpretive norms can be purely mechan384 See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d ixo8 (D.C. Cir. 1987), cert. denied, 1o8 S. Ct. 1470 (i988). ical. Inevitably, statutory construction is an exercise of practical reason, in which text, history, and purpose interact with background understandings in the legal culture. 3 85 In light of the dependence of outcomes on particular contexts, a fully systematized approach to statutory construction would be unmanageable. But short of a complete system, it is possible to develop some guidelines. 
i. Priority. - The first task is to develop principles by which to rank interpretive norms. Although different judges and administrators will rank such norms in different ways, it should be possible to achieve a more precise understanding of statutory construction - both as a descriptive and as a normative matter - by generating a hierarchy of interpretive principles. 
In that hierarchy, the presumptions in favor of decisions by politically accountable actors and in favor of political deliberation should occupy the very highest place. The principle of political accountability has a clear foundation in article I of the Constitution, is an overriding structural commitment of the document, has roots in assessments of institutional performance, 3 86 and is also designed to counteract characteristic failures in the regulatory process. 3 87 In this sense, the norm of political accountability draws on all three basic sources of interpretive principles. 
The commitment to political deliberation belongs on the same plane. The belief in deliberative democracy is also a basic constitutional commitment. 388 Implicit in the systems of checks and balances and federalism, it draws on Madison's conception of political representation. The absence of deliberation has also contributed to regulatory failure. 38 9 In these ways, the belief in political deliberation and the belief in political accountability are closely allied. 
Other interpretive principles traceable to constitutional norms deserve great respect. They should occupy the next highest position in the hierarchy. This category would include the norms in favor of broad interpretation of statutes protecting disadvantaged groups, against delegations of legislative authority, in favor of state autonomy, and in favor of narrow construction of interest-group transfers. As we have seen, all of these principles have constitutional status but are underenforced as a result of the institutional position of the judiciary.3 90 Moreover, it is possible to create a kind of hierarchy within constitutionally based interpretive principles. Thus, for example, the 385 See Eskridge & Frickey, Statutory InterpretationAs PracticalReasoning, 42 STAN. L. REV. 321 (I990). 
386 See supra p. 475. 387 For a discussion of these failures, see pp. 467-68 above. 388 See sura pP. 471-72. 389 See, e.g., J. MENDELOFF, supra note 224; Rose-Ackerman, supra note 292, at 352-54. 390 See supra p. 466. principle in favor of state autonomy should occupy a lower place than the principle in favor of protection of disadvantaged groups, which is the product of the fourteenth amendment, a self-conscious attempt to limit the scope of state power. The case law in fact reflects this hierarchy.391 
Finally, interpretive principles without constitutional status should occupy the lowest rung, precisely because the judgments they represent are not so closely connected with the foundational commitments of American constitutionalism. This category includes norms in favor of coordination and of proportionality, norms requiring consideration of systemic effects, norms against implied repeals, and norms against obsolescence. All these norms should play a less significant role in cases of conflict. Moreover, these principles might themselves be placed in lexical order. For example, the principles calling for de minimis exceptions and for proportionality, and for taking account of systemic effects, should occupy the highest position among nonconstitutional principles. To use (for example) the principle calling for broad construction of statutes favoring nonmarket values as a reason to abandon proportionality would sacrifice those very values - because of the likelihood that stringent regulation that bars balancing will produce regulatory irrationality and, ultimately, underregulation. The background principles calling for proportionality and de minimis exceptions, and requiring consideration of systemic effects, should ordinarily apply unless a constitutional principle trumps them. 
to rank interpretive norms but to minimize the number of conflicts among norms. For example, courts should apply the proportionality principle differently when nonmarket values are at stake. In cases of economic regulation, translating costs and benefits into dollars, measured in terms of private willingness to pay, is entirely sensible. In cases implicating nonmonetary values, the fact that monetized costs and benefits are disproportionate is not controlling. Reflecting a similar understanding, the courts have interpreted statutes quite generously, and in a way that conspicuously departs from private willingness to pay, when aspirations and noncommodity values are involved. 39 2 
Another principle of harmonization would recognize that cases turn not simply on the applicability of interpretive norms, but also on the degree of their infringement. Thus, for example, an enormous grant of discretionary lawmaking power to a regulatory agency would argue more strongly in favor of an aggressive narrowing construction than a minor grant of such power. Moreover, if the norm in favor of 391See, e.g., Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer, 427 U.S. 445, 453-56 (1976). 392See cases cited supra notes 333-34. limited delegations conflicts with the norm in favor of coordination of regulatory policy, the degree of the infringement on both norms would be highly relevant to the decision. 
priority and harmonization. In Pennhurst, a group of mentally retarded people brought suit against a mental health facility that was found to contain dangerous conditions. Many of the residents had been physically abused, brutally mistreated, or drugged; the facility was utterly inadequate for the treatment of the retarded. As the basis of their legal claim, the plaintiffs invoked the "bill of rights" in the Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill of Rights Act. 3 94 The bill of rights contained a set of legislative findings, including the following: (i) Persons with developmental disabilities have a right to appropriate treatment, services, and habilitation for such disabilities. ( developmental disabilities should be designed to maximize the developmental potential of the person and should be provided in a setting that is least restrictive of the person's personal liberty. (3) The Federal Government and the States both have an obligation to assure that public funds are not provided to any institution]... that] does not provide treatment, services, and habilitation which is appropriate to the needs of such persons .... 395 
The question in Pennhurst was whether the bill of rights created legally enforceable rights, or whether it instead enacted a set of goals or aspirations that could not be vindicated in court. The history of the Act supported an argument that Congress intended to create legally cognizable rights. 39 6 On the other hand, it was not unreasonable to suggest that the bill of rights should be taken, like some other prefaces to legislation, as a statement of goals and purposes that amounted to an essentially precatory statement of congressional aspirations - a statement that would not permit the developmentally disabled to bring suit against a facility that failed to respect the bill of rights. There was no affirmative indication that the "findings" were intended to give rise to legally enforceable rights, costing the state enormous sums. Without a background interpretive principle, the case was probably impossible to resolve. 
393 451 U.S. i (1981). 39442 U.S.C. ยงยง 6ooo-6o8i (1982 & Supp. 1989). 395 Id. ยง 6009. 396 See, e.g., 451 U.S. at 42-47 (White, J., dissenting). 
In holding for the governmental defendant, the Supreme Court did not deny that the conventional sources of interpretation left the case in equipoise. Instead it invoked a background principle: "[I]f Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously. By insisting that Congress speak with a clear voice, we enable the States to exercise their choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their participation. '3 97 The Court decided Pennhurston the basis of an interpretive norm derived from the constitutional background, not from the statute at issue. 
For reasons explored above, federalism principles are properly invoked, at least in ordinary settings, to require a clear statement from Congress for the imposition of significant duties on the states. If the Court had held the bill of rights legally enforceable, the states would have faced an enormous financial burden - one that they had not, in view of the statute's ambiguity, necessarily expected to incur. It is for this reason that the outcome in Pennhurst is a plausible one. But two considerations suggest that Pennhurst was incorrectly decided. 
First, a constitutional norm calls for aggressive construction of statutes involving the developmentally disabled. The Court has been extremely cautious in using the Constitution to protect the disabled, largely for institutional reasons. 398 In holding that the equal protection clause does not entitle the mentally retarded to special judicial protection, for example, the Court stressed that federal and state legislatures have responded to the pervasive mistreatment of the retarded, and that unelected judges should be reluctant to intrude so dramatically into democratic processes. 3 99 In these circumstances, the best substantive theory of the equal protection clause accords special protection to the disabled, and when other branches give such protection, they are fulfilling their constitutional responsibilities. 
Second, federalism principles have much less force in cases in which Congress attempts to protect a traditionally disadvantaged group from state political processes. The ordinary presumption in favor of state autonomy is countered by the fourteenth amendment - a self-conscious limitation on state power. Invocation of principles of state autonomy in the context of a socially subordinated group to justify a narrow reading of a statute enacted on its behalf - is positively perverse in light of constitutional structure and history. 40 0 397451 U.S. at 17 (footnote and citations omitted). 398 See City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432 (1985). 399See id. at 442-47. 
400 To be sure, this conclusion depends on the (controversial) view that the developmentally disabled should for these purposes be treated the same as blacks, the unquestionable principal beneficiaries of the fourteenth amendment. But that view should not be difficult to defend in light of the past and present treatment of the developmentally disabled, treatment that led to 
It follows that when Congress has taken steps to provide safeguards for that group, the Court should take into account the fourteenth amendment and the underenforced character of the equality norm in order to give statutes involving the disabled a hospitable rather than a grudging interpretation. 40 1 The PennhurstCourt should not have relied on a background norm in favor of federalism in order to render meaningless a statutory provision involving a group and a right safeguarded by the fourteenth amendment. 40 2 
What would the universe of statutory interpretation be like if all of these proposals were accepted? In one sense, it would not be dramatically different from the one we inhabit. All of the principles suggested here have some foundations in current law. A system of interpretation without interpretive norms, even substantive and institutional ones, would be inconceivable. On the other hand, a legal system that adopted such principles self-consciously would have a far greater degree of uniformity and coherence. It would be especially responsive to constitutional norms, to institutional considerations, and to an informed understanding of the functions and failures of the modern regulatory state. Above all, the system would rely on norms that promote the goals and that improve the performance of statutory regimes, and it would use the process of statutory construction as a corrective against some of the pervasive weaknesses, injustices, and irrationalities of modern regulation. 
In all likelihood, a set of explicitly articulated interpretive norms would elicit administrative and legislative responses. In time, members of Congress, and others involved in the lawmaking process, would become aware of those norms and would enact statutes in the shadow of such norms. Some statutes would look quite different, for Congress would know that courts would, in the face of statutory silence or ambiguity, press legislation in one direction rather than another.403 Judicial adoption of interpretive norms of this sort would and made necessary the very statute at issue in Pennhurst. See Minow, When Difference Has Its Home: Group Homesfor the Mentally Retarded, Equal Protectionand Legal Treatment of Difference, 22 HARv. C.R.-C.L. L. REv. III, 144-52 (1987). 
401 But cf. Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49 (1978) (upholding tribal sovereign immunity against equal protection claim under the Indian Civil Rights Act). 
402 Principles of priority and harmonization were also at work in Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U.S. 574 (1983). See supra note ioo. That decision reflects an implicit understanding that the nonsubordination principle trumps the interest in the autonomy of religious organizations, at least in the context of tax policy. 
403 In light of the absence of solid evidence that legislative activity is materially affected by interpretive norms in general, this effect would, however, probably not be as great as one might expect. ultimately shift the burden of legislative inertia - giving rationality of various sorts the benefit of the doubt, and raising the costs of absurdity or injustice - and at the same time would offer legislators and others a clear rather than murky background against which to do their work. 
The interpretive norms suggested here would convert some hard cases into easy ones, by providing principles with which to decide cases that might otherwise be in equipoise. Examples include cases like American Petroleum, which involved the operation of the proportionality principle, and cases involving allegations of preemption, which implicate the principle in favor of state autonomy. But the norms would also make some easy cases into hard ones, by shifting the legal backdrop and requiring clear legislative instructions before certain results could be reached. For this reason, a legal framework pervaded by explicit background norms of the sort outlined here would in some settings create rather than diminish legal uncertainty. 40 4 This cost, however, is a small price to pay for increased clarity in a variety of contexts, and, much more fundamentally, an improvement in the performance of regulatory law, an increase in rationality, and a greater sensitivity to the constitutional backdrop, statutory function, and regulatory failure. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The traditional understandings of statutory construction are inadequate. They fail to describe existing practice or to set out an approach that deserves support. Under the approach suggested here, the statutory text is the foundation for interpretation, but structure, purpose, intent, history, and "reasonableness" all play legitimate roles. It is possible, moreover, to distinguish among those roles, and thus to produce a system in which dictionary definitions of statutory terms ordinarily suffice, but are subject to various forms of contextual qualification. 
As complete theories of interpretation, however, all of the traditional sources depend on fictions or leave large interpretive gaps. Efforts to approach statutes as "deals," or to justify a general background rule in favor of either administrative interpretation or "private ordering, '40 5 cannot be defended, for they produce indeterminacy, lead 404 The Delaney Clause might be an example. On one understanding of a textualist approach, the case is an easy one, and the FDA loses; it is the norm against de minimis exceptions that introduces uncertainty into a case that might be otherwise resolved on the basis of the "text." 
40S The quotation marks are necessary because of the dependence of private ordering on legal decisions - a prominent New Deal theme. See Sunstein, supra note 9, at 437-38, 451to an inferior system of law, or depend on values that were repudiated by the decision to create the regulatory regime in the first instance. 
Because language "by itself" lacks meaning, and in light of the existence of gaps or ambiguities in hard cases, interpretive principles of various sorts are desirable and in any case inevitable. Interpretation cannot occur without background principles that fill gaps in the face of legislative silence and provide the backdrop against which to read linguistic commands. In easy cases, the text, in conjunction with generally held interpretive principles, is enough to solve interpretive disputes; in other cases, also relatively easy, a resort to purpose, context - including legislative history - or reasonableness will be proper, necessary, and sufficient. In many cases, however, courts must invoke interpretive principles that appear controversial. 
Some such principles aid courts in discerning the meaning of particular statutes, or help to implement Congress' actual or likely interpretive instructions. Others are rooted in constitutional concerns; others derive from assessments of institutional performance; still others attempt to respond to characteristic failings of regulatory legislation. Because statutory meaning is a function of interpretive principles and cannot exist without them, something like "canons" of construction, far from being obsolete, must occupy a prominent place in the theory and practice of statutory interpretation. 
In these circumstances, it is especially important to avoid thiee common errors. The first is to treat interpretive principles as the illegitimate intrusion of discretionary policy judgments into "ordinary" interpretation; as we have seen, there is no such thing. The second is to think that the existence of competing, and value-laden, principles is a reason to give up on the enterprise of statutory construction altogether, and in hard cases to resort to a sometimes fictional "plain language," to treat interpretation as inevitably indeterminate, or to rest content with the conclusion that statutes turn out to mean what people in authority say that they mean. Even in hard cases, it is possible to mediate among competing principles and to assess them in terms of their sensitivity to constitutional structure, to institutional arrangements, and to regulatory function and failure. The third error is to use traditional principles of private law - carried over from anachronistic conceptions of the relationship between the citizen and the state - to resolve disputes about the meaning of modern enactments. 
The interpretive principles suggested here are intended for the President, regulatory agencies, and Congress, as well as for the courts. Even more fundamentally, they provide a basis for understanding the ideas that underlie the fabric of the modern regulatory state. Indeed, it is in disputes over background norms of interpretation that one finds principles that organize and divide understandings not only of the New Deal reformation, but of American constitutionalism and democracy as a whole. 
The ultimate task is to develop a set of interpretive norms sensitive to constitutional structure, institutional design, the New Deal reformation, and the diverse functions and failings of governmental actors and statutory regimes 40 6 - with which to approach social and economic regulation in a system that has largely abandoned common law categories. It is possible to generate a series of interpretive principles, all with support in current law, that can promote the goals of deliberative government in the post-New Deal period. In this way, statutory construction can serve as an ally of other, more ambitious strategies designed to promote some of the original constitutional goals in a dramatically changed legal environment. It is far too much to expect statutory construction to respond to all of the failings of the modern regulatory state. But it is not too much to expect that the process of interpretation can make the situation better rather than worse. 
406 See Pound, Common Law and Legislation, supra note 4, at 386 (deploring the courts' failure to conceive of statutes "as entering into the legal system as an organic whole" and the judicial treatment of statutes "as introducing a sort of temporary innovation which is not at all to be thought of as on the same footing with common law doctrines"); see also Stone, The Common Law in the United States, 5o HARv. L. REv.4, i5 (1936) ("[A] statute is not an alien intruder in the house of the common law, but a guest to be welcomed and made at home there as a new and powerful aid in the accomplishment of its appointed task of accommodating the law to social needs."). 
APPENDIX: INTERPRETIVE PRINCIPLES, OLD AND NEW I. EXISTING OR DEFUNCT PRINCIPLES: A TYPOLOGY 
Cases i. Plain meaning (questionable). provisions. 
other statutes. 
I. I U.S.C. ยงยง 1-6. decisions. 

I. Plain meaning (questionable). decisions where discretion has been conferred. and force decision by politically accountable persons. judicial or administrative interpretations of statutes as acquiescence or ratification. 
I. Presumption against preemption of state law (questionable when discrimination is at issue). law (obsolete). immunity (obsolete). (questionable). io. Presumption that laws apply only within territory of United 
States. xi. Presumption against standing for "regulatory harms" (questionable). as a corrective to 4 above). of the President and federal courts. 
II. PROPOSED PRINCIPLES FOR THE REGULATORY STATE A. ConstitutionalPrinciples i. Avoiding constitutional invalidity and constitutional doubts. antipathy to naked interest-group transfers. 

B. Institutional Concerns x. Narrow construction of appropriations statutes. history. 
C. CounteractingStatutory Failure x. Presumption in favor of political accountability. action problems. substantive rights. io. Narrow construction of statutes embodying interest-group transfers (to counteract "deals"). iI. Broad construction of statutes protecting disadvantaged groups. values. 
]III. PRIORITY AND HARMONIZATION 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
This content downloaded from 195.34.79.174 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 08:58:11 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Introduction: Notes on Feminist Political Thought As the collection of essays in this symposium reveals, the recent growth of feminist thought has produced a wide range of work in political theory-as it has in most areas of the social sciences and the humanities. A large amount of feminist writing deals with various aspects of the social subordination of women. Much of it also discusses the ways in which that historical fact has affected political theory and political practice; and it explores the possibilities for reformulating both by eliminating gender biases. One of the most striking features of feminist political theory, however, is its diversity. It is difficult to describe the general tendencies in feminist political thought without eliding important differences. 
Nonetheless, the essays in this collection, and most feminist work in political theory, can be organized around a set of common themes. Some of these themes have been developed into large-scale critiques, and in some cases reconstructions, of important strains in modern political thought. The critiques tend to emphasize that important aspects of traditional political thought are based on gendered ideas; the reconstructions attempt to develop alternatives that take account of women's experience. For example, feminist work challenges traditional views of sex and the family, contending that the emphasis on community and consent have created important errors (see the contributions in this symposium by Marilyn Friedman, Catharine MacKinnon, Susan Moller Okin, and Laurie Shrage). At the same time, some feminist work challenges certain forms of liberalism and of social contract theory by undermining its individualistic assumptions (see the contributions by Virginia Held, Okin, and Iris Marion Young). Feminist writings are often unified by attempts to enrich and alter conventional understandings of both community and individual autonomy; both individualistic and communitarian understandings have come under sharp attack. 
For purposes of this introduction, it will be useful to outline some of the themes of feminist political thought and to discuss their relationship to the essays in this collection. 
* I am grateful to Mary Becker, Stephen Holmes, Martha Minow, and David Strauss for helpful comments. 219 
OF "DIFFERENT VOICE" A good deal of feminist work is responsive to Carol Gilligan's influential challenge to Lawrence Kohlberg's theory of moral development.' In Gilligan's view, Kohlberg's theory, which purports to generalize across social differences, is in fact based on male norms. Gilligan's study argues that the moral development of young girls is different from that of young boys-that girls are inclined to focus on responsibility, context, and connection, whereas boys tend to favor abstractions, rights, autonomy, and separation. 
Gilligan writes: "The moral imperative ... [for] women is an injunction to care, a responsibility to discern and alleviate the 'real and recognizable trouble' of this world. For men, the moral imperative appears rather as an injunction to respect the rights of others and thus to protect from interference the rights to life and self-fulfillment.... The standard of moral judgment that informs [women's] assessment of self is a standard of relationship, an ethic of nurturance, responsibility, and care.... Morality is seen by these women as arising from the experience of connection and conceived as a problem of inclusion rather than one of balancing claims."2 
For political theory, this account is noteworthy above all because Kohlberg's theory of the stages of moral development is closely connected with prominent approaches to questions of social justice. If Kohlberg's theory of development is based on male norms, and ignores an important alternative, the same may be true of (to take a not entirely random example) contractarian theories of politics. Thus Gilligan's "ethic of care" is opposed, in much feminist work, to the "ethic of justice" associated with social contract theory, most notably that of John Rawls. Views in this general category-many of them diverging from Gilligan-have led to feminist challenges to approaches that purport, for normative or explanatory purposes, to treat people as self-interested maximizers of private or existing desires. Such approaches, it is contended, are false to the experience of many women. 
It is important to emphasize that there is no necessary connection between Gilligan's discussion of moral development and any particular approach to politics. A rights-based system of politics might provide the necessary conditions for community; it might protect against the abuse of public and private power; it might be defensible on any number of other grounds. But the divergent moral development of men and women-if it can be established-seems especially interesting if there is a relationship between conventional approaches to politics and distinctly male ethical norms. 
In some respects, feminist critiques of contractarian approaches to justice might be thought to overlap with arguments made by modern communitarian critics of liberalism.3 In both critiques, systems based on rights and autonomy, and seeking to provide well-defined constraints on the private and public spheres, are distinguished from systems that emphasize the possibility of making political choices through a form of political deliberation that includes empathy. But there are significant differences as well.4 The capacity for connection and care is, in some feminist accounts, treated as an ordinary part of women's personalityat least in this culture, and perhaps partly as a result of the social subordination of women-rather than as the precious outcome of a hardwon battle to be achieved through struggling against existing premises and institutions. Moreover, the feminist approach tends to be quite skeptical about the authority wielded by communities over individuals. 
Marilyn Friedman's essay, "Feminism and Modern Friendship: Dislocating the Community," is a critical encounter with some of the communitarian critics of liberal thought. Stressing the experiences of women in private and public collectivities, Friedman argues that there are numerous problems with the communitarian's affirmative case. This is so particularly in light of the exercise of oppression by private and public groupsincluding religious groups and the family-that are so celebrated by many communitarians. In these circumstances, the communitarian's enthusiastic approval of the "embedded" self has ironic albeit unintended dimensions (on which, see also Catharine MacKinnon's contribution to this symposium). 
Observing that attempts to overcome atomism take the form of reviving community, Friedman argues that such attempts must incorporate some of the aspirations of those forms of political liberalism against which communitarians rebel. Thus she distinguishes sharply between voluntary and ascriptive communities, emphasizing the importance of "exit" as a constraint on local tyranny. A norm of individual autonomy, to operate in both public and private spheres, appears to underlie Friedman's critique of communitarianism and her endorsement of voluntary association. Autonomy is understood not in economic terms (as respect for given or purely private preferences) but, instead, as a belief in individual immunity from collective control by large and small organizations. 
Susan Moller Okin's contribution, "Reason and Feeling in Thinking about Justice," is a response to the numerous feminist critiques of social contract theory in general and of Rawls in particular. Such critiques typically challenge the abstraction of the original position, its foundations in rational choice theory, and its asserted inattentiveness to differences between individuals and groups on the one hand and to concrete social contexts on the other.5 Okin's response takes the form of an interpretation of social contract theory, and of Rawls's effort more specifically, so as to accommodate some of the concerns of the feminist attack on (liberal?) conceptions of justice. 
The foundations of Rawls's theory in rational choice theory have led to a variety of challenges. One response, often coming from rational choice theorists themselves, is that Rawls's principles-most importantly the difference principle-would not emerge from the original position as he defines it. By contrast, feminists (among others) have argued that Rawls's approach is tied to an egoistic conception of human nature and that it is excessively rationalistic and acontextual. On the other hand, the abstraction of Rawls's approach might be counted a virtue. In some circumstances, the fact that political actors must be blind to individual characteristics-of race, gender, religion, and political belief-is surely a significant advantage. 
In Okin's view, the original position need not and should not be understood either abstractlyor in terms of rational choice. On the contrary, she argues that Rawls's approach can be recast in terms that immunize it from the feminist critique. Above all, Okin contends that the original position forces political actors to be empathetic. In the original position, those who are in a position to choose principles of justice are deprived of knowledge of their place in society. As a result, the original position forces the choosers to take the position of (among others) the disadvantaged. For this reason, Okin argues, the choosers are not required to be or to think as if they were "disembodied nobodies" but are instead required to "think from the position of everybodyi,n the sense of each in turn." On this view, the original position is not at all abstraction from difference and contingency but is instead rooted in "an appreciation and concern for social and other human differences." 
This understanding of the original position serves largely to collapse the distinction between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice and to recast in a new light the goals, central to contractarian and liberal thought, of impartiality and universalizability. Okin emphasizes as well that Rawls's theory ignores problems of gender structure and above all the question of justice within the family, which, she claims, leads to tension for his theory. In her view, the logic of the original position draws the traditional family and gender structure into severe question. 
If Okin's general argument is correct, it is possible to bridge the division between the feminist critique of social contract theory and at Critique:On the Politics of Gender,ed. S. Benhabib and D. Cornell (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987). least some forms of contractarianism: the dichotomy between an ethic of care and an ethic of justice seems to dissolve. But other pieces in this collection- notably Iris Marion Young's essay, discussed below-attempt to provide reasons for skepticism about this strategy. 
In arguments made in the 1970s for the Equal Rights Amendment, the principal norm underlying much feminist work was one of formal equality. In this view, distinctions between men and women should (almost always) be abolished. More recently, norms of formal equality have been thrown into sharp question-and the resulting debate has produced an outpouring of work on the appropriate meaning of equality in this and other contexts. The major problems here are twofold. 
First, formal equality-defined as a refusal to permit women to be treated differently from men-will sometimes undermine rather than promote the cause of equality (understood in more substantive terms) as between men and women. Consider, for example, the fact that the achievement of formal equality with respect to alimony, child custody, and divorce has in many settings aggravated the real world inequality of women. Second, some aspects of the social inequality of women are entirely unaddressed by formal equality as it is usually understood. The principal problem has to do with the application of norms of formal equality to settings of "real differences" between men and women. How, for example, ought one to think of equality and discrimination in the settings of reproductive rights, sex-related violence, and the continuing differences in the domestic and economic responsibilities and welfare of mothers and fathers? Formal equality often considers these issues to raise no problem of inequality at all; but if that view is accepted, many arenas of sex discrimination will be unaddressed. 
One consequence of questions of this sort is to draw into doubt the idea (or at least usual applications of the idea) that the function of an equality norm is to require that those similarlysituated be treated similarly.6 (Of course this idea-like the norm of formal equality itself-is highly ambiguous, and it might well be possible to reconceive both in ways responsive to the feminist critique.) Another consequence is to suggest that the question of equality is not whether there are "differences"between the two groups subject to comparison but is instead what sort of political and social difference the actual difference makes. In this view, the ultimate goal should be to develop an understanding of inequality as the systemic subordination of certain social groups. 
Such an understanding would call for a novel conception of the nature of inequality and discrimination; and it remains for this understanding to be worked out in detail. But the contributions to this collection by Catharine MacKinnon and Iris Marion Young, both outlined in more detail below, are centrally concerned with the problem. MacKinnon examines the relationship between sexuality and inequality; Young explores the relationship of reproductive capacities to that problem. 
Some feminist work attempts to analyze the consequences of practices distinctive to women-most notably, the experiences associated with reproduction-for political and social theory. For example, it is sometimes said that women's reproductive functions, and male responses to those functions, have played a large role in the creation of a split between the public and private spheres; in the devaluation of domestic roles; in certain conceptions of the distinction between reason and passion (often described along gender lines [see Okin's contribution to this collection]); and in the emphasis, most prominent in republican thought, on the creation of public spheres for the expression of male solidarity and sometimes for the achievement of a kind of immortality. 
Virginia Held's contribution to this collection, "Birth and Death," belongs in this category. Held argues that the act of giving birth-unlike the act of dying-has often been described as an essentially natural process not involving elements of human choice. In her view, the decision to give birth is a self-conscious one over which women have frequently exercised control. In Held's view, the alternate devaluing and disregarding of the reproductive act and of reproductive choice has both reflected the social subordination of women and distorted political thought. Held contends that attention to the act of giving birth will lead to greater understanding of human experience. 
The feminist critique of universality takes the form of an emphasis on the importance of differences among social groups for political deliberation and political interaction. This critique is represented by Iris Young's contribution here, "Polity and Group Difference: A Critique of the Ideal of Universal Citizenship."Sometimes the critique of universalityis relatively specialized, emphasizing that social and legal practices are based on partial norms that they deem universal. Here some of the challenges to formal equality, noted above, become relevant. Consider, for example, the fact that workplaces, insurance policies, and educational systems tend to be tailored to male career patterns and that changes in those systems are often considered to provide "special benefits" or "affirmative action" for women. Young argues that rights sometimes thought to be "special"from one point of view might well be necessary in order to ensure equal citizenship. In this sense, and perhaps in others, the distinction between affirmative action and nondiscrimination tends to dissolve. 
In other forms, the critique of universality amounts to a challenge to contractarian approaches insofar as they suggest that unanimity or consensus might be reached by political deliberators. Sometimes the critique is an attack on political conceptions-associated with some forms of liberal, republican, and even radical thought-that emphasize the duty of the citizen to the "common good." In the face of sharp differences in social experience, the idea that political actors should look to the interests of the community as a whole seems alternately mystical, tyrannical, or perverse. For feminists in particular, the problem is that universalist claims have tended to exclude women or to make women's claims appear deviant when measured against established norms. 
This attack has some resemblance to challenges to notions of the "public interest" as those challenges appear in the work of Schumpeter and in the writings of many economists and economically oriented political scientists.7 But the goal of Young's essay is hardly to celebrate approaches to politics that seek to find an equilibrium among the prepolitical "interests" of private actors. Her purpose is instead to develop approaches to citizenship and to structure political institutions, so as to ensure that disadvantaged groups are not erased, or deemed partial and parochial in their emphasis, in politics, on private interests and private injuries. It is in this spirit that Young argues in favor of developing mechanisms to ensure group representation in political life. 
A number of questions are of course raised by proposals for group representation, including the risks of political instability, the dangers of marginalizing the disadvantaged, and the potential problem of entrenching current minorities as such. There are further questions about identifying the groups to be represented, the institutionalization of group differences, the nature of political deliberation among those differently situated, and the possibility of reaching closure. On this score, as on others, there is some tension between Young's and Okin's contributions to this symposium. 
PUBLIC/PRIVATE; COERCION AND CONSENT; SEXUALITY a) Many feminists have dealt with the allocation of social power in areas that have been studied relatively infrequently. Relations between men and women provide the foundation for an inquiry into ways of understanding such notions as coercion, power, and consent. Some of this work can be connected with various attacks, prominent in the 1970s, on pluralist conceptions of power.8 Here the problem is to explore not only how one group is able to force another to do what it wants but also how certain issues come to be put on the political agenda and, more generally, how preferences and beliefs are formed. 
Nancy Fraser's contribution to this collection, "Talking about Needs: Interpretive Contests as Political Conflicts in Welfare-State Societies," is a good example. Fraser's goal is to trace the social construction of needs: the ways in which needs come to be recognized as such, and are placed on the political agenda, as a result of the efforts and understandings of different social movements. In Fraser's view, needs cannot be seen as prepolitical or as independent of culture and politics. Fraser offers a number of illustrations, many of them coming from feminist work, of practices currently described as "needs" that have assumed that status only recently and as a result of a particular constellation of social forces. 
Fraser's essay raises two further questions, on which she touches briefly. The first has to do with the precise mechanism by which social needs are recognized as such. The second involves the normative problem of how to decide which harms-of the multiple injuries that society does or does not recognize as "needs"-ought to receive a response from the political community. Fraser's ultimate goal is to contribute to a discussion of the processes by which that question might be answered. 
b) From a slightly different direction, a large amount of feminist work has attempted to show the ways in which the private sphere contains mechanisms of oppression. The family is of course the principal example here. Frequently treated, in law and theory, as an autonomous realm deserving protection from public intervention, the family often contains a variety of mechanisms for subordinating women. Principal objects of study here include domestic violence and the allocation and valuation of work associated with child care and housekeeping. Here the traditional household, usually celebrated in communitarian terms, is subject to feminist critique. 
Much of this work argues that modes of interaction that appear consensual in fact reflect forms of social coercion. This claim fits comfortably with recent developments in social choice theory that stress that private preferences are not exogenous and prepolitical but, instead, adaptive to available opportunities.9 The phenomenon of endogenous preferences, or of preferences that are a product of limited options, finds a good test case-and strong confirmation-in studies of gender relations. That phenomenon in turn has consequences for usual understandings of autonomy and welfare, and the possible need for public intervention to support both. If preferences are adaptive to available opportunities, collective intervention designed to shape preferences might promote both autonomy and welfare.10 Catharine MacKinnon's contribution to this collection, to be discussed shortly, bears on this problem. 
c) Some feminist work asserts that the social subordination of women and sexuality are closely intermingled. In this light, it is no puzzle that a large part of the feminist movement has concentrated on the social and legal treatment of rape, prostitution, male control of reproduction, and sexual harassment. The empirical work here has attempted to show the pervasive and systemic quality of all these practices; the theoretical work considers the implications of the fact that legal and social systems tend to treat them as infrequent or marginal. Consider in this regard the fact that sexual harassment has been recognized as a legal category only in the last decade or so and that marital rape was not treated as a crime until quite recently (and even now the law here is in a primitive state). Some of the relevant work emphasizes the analogies between rape and prostitution and forms of interaction between men and women that are taken as normal and unobjectionable. The same argument is the source of the controversy over the definition of and appropriate response to sexual harassment. 
Laurie Shrage's contribution to this collection, "Should Feminists Oppose Prostitution?" deals with the question of prostitution. She argues that prostitution both reflects and perpetuates the social subordination of women. Shrage endorses and amplifies the feminist critique of the claim that prostitution is an unobjectionable exercise of contractual liberty. In Shrage's view, prostitution is a product of particular, identifiable beliefs and attitudes, and the industry of prostitution is sustained and organized by principles that "underlie pernicious gender asymmetries in many domains of our social life." 
Politicaltheory has often dealt uneasily or not at all with the relationship of sexuality to political power. Freud of course attempted to explore the problem, but his discussion of gender relations is notoriously inadequate. The most prominent modern example is the work of Michel Foucault, which stresses the variability of social mechanisms for understanding, creating, and controlling sexual behavior; but Foucault's lengthy work on the subject (astonishingly) deals not at all with questions of power as between men and women. Catharine MacKinnon's contribution here, "Sexuality, Pornography, and Method: 'Pleasure under Patriarchy,'" explores the social and political meaning and consequences of sexuality for issues of gender and equality. The essay provides the theoretical underpinnings for MacKinnon's well-known efforts to regulate pornography. 
MacKinnon's basic argument is that sexuality ought to be seen as socially constructed rather than as natural; that sexuality, as currently constituted and practiced, is a central though overlooked ingredient in the subordination of women; that theories that celebrate the liberation of sexual drives disguise this fact and often serve-in purpose, in effect, or both-to increase the sexual availability of women to men; and that the case of pornography cannot be treated as marginal or deviant but, instead, reveals something significant about the nature of sexuality and gender relations. MacKinnon's basic argument is that political theory must deal with questions of sexuality if the sources of inequality as between men and women are to be understood. The argument bears as well on the relationship of objectification to ethics and politics. 
MacKinnon's analysis helps to explain why some feminists have found the control of pornography to be an important subject. If widespread physical abuse of women occurs in and results from pornography, and if pornography plays a role in reflecting and perpetuating conceptions of sexuality that are an ingredient in sexual inequality, then efforts to understand and regulate pornography might be thought central to feminist theory and practice. 
Cheshire Calhoun's essay, "Responsibility and Reproach," deals with a problem that cuts across many of the questions discussed in this collection. That problem has to do with the attribution of responsibility or blame in "abnormal" moral contexts, in which the criteria for making moral judgments are not generally available and understood. The central case here is sexist behavior engaged in by people whose wrongdoing is widespread or even pervasive, and who are responding to widely held social norms. 
Calhoun contends that people who engage in such behavior are not themselves blameworthy but that their moral failings should nonetheless be reproached. She claims that a moral reproach is necessary in order to publicize the relevant standard and to convey the obligatory force of normative commands. Calhoun's essay-like the other contributions to this symposium-attests to the ways in which feminist work in political theory has cast light both on the social subordination of women and on the wide range of ethical and political issues that are implicated by efforts to promote equality on the basis of sex. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Is There an Unconstitutional Conditions 
I 
In a number of areas of public law, a set of issues is organized around a "doctrine" that purports to give order and regularity to problems that might otherwise be treated as discrete and unrelated. 
Ordinarily, organizing strategies of this sort are no cause for alarm; they help provide structure and direction in areas that are indeed closely connected. But on occasion, such strategies are highly misleading. By combining problems that are quite discrete, and by treating them at a high level of generality, they deflect attention from more particular considerations that ought to be the central focus of judicial attention. 
One of the most prominent examples here is the "political question doctrine" - a doctrine that is said to help courts decide when to remove themselves from nonlegal controversies. To be sure, some decisions should not be subject to judicial resolution, but not because of a unitary or general "political question doctrine."' When decisions are immunized from the courts, it is because no particular constitutional provision forbids the governmental action at issue - a point t All rights reserved. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a presentation to the Constitutional Law Section of the Association of American Law Schools in January 1989. Akhil Amar and Michael McConnell gave helpful comments on an earlier draft. 
Some of the ideas in this essay are discussed in more detail, and from a different angle, in Sunstein, Why the Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine Is An Anachronism (forthcoming). 
Doctrine?, 85 YALE L.J. 597 (1976). recognized by Chief Justice Marshall in the original decision giving rise to that doctrine.2 In resolving issues of this sort, it is far better to attend to the nature of the constitutional disability in the particular case, rather than to a supposed "political question doctrine." The question is whether the government's action violates a constitutional provision, and that question is one on the merits.3 
Similar considerations apply to the doctrine of "standing." Much of the confusion of the last generation has been a product of a belief that there is something called a unitary standing doctrine, one that is independent of the particular rights created under particular constitutional and statutory provisions. Whether there is standing depends on whether positive law has created a right to relief - sometimes a complex question, to be sure, but one that will yield different answers in different contexts. 
Much of the same is true of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine. Whether a condition is permissible is a function of the particular constitutional provision at issue; on that score, anything so general as an unconstitutional conditions doctrine is likely to be quite unhelpful. The due process clause might well, for example, forbid states from denying Medicare benefits to those who have had abortions; but if this is so, it is because the best interpretation of the clause leads to that result, and not because of anything especially revealing in the idea that some conditions are unconstitutional. The unconstitutional conditions doctrine cannot, in short, do much of the work expected of it. It is far too crude and general a way to address the multiple possible collisions between constitutional protections and the modern regulatory state. Indeed, many of those collisions have been approached in highly misleading ways, and ironically, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is the source of the difficulty. 
I will be arguing, in short, for particularism in cases involving unconstitutional conditions: for an inquiry, not into whether the greater power includes the lesser, or whether the government can do "indirectly" what it cannot do "directly," but instead into whether the particular infringement affects a protected interest in a constitutionally troublesome way, and, if so, whether the government is able to justify any such effect. In order to ask and answer these questions, it will be necessary to venture far beyond the unconstitutional conditions doctrine. 

judicial hand even if the particular case involves an otherwise plausible legal claim. 
Standing and the Privatizationof Public Law, 88 COLUM. L. REv. 1432 (1988). 
II 
We might begin to explore the confrontation between constitutional rights and government expenditures through three possible cases of unconstitutional conditions. In case one, the government makes welfare benefits available to those, and only those, who have spoken and who agree to speak favorably of the Democratic party. 
In case two, the government says that it will pay for public schools but not for private schools. In case three, the government funds all medically necessary expenditures except those associated with abortion. 
In all of these cases, government has failed to intrude on rights protected by the common law; in all of them, complaining citizens are better off with the program (even including the condition) than they would be if the program as a whole were eliminated. In all three cases, the source of the difficulty lies in the possibility that government might (a) be attempting to influence or (b) in fact be influencing the decision to exercise a constitutional right. The two possibilities are quite different. The first would point to an illicit governmental motivation: to use federal funds in a way designed to discourage people from availing themselves of a constitutional protection. The second would point to an impermissible effect: the use of governmental funds in a way that pressures or coerces the exercise of a right. 
Both of these possibilities played a large role in the original development of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine, in which the Supreme Court attempted largely to protect Lochner-like rights from invasion through the regulatory state.' In this respect, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine owes its origins to a judicial effort, in a period of transition from the common law, to protect common-law rights from a new form of interference. That effort was rooted in an understanding that such rights could be pressured by something other than common-law coercion - as, for example, when government made licenses or other benefits available on its own terms, by subjecting them to conditions that led citizens not to exercise what would otherwise be protected rights. Thus, in all three cases, it is no longer sufficient to argue: (a) that the supposedly greater power not 
Foreword: UnconstitutionalConditions, State Power, and the Limits of Consent, 102 HARV. 
L. REV. 4 (1988). Epstein's own analysis is marked above all by its foundations in a Lochner-like conception of the relationship between the citizen and the state. For a discussion, see Sunstein, supra note *. to create or to abolish the program includes the supposedly lesser power to create the program with the condition; (b) that the citizen voluntarily accepted the condition because he willingly participated in the program in the first instance; and (c) that the citizen cannot complain because the program makes him better off than he would be without it.' 
But in all three cases, what sort of help does the unconstitutional conditions doctrine offer? The doctrine operates as a shorthand response to these otherwise plausible arguments from the greater power and waiver; sometimes it provides the basis for a broadside attack on arguably unconstitutional conditions, on the theory that government cannot do "indirectly" what it cannot do "directly." But in order to resolve the three cases, or any other problem of this sort, it is necessary to ask far more particular questions about the nature of the constitutional right in the cases. 
Case one, for example, is relatively simple. The reason is that the first amendment, properly interpreted, does not permit government to pressure the right to free expression in this way. That conclusion is in turn a product of two subsidiary ideas: (1) The pressure imposed on the right to free expression through the use of monetary incentives is a constitutionally significant burden, in light of the nature of the free expression interest, which calls for governmental neutrality among different points of view; and (2) the government, in the welfare setting, does not have available to it distinctive, financerelated interests that justify the imposition of that burden. It is therefore impermissible, under the first amendment, for government to make welfare available on the basis of this kind of selectivity. 
Case two is also a simple one, at least under current law, and it goes in precisely the opposite direction. To be sure, there is, under Pierce v. Society of Sisters,7 a constitutional right to send one's children to private school. But there is no right to government funding of that right even if the government does in fact fund the public schools. For those who believe in a unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine, the different results in cases one and two must be a puzzle. The pressure exerted on the right by the government is precisely the same in both settings. Why is the government able to treat speech rights in a way that it cannot treat the right to educate one's children? 
If there is an answer, it lies not in anything with which the uncon 
simple, to explain why this is so. See Easterbrook, Insider Trading,Secret Agents, Evidentiary Privileges, and the Production of Information, 1981 Sup. CT. REV. 309. For discussion of and response to those arguments, see generally Sullivan, Unconstitutional Conditions, 102 HARV. L. REV. 1413 (1989); Epstein, supra note 5. 
[VOL. 26: 337. 1989] stitutional conditions doctrine can be helpful, but instead in the different nature of the rights in the two cases. If current law is correct, it is because the right to send one's children to private schools is a distinctive one. It might be distinctive in the sense that it is not a right to governmental fneutrality in general or in the abstract, but instead merely a right to be free from criminal coercion in the private education of one's children. On this view, the right to educate one's children does not require governmental neutrality as between public and private schools, and it does not proscribe the use of funding to pressure that choice. This may or may not be a correct interpretation of the relevant right. But if it is incorrect, it is because of nothing in the unconstitutional conditions doctrine, but instead because of something in the nature of the right. 
If this distinction between the right recognized in Pierce and the free speech right is unpersuasive, current law might nonetheless be correct for a quite independent reason. Perhaps the differential use of financial incentives in the setting of private schools is constitutionally troubling, and government must therefore come up with a powerful argument in its defense; but perhaps such an argument is available. The argument would go like this. Many taxpayers would have severe objections to the public funding of religious schools. Those objections are not only severe, but closely tied up with, and indeed are an inextricable part of, the rationale behind the establishment clause. In these circumstances, an interpretation of the right to educate one's children that would compel governmental neutrality would wreak havoc with the deeper logic of the constitutional text. Governmental neutrality would, in short, bring about violations of the establishment clause. One might add here that any government has strong and legitimate reasons to favor public over private education, in order (for example) to foster the development of an integrated national (or state) polity. These reasons may well be insufficient to permit prohibition of private schools without being so weak as to be insufficient to permit the funding of public but not private schools.' 
All this should be enough to suggest that it is at least plausible to understand the right to educate one's children in private schools as not including a prohibition on the funding of public but not private schools. If this is so, case one and case two properly come out differ 
with Professor McConnell's contribution to this symposium. See McConnell Unconstitutional Conditions: Unrecognized Implicationsfor the Establishment Clause, 26 SAN DiEGO L. REv. 255 (1989). ently. The reason lies in the distinctive nature of the constitutional rights in the two cases, and the availability of unusual justifications in case two, justifications that permit government to invoke additional considerations in its support. 
What of case three?9 Here an initial instinct would be to suggest that it necessarily falls within case one. Roe v. Wade'0 recognized a right to reproductive freedom, and that right, it would be argued, cannot exist if government is permitted to fund childbirth but not abortion. Such a distribution of financial incentives necessarily pressures the choice - particularly in the case at hand, which involves indigent women. 
This basic argument derives support from a current staple of modern unconstitutional conditions arguments - the distinction between penalties and refusals to subsidize." A refusal to subsidize, on this view, amounts to a constitutionally unobjectionable unwillingness to ensure the exercise of a right. By contrast, a penalty represents a sanction exacted by making citizens worse off than they would be if the program were not created; a penalty is therefore constitutionally suspect. In case three, it might be said, there is an impermissible penalty since government is depriving citizens of something that they would otherwise receive, that is, funding for all medically necessary expenditures. 2 
Ironically, these arguments reveal precisely what is wrong with a general or unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine; and it is possible to reach this conclusion without thinking that the arguments are necessarily wrong. There are three points here. The first is that the asserted characterization of the right in Roe v. Wade is by no means self-evidently correct. Whether the right is one to governmental neutrality, or instead to freedom from criminal coercion, is not a question that can be answered on the basis of the holding or rationale in Roe itself.' 3 That question depends on a far more complex inquiry into the best argument available for the Roe outcome. There is nothing illogical in reading Roe more narrowly, even if such a reading would be incorrect on balance. On that view, the Roe right would be akin to the right in Pierce. 
The second point is that in the setting of financial expenditures, government possibly has available to it distinctive finance-related justifications that serve to legitimate any burdens on the relevant 
!1. The distinction is made central in Harris. For a general discussion, see Kreimer, Allocational Sanctions: The Problem of Negative Rights in a Positive State, 132 U. PA. L. REv. 1293 (1984). 
right. Many taxpayers would severely object to the use of taxpayer money to fund an activity that they consider the moral analogue of murder. These objections do not have the weight that would ground a serious free exercise objection to the use of federal funds to pay for abortion. But the objections might well make it permissible - not necessary, but permissible - for government to decide not to fund abortions even if it cannot criminalize them. 
The third point is that the question whether the denial of funds for abortion is a "penalty" or a "refusal to subsidize" is both difficult to answer and - more importantly - constitutionally irrelevant. To decide the penalty-subsidy question, it is necessary to identify some status quo, or baseline, in order to conceive of the alternative universe from which the current deviation is to be measured. 4 In a period in which governmental regulatory programs interact with common-law rights in complex ways, that question is almost impossible to sort out. More fundamentally, the question whether a denial of funding operates as a "penalty" or as a "refusal to subsidize" is not, for constitutional purposes, the important one. The question is instead whether the governmental action at issue intrudes on the relevant right in a constitutionally troublesome way, and if so, whether the government has available legitimate justifications that are sufficiently weighty to justify any such intrusion. The penalty or subsidy inquiry does not help to answer this question. 
These considerations hardly supply a decisive argument in favor of government programs that subsidize childbirth but not medically necessary abortions. It might well be that the right in Roe should in fact be characterized as a right to governmental neutrality - an argument that would draw strength if one accepts the view that the Roe outcome is best understood as a case involving sex discrimination and predictable adverse consequences for poor women. 15 It might well be that taxpayers' moral objections to public funding of abortion are not, in view of the best characterization of the relevant right, sufficiently weighty to justify the intrusion. This view might be supported by analogy to cases involving speech, religious, and nondiscrimination rights, where, as a general rule, the moral objections of the taxpaying public are insufficient to permit selectivity in funding. 
These are complex questions, and they cannot be answered here. 

Duties, and the Dilemma of Dependence, 99 HARV. L. REv. 330 (1985). For present purposes, the central point is that in our three cases involving arguably 'unconstitutional conditions - under current law, the first an easy call for the citizen, the second an easy call for the government, and the third a difficult call that produced a split Supreme Court - the unconstitutional conditions doctrine has been entirely unhelpful. Cases that fall within the general category of unconstitutional conditions problems require a quite particular analysis of the nature of the relevant right. Whether there is a penalty or a subsidy is immaterial. Sometimes the government may do indirectly what it cannot do directly. The relevant cases must be argued on the merits, in terms of the appropriate conception of the relevant right; the unconstitutional conditions doctrine cannot do any of the necessary work. 
All this is not to suggest that the doctrine has served no function, and it is hardly to say that cases involving conditions on governmental programs do not call up distinctive considerations. The doctrine has been helpful in answering familiar objections to the use of constitutional review in this area, and those objections are indeed misguided.1 6 Moreover, reviews of funding programs do share distinctive common inquiries - as we have seen - into the nature of the right and the character of governmental justifications. The principal problem with the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is that it tends to focus attention away from these questions, which are the correct ones, to other questions altogether - questions that probably cannot be answered and that in any case need not be asked. 
III 
We have seen that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an awkward and crude effort to bring under constitutional scrutiny a range of measures that affect constitutional rights in serious ways, but that would not otherwise be subject to serious judicial review. 
The doctrine does help to identify a technique of burdening constitutional rights,'7 and thus to alert courts that a serious constitutional issue may be present notwithstanding both the absence of commonlaw "coercion"' 8 and the possibility that the person who has accepted both the benefit and the burden is on balance better off as a result of the deal. In coming to terms with the questions raised by the relevant cases, however, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is inadequate in two fundamental ways. 
First, it focuses attention on the largely immaterial question 
idea. see Sunstein, supra note *. whether there is a "threat" (penalty) or an "offer" (subsidy). This is an extraordinarily complex question that courts are unlikely to be able sensibly to unpack. More importantly, the question is not the one that, as a general rule, the Constitution tells courts to ask. 
Second, and most fundamentally, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine tends to lead courts to disregard the extraordinary particularity of the settings in which problems under this rubric tend to arise. Whether a condition is unconstitutional depends on whether the relevant clause, properly interpreted, makes the particular burden a constitutionally troubesome one, and, if so, whether the government has available to it - because of the setting - distinctive justifications that make its action permissible. These are not simple questions, but they are the relevant ones. We do not need an unconstitutional conditions doctrine in order to ask them. 
LOW VALUE SPEECH REVISITED Cass R. Sunstein* 
The first amendment protects speech. But what activities qualify as "speech"? The distinction between speech and conduct usefully orients the inquiry, but it is incomplete. Some "conduct" has all or almost all of the characteristics that qualify speech for special protection; consider picketing, marching, perhaps draftcard-burning. Some "speech" has few such characteristics. Consider conspiracies to fix prices, consumer fraud, a letter discharging someone from employment on racial grounds, or a threatening telephone call. A large task for first amendment doctrine is to develop criteria for deciding what is constitutionally protected "speech"-criteria that enable judges and others to decide what activities are protected by the guarantee of freedom of speech. 
Such criteria might well help judges to distinguish between "highvalue" and "low-value" expression as well. Instead of entirely excluding some categories of expression from the universe of speech, judges might conclude that some expression may be regulated on the basis of a less stringent demonstration of harm than is ordinarily required. An approach of this sort would have the advantage of forcing government to justify the imposition of restraints on speech that lies somewhat afield from the core concerns of the first amendment-or so, at least, I shall be arguing. 
In order to undertake the task of distinguishing between speech and nonspeech, or between high- and low-value speech, several things should be relatively clear. 
(1) An approach that distinguishes between constitutionally protected speech and other activities should not be taken to devalue those other activities, or even to suggest that they are less important than speech. Food, work, love, and friendship are all important; but eating, * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Mary Becker, Geoffrey R. Stone, and David Strauss for valuable comments on an early draft. working, falling in love, and making friends do not usually count as speech. 1 In order to interpret the first amendment, it is necessary to decide what activities possess the characteristics of "speech" that call for special constitutional protection. That fact does not mean that activities without such characteristics are less valuable or less worthwhile. 
A central point here is that the Constitution singles out speech for special protection, and in deciding what counts as speech, those entrusted with the task of interpretation must bring to bear the best available theory to account for that constitutional commitment as well as for the decided cases. 2 The decision to accord particular protection to "speech" may be controversial as a matter of first principles; that decision will, for some, seem an anachronistic holdover from Enlightenment rationalism, or rooted in naive understanding about the nature of communicative processes. But for those charged with interpreting the Constitution, an effort to challenge the decision to single out speech for special protection, or to adopt theories that fail to distinguish speech from other activities, would be irresponsible. 
(2) The derivation of meaning is a shared process in which both reader and text play important and interrelated roles. But for constitutional purposes, a test for "speech" that depends solely or primarily on the derivation of meaning by some or many members of the audience, 3 rather than on the nature and properties of the materials at issue, will be unsuccessful. A trip to Europe, a sale of commodities, a sip of coffee, a visit to a brothel, a purchase of beachfront property-none of these is plausibly "speech," at least in the absence of unusual circumstances; but those who watch or participate will derive some sort of meaning from all of these activities. To be sure, government might interfere with such activities for reasons that raise serious constitutional concerns;4 but to acknowledge that point is not to endorse the far more doubtful proposition that activities become speech, or high-value speech, by virtue of the fact that observers derive meaning from them. Such a test would disable courts from sensibly distinguishing between those activities that are and those that are not protected by the first amendment.5 
(3) If distinctions are to be drawn between categories of speech in terms of their centrality to the purposes of the free speech guarantee, it need not follow that government will be permitted to ban all "low-value" speech. One might, for example, conclude that some forms of expression 
I Of course government efforts to regulate the "speech" that might be involved in these activities would raise first amendment questions. 
2 It is important to recognize that the effort to develop the best theory is not untethered; it must of course take account of the constitutional tradition and of the relevant cases. 3 See Alexander, Low Value Speech, 83 Nw. U.L. REv. 547 (1989). 
4 Id. at 553 (discussion of rock formation banned because government considers its "message" to be dangerous). 
5 See STONE, SEIDMAN, SUNSTEIN & TUSHNET, CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 1201-02 (1986). may be regulated only on the basis of an exceptionally powerful showing of harm; that others may not be regulated unless the government is able to meet a less severe but still significant burden; and that still others are not speech at all and may be regulated so long as the regulation is "rational." Indeed, an approach of this sort is followed in current law. To say that some speech is low-value-for example, libel of private persons-is emphatically not to say that it is automatically subject to government regulation. 
(4) It is impossible to develop a system of free expression without making distinctions between low and high value speech, however difficult and unpleasant that task may be. Consider the alternatives. 
(a) To distinguish between high- and low-value "ideas" 6-quite apart from harms-would be inconsistent with the generally salutary constitutional commitment to the prohibition of regulation of speech on the basis of its viewpoint. 7 At least as a general rule, government ought not to be in the business of saying which ideas should be heard and evaluated by the citizenry.8 Of course some things that qualify or might qualify as "ideas" should be regulable; both child pornography and private libel might well contain "ideas." But it is far more sensible to look at the issues of harm and value, rather than to authorize government to distinguish among ideas on their merits. 
(b) It would not be plausible to base first amendment doctrine on distinctions among the audiences for speech, or to treat some categories of citizens as more trustworthy than others.9 There are no readily available criteria for making such distinctions; and any effort at distinguishing among audiences would be easy to abuse. Class or racial biases are especially likely dangers in a judicial assessment of which audiences could hear what kinds of speech; and even if biases of this sort could be avoided, others would undoubtedly intrude. Outside of unusual settings, all audiences should be treated the same. 
(c) The most plausible alternative to an inquiry into value would be to look at the question of harm alone.t 0 On this view, the question is whether the speech causes sufficient harm to permit regulation, and it does not matter what "value" the speech has. An approach of this sort would have the advantage of simplicity. It would also avoid the signifi6 See Alexander, supra note 3. 
7 See Stone, Content Regulation and the FirstAmendment, 25 WM. & MARY L. REV. 189 (1983). On some of the difficulties with the requirement of content neutrality in the context of pornography, see C. MAcKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987); Sunstein, Pornographyand the FirstAmendment, 1986 DUKE L.J. 589. 
8 In some cases, ofcourse, the risk of a hostile audience reaction is relevant to the constitutional question. 
9 See Alexander, supra note 3 at 548. 
10 Alexander favors this approach, supra note 3 at 554. See also Redish, The Value of Free Speech, 130 U. PA. L. REV. 51 (1982). cant difficulties, and the risks of abuse, involved in assessing the value of different kinds of expression. 
Such an approach would, however, impose intolerable pressures on constitutional doctrine. Consider the enormously wide range of the category of "speech," covering, for example, libel of public and private actors, pornography, political speech, commercial speech, conspiracies, bribes, threats, contractual agreements, public debates. If the question of value is put to one side, there are only two possibilities for doctrinal development, and both of them are unacceptable. The first would be to impose a relatively weak burden of justification on government, in order to allow it to regulate such harmful activities as misleading or false commercial speech, child pornography, and libel of private citizens. By hypothesis, a system looking at harm alone would have to extend that weaker burden across the board, and thus to all categories of speech. This route would, however, be singularly difficult to defend, since it would allow for public regulation of a wide range of speech-including misleading or false political speech, or libel of public officials-that, by general agreement, ought not to be subject to government control. In short, the less stringent burden properly placed on governmental efforts to regulate some forms of speech should not be extended to (for example) political debates. 
The second possibility would be to adopt for all speech a quite stringent justification requirement, one that would forbid regulation that is currently accepted, on the theory that the quite severe burden applied to political speech should be extended to (for example) commercial speech. Such a system would be equally vulnerable, for it would fail to draw lines that ought to be drawn. It is difficult to maintain that false commercial speech, libel of private figures, conspiracies, or child pornography ought to be immunized from governmental control-as in all likelihood they would be if the stringent burden properly imposed on governmental efforts to regulate political speech were extended to all categories of expression. In these circumstances, the most likely outcome of a doctrinal refusal to look at the "value" side would be that judgments about value would be made tacitly, and the articulated rationale for decisions would not reflect an assessment of all factors thought relevant by the courts. 
These conditions suggest that it would be exceptionally difficult to develop free speech doctrine without distinguishing between categories of speech in terms of their centrality to the first amendment guarantee. The most powerful argument in favor of distinguishing between high- and low-value speech is that the alternatives turn out, on reflection, to be intolerable. 
To say this is not to deny that there are serious dangers in denominating some speech as low-value. Judges may err; impermissible factors may enter into the determination; there are risks of abuse; as we will see, it is hard to develop good criteria for making the relevant distinctions. But if it is even plausible to make distinctions between high- and lowvalue speech, such an approach appears preferable to the alternatives. 
The fact that distinctions between different categories of expression-in terms of their centrality to the purposes of the first amendment-are unavoidable need not be a reason for alarm; some of the polar cases are quite easy. Speech that is intended to contribute to governmental affairs, broadly defined, unquestionably belongs in the category of high-value speech; speech that consists of unintelligible syllables does not. Intuitions of this sort are probably sufficient to resolve a broad range of cases, and perhaps to provide a workable basis for approaching the bulk of first amendment problems. 
Unfortunately, however, there will be hard cases as well, and it is difficult to develop a simple test for distinguishing between high- and low-value speech that accounts either for judicial decisions or for widely held understandings and intuitions. In these circumstances, one might base the inquiry on the decided cases, which seem to point to a somewhat unruly set of considerations. These include (1) the relevance of the speech to a principal purpose of the first amendment, the effective democratic control of public affairs; (2) the cognitive or noncognitive character of the speech, which goes to one of the central goals of free expression, which is to permit the free communication of ideas; (3) the purpose of the speaker-an idea with roots in the writing of Mill I'-which may or may not be to communicate a message; and (4) the possibility that the speech belongs in a category in which government is unlikely to be acting for constitutionally impermissible reasons or to be producing constitutionally troublesome harms. 
Ideas of this sort account for a wide range of fully plausible results. If the first amendment is designed above all to promote democratic control of government, commercial speech, for example, is far afield from its central purpose. Advertisers are not attempting to communicate a political message, 12 and government is likely to be regulating commercial speech for legitimate reasons.13 Similar ideas account for the characterization, as low value speech, of bribery, private libel, and obscenity. At least in general, all of these fall in the low-value category by reference to the four criteria. Application of factors of this sort is inevitably unruly, and makes the decision uncomfortably ad hoc; but perhaps this is the 11 See Wright, A Rationalefrom J.S. Mill for the Free Speech Clause, 1985 Sup. CT. REV. 149. 12 In some cases, ofcourse, they might be; and some kind of political message may be implicit in advertisements. In the first case, constitutional protection should attach at the highest level; in the second case, the fact of an implicit message is an insufficient reason to accord such protection. See Sunstein, supra note 7, at 607-08. 
13 It is possible, however, that restrictions on commercial speech will be sought by well-organized private groups seeking to cartelize the industry. best that a system of free expression can do in light of the overwhelming likelihood that a less complex inquiry will produce significant errors.14 
If it is necessary to develop a more concise and unitary test---one that is sensitive to the historic functions of the first amendment-perhaps speech should qualify as high-value if it expresses a point of view on a question of public importance. 15 Under this approach, expressionwhether speech or conduct-that sets out an intelligible position on a public subject is protected. On this view, Cohen v. California1,6 for example, was rightly decided. Political speeches, whatever their contentdraftcard burning; racist or misogynist tracts-all these qualify for protection, unless there is an exceedingly powerful demonstration of harm. But ordinary conspiracies, contracts, bribes, threats, publication of the names of rape victims, commercial speech' 7-and pornography 8 -can usually be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing of harm. Of course there will be hard intermediate cases, and some situations will pose unusual difficulty. But it is inevitable for, and thus no embarrassment to, a sensible system of free expression that it is unable to avoid that problem. 
In general, government may not regulate speech because it disap14 See Farber & Frickey, PracticalReason and the FirstAmendment, 34 UCLA L. REV. 1615 (1987); Shiffrin, The FirstAmendment and Economic Regulation: Away From a General Theory of the FirstAmendment, 78 Nw. U.L. REv. 1212 (1983). 
15 This test works well as a sufficient condition for protection; it is less satisfying as a necessary condition. 
It would follow from this approach that music and art are, at least as a general rule, more likely to be regulable than political speech. In the genuinely troublesome cases, however, government will in all likelihood be attempting to control those forms of expression for impermissible reasons, in which case the constitutional proscription will be triggered. 
16 403 U.S. 15 (1971). It is irrelevant here that the word "Fuck" was used during the political message; the method of communicating was one of the central features of the message. One cannot prohibit the use of expletives while holding the "message" constant. 
17 1 collapse some quite complex issues here. Government efforts to regulate all of these forms of speech might in some settings raise serious constitutional questions. For purposes of this brief essay, I am speaking of general regulation of all these forms of speech, regulation that is widely accepted. 
18 The principal point here is that most pornography does not express a point of view on an issue of public importance, any more than does a prostitute or a rape or a sexual aid. In this respect, pornography is critically different from a misogynist tract, which consists of a direct appeal on an issue of public importance, one that engages cognitive capacities. With respect to both value and harm, the fact that pornography is essentially a sexual aid substantially strengthens the case for regulation. See Sunstein, supra note 7, at 606. 
It is not an argument in favor of the constitutional protection of pornography that pornographers tend to be misogynists and that pornography tends to inculcate misogyny; the act of pimping, or of engaging a prostitute, may involve the same characteristics as pornography, but it is not by virtue of that fact qualified to the highest protection accorded to political speech. Of course regulation of some forms of sexuality may raise serious constitutional questions under the due process and equal protection clauses. See, e.g., Sunstein, Sexual Orientation and the Constitution: A Note on the RelationshipBetween Due Processand EqualProtection, 55 U. CHI. L. REV. 1161 (1988). But it is doubtful that the control of pornography, as defined in Sunstein, supra, would do so. proves of a point of view; 19 and a severe burden of justification is properly imposed on government whenever it attempts to regulate speech that bears on political affairs, broadly understood. But the constitutional commitment to free expression, and to the protection of dissent, cannot plausibly be taken to disable the government from controlling all activities that might qualify as speech. If taken to an extreme, the generally salutary antipathy to "censorship" would protect those who defraud consumers; who conspire, threaten, and bribe; who disclose to unfriendly countries plans to develop military technology; who use children to produce pornography; who disclose the names of rape victims; and who spread knowing falsehoods about private citizens. And ifjudges are unwilling to distinguish between high- and low-value speech, government will be unable to control these forms of expression without simultaneously lowering the burden of justification and thus endangering other speech that belongs at the center of constitutional concern. To draw such distinctions is not a simple task; but it is a task that a well-functioning system of free expression cannot refuse to undertake. 
19 For the basic defense, see Stone, supra note 7. See also Sunstein, supra note 7, on some of the complexities here. 
In this essay, I undertake three tasks. The first is to describe some of the difficulties of defining "benefits" in the setting of judicial review of administrative action. The second task is to offer reasons, though tentative and largely anecdotal ones, for an affirmative answer to the question whether aggressive judicial review has produced "net benefits." At the very least, I suggest, aggressive judicial review has had significant benefits in many settings. The third and final task is to outline some proposals by which to increase the benefits, and decrease the risks, of an aggressive judicial posture in administrative law. 
I. 
THE VARIOUS "BENEFITS" OF JUDICIAL REVIEW 
For those assessing the value of judicial review of administrative action, the first problem is one of definition. In this context, the criteria for evaluation are elusive, and shift dramatically with context. Even so, it is possible to identify at least four different sets of criteria, all of which have been invoked in recent discussion.' 
The most obvious goal, or "benefit," of judicial review is to increase the incidence of legality. Under this view, 2 judicial review of administrative action is necessary above all to ensure that regulatory agencies comply with congressional commands. Far from being an enemy of the democractic process, judicial review is its indispensable ally, since it ensures administrative fidelity to public desires expressed in legislative commands. A major premise of this view is that implementing agencies have an electoral pedigree inferior to that of the Congress-the constitution* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a talk delivered to the section on administrative law of the Association of American Law Schools in January 1989. 
58 VA. L. REV. 585, 591-93 (1972). 
STATES 261 (1989); see also F.A. VON HAYEK, THE CONSTITUTION OF LIBERTY 153-54 (1960). ally specified institution in the design of federal law.3 
If legality is the goal of judicial review, active judicial review might well be desirable. There are good reasons to believe that courts have a comparative advantage over agencies in deciding what the law is.4 But an increase in legality might not improve social welfare by,any measure. A statute might be foolish, for example; it might impose costs that outweigh any benefits. A possible example is the Delaney Clause,5 which forbids any carcinogens in food additives. The prohibition applies to carcinogens posing trivial risks, and for that reason it has the potential to impose costs-including harms to health resulting from the substitution of noncarcinogenic but risky substances for carcinogenic substances posing de minimis risks-that would dwarf its benefits.6 ' A court that required literal compliance with the Delaney Clause might increase legality but decrease net social benefits. 
Under a second view, the goal of judicial review is to promote efficient resource allocation.7 The principal concern here is that regulatory PoliticalDecisions, 1J.L. EcON. & ORG. 81, 91-99 (1985) (arguing for broad statutory delegation of authority to administrators). 
HARV. L. REv. 421, 464-69 (1987); for critical discussion, see Diver, StatutoryInterpretationin the Administrative State, 133 U. PA. L. REv. 549, 582-92 (1985) (favoring interpretive competence of agencies). 
If the goal of judicial review is to promote legality, an expansive interpretation of Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. NRDC, 467 U.S. 837, 843 (1984) (suggesting that courts should defer to agency interpretations of law when the statute is ambiguous or when Congress has not "directly addressed the precise question at issue"), would be a serious mistake. Courts could not defer to congressional interpretations of ambiguous constitutional provisions without grossly distorting basic principles of separation of powers. So too, judicial deference to agency views about "pure" questions of statutory meaning would upset longstanding principles to the effect that those limited by legal authority should not be empowered to decide on the scope of the limitation. Foxes, in short, should not guard henhouses. See Sunstein, supra, at 464-69. 
One might emphasize this point while at the same time agreeing that courts should defer to agency views when Congress has told them to do so, or to agency view.s on questions, including legal questions, that call for the distinctive factfinding and policymaking competence of the agency-a point that supports the result in Chevron itself. A respect for the judicial role in deciding on the scope of an agency's legal authority, for the agency's institutional competence, and for Congress' power to allocate interpretive authority, all appear to underlie the discussion in INS v. CardozaFonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987)-perhaps the most sensible treatment of these issues in the last two decades. 
21 U.S.C. ยงยง 321, 331, 342, 346, 348, 451 (1982)). 
Choice or Reasoned Adaptation to Scientific Progress?,5 YALE J. ON REG. 1 (1988). agencies might undertake action whose real-world benefits are exceeded or even dwarfed by their real-world costs, measured in economic terms. In these circumstances, judicial review might serve as a corrective. Courts might, for example, ensure against excessive intervention in the marketplace; or they might compel agencies to consider the effects of private conduct-for example, pollution-whose extremely high social costs are insufficiently taken into account by the marketplace. 
If the goal of judicial review is efficient resource allocation, that goal might be promoted as a result of judicial invalidation of agency action or inaction deemed "arbitrary" or "capricious." '8 But judicial promotion of efficient resource allocation may or may not overlap with other beneficial goals, such as compliance with a statute ("legality"). Statutory requirements sometimes promote the goal of efficient resource allocation, but frequently they are directed toward other ends, and in such cases the promotion of legality will conflict with the goal of efficient resource allocation. 
A third conception of the purpose of judicial review also focuses on real-world improvements, but selects a quite different set of goals. Under this view, 9 courts should not only promote better resource allocation in an economic sense, but might also, or even alternatively, attempt to: (a) ensure a better distribution of wealth; (b) promote the various nonmarket or noncommodity values contained in statutes that, for example, regulate broadcasting or protect endangered species and the environment; 10 and (c) work against discrimination directed at various groups, including blacks, women, and the handicapped. 
On this view, one would evaluate judicial review by asking if it brings about these various goals. Net benefits would be found when courts sensibly promote these goals; net costs would be found if they fail to do so. Here, too, the connection between legality in the sense of adherence to statute and real-world improvements is uncertain and sometimes merely coincidental. But since many statutes are in fact designed to promote goals of this sort, judicial efforts to ensure fidelity to law will often also result in practical changes in this direction. 
capricious). 
goals). 
L.J. 1537 (1983). D. 
Under the traditional view, associated most closely with the work of Kenneth Culp Davis and Louis Jaffe, the basic function of the courts might be described as the promotion of "legitimacy" in the administrative process.11 This is an ill-defined concept, but it is associated with such conventional notions as ensurance of legality, protection against arbitrariness and selectivity, promotion of procedural regularity, and ensurance against the twin evils of factional tyranny and self-interested representation. A particular fear of this view is that well-organized private groups ("special interests") often have disproportionate influence over administrative processes-a phenomenon that provides the basic insight behind the extensive literature on agency "capture." 12 
This view places great emphasis on judicial independence, which serves as an important safeguard, providing both an ex ante deterrent and as an ex post check against the domination of administrative processes by irrelevant or illegitimate considerations. On this view, moreover, an aggressive judicial role is necessary in order to introduce some of the traditional virtues of Anglo-American law into the administrative process. Here, as with the goal of legality, the "benefits" of judicial review are not evaluated directly in terms of its consequences for the world. The goals of judicial review are of a more diffuse sort, and have no necessary or linear connection with good regulatory outcomes. 
Both critical and approving evaluations of the judicial process are often confused by a failure to distinguish among these various criteria. Thus, for example, courts have been criticized for adhering to statutory text at society's expense, and at the same time for promoting social welfare at the expense of the statutory text.1 3 Courts might do an excellent job of promoting fidelity to law, but at the same time, and perhaps as a direct result, bring about a less sensible system of regulation. By the same token, courts might introduce necessary regulatory controls but do so with a weak or uncertain statutory warrant. 
In assessing judicial review, then, it is important to be careful to spell out the relevant criteria. While selection of those criteria is a value11. See K. DAVIS, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW TREATISE ยง 29.1 (2d ed. 1979); L. JAFFE, JUDICIAL CONTROL OF ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION (1965). 
seeking to determine how regulatory agencies ordinarily operate and develop to their degree of influence by private powers); P. QUIRK, INDUSTRY INFLUENCE IN FEDERAL REGULATORY AGENCIES (1981) (addressing incentives acting on regulatory agencies to adopt pro-industry policies); K. SCHLOZMAN & J. TIERNEY, ORGANIZED INTERESTS AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY (1986). 
AIR ACT (1983) (examining how federal courts have influenced policymaking in the regulation of air pollution), which, despite its numerous virtues, suffers from this problem. laden task, it is probably fair to say that both courts and observers have paid less attention than they should to the effects ofjudicial review on the real world of regulation--effects that are crucial to an evaluation of the judicial role. It is in large part because of our considerable ignorance on this score that the study of administrative law remains in a primitive state. 
II. 
THE "NET BENEFITS" PRODUCED BY AGGRESSIVE 
Whatever the relevant criteria, it is difficult to make confident statements in the abstract, about the benefits and costs of aggressive judicial review of administrative action. It is surely imaginable, in certain times and places, that aggressive judicial review will both increase illegality and decrease social welfare on any view. Indeed, one could argue that this was precisely the pattern in the period immediately before and after the New Deal, when courts invoked a principle calling for narrow construction of regulatory power. 14 
More recently, aggressive judicial review has produced regulatory irrationality in a variety of areas. Professor Mashaw has shown that the courts' simultaneous hospitality toward administrative recalls of defective vehicles and hostility toward ex ante motor vehicle regulation have pushed automobile safety regulation in peculiar directions. The net result tends toward regulation through random, ex post directives rather than through managerially coherent, ex ante controls.1 5 In the same vein, the courts' literal approach to the Delaney Clause has increased regulatory irrationality by imposing serious costs and in fact bringing about fewer rather than more improvements in safety and health.' 6 
On the other hand, it is fully imaginable that aggressive judicial review will both increase legality and improve social welfare. Commentators can invoke considerations at a high level of generality that bear on this problem, and indeed such considerations form the staple of academic authority to require company to divest labs acquired before action by Commission); FTC v. Gratz, 253 U.S. 421, 427 (1920) (meaning of "unfair method of competition" is for the courts, not the Commission, to determine). See generally Fordham & Leach, Interpretationof Statutes in Derogationof the Common Law, 3 VAND. L. REV. 438 (1950) (noting increasing reliance on statutes rather than common law), and cases cited therein. 
YALE J. ON REG. 257, 263 (1987) (arguing that judicial review is a cause of National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's shift from rules to recalls). 
108 S. Ct. 1470 (1988) (Delaney Clause does not contain an implicit de minimus exception; FDA listing decisions for Orange No. 17, with cancer risk of I in 19 billion, and Red No. 19, with cancer risk of I in 9 million, must be changed). debates on these matters. Judicial lack of accountability, the judges' ignorance of the often complex matters at hand, the delays and formality built into the litigation process, and the courts ad hoc, case-by-case approach to regulatory issues are certainly likely to impair judicial performance in overseeing administration.' 7 At the same time, judicial independence might serve as a protection against the various pressures that produce administrative illegality, injustice, and irrationality. 18 In recent years, there has been extensive documentation of the distorting effects of various pressures placed on regulators. 19 Such evidence provides at least a plausible basis to believe that courts, precisely because of their independence, will provide a crucial deterrent and ex post corrective. 20 
Pitched at this level of generality, however, considerations of this sort are unlikely to be conclusive. Much will depend on context-on the particular substantive area and on the incentives, good faith, and competence ofjudges and administrators at any particular time. An evaluation of how these considerations have in fact played out over the past, say, fifty years must await extensive empirical investigation. 
Even in the absence of a systematic treatment, however, it is possible to point to reasons to believe that aggressive judicial review, evaluated under any criterion, has been desirable in many contexts. Aggressive review serves as a powerful ex ante deterrent to lawless or irrational agency behavior. In some settings, it also strengthens both analytic processes and accountability to superiors within agencies.2 1 In this sense, judicial review should be evaluated in terms of its systemic consequences for the administrative process, which takes place in the shadow of judicial review. Those consequences frequently have been desirable, above all because of the in terroram effect of the prospect of judicial scrutiny. A brief look at recent Office of Management and Budget (OMB) reports on the regulatory programs of the United States demonstrates that judicial decrees are important in producing executive compliance with law. 22 
It is also possible to show that aggressive judicial review has often provided significant benefits both in bringing about desirable regulatory initiatives and in preventing unreasonable or unlawful regulation. Examples are numerous, and indeed on balance extraordinary. Judicial initiatives helped bring about regulation of DDT 23 and airborne lead 24; control of asbestos, beryllium, and mercury 25; regulation of atmospheric loading, which produces acid deposition, 26 disclosure requirements for hazardous chemicals 27; and regulation in the workplace of ethylene oxide and formaldehyde. 28 The federal courts also prevented the government from eliminating passive restraint rules. 29 The Supreme Court's invalidation of an extremely hasty and ill-considered decision to scrap those rules will ultimately save many lives. In the areas of communications and broadcasting, an aggressive judiciary has helped ensure high quality programming, diversity, local control, and sensitivity to the interests of minority groups.3 0 In addition, the Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) program--calling for, among other things, protection of pristine areas from environmental degradation-is a product of an aggressive fed3 1 eral court. 
PRESIDENT, REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT 50, (Apr. 1, 1986-Mar. 31, 1987) [hereinafter REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT] (discussing Department of Commerce amendments to the Coastal Zone Management Act in order to conform to Secretary of the Interior v. California, 464 U.S. 312 (1984), which held federal sale of outer continental shelf oil and gas leases not activity directly affecting coastal zone within meaning of ยง 307(c)(2)). See generally REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES, 1985-90 (filled with illustrations of regulatory initiatives undertaken because of judicial compulsion). 


preliminary injunction to prevent EPA approval of state plans that would allow air pollution to rise to secondary levels pursuant to the Clean Air Act of 1970). As we will see, the PSD program is far from perfect, see infra notes 46-52 and accompanying text; but the basic idea of protecting pristine areas is sound. 
In addition to bringing about regulatory initiatives that are desirable, courts have played an important role in ensuring against overzealous or irrational regulation. Here too, the aggregate picture is quite extraordinary and reveals judicial protections against many ill-considered intrusions. For example, courts have invalidated an indefensible secondary standard for sulfur dioxide; 32 struck down draconian regulation of the automobile 33 and cement industries; 34 required a quite sensible showing of a "significant risk" before OSHA may regulate the workplace; 35 and invalidated extremely aggressive transportation control plans written by the EPA.36 
Examples of this sort amount to little more than anecdotes. This can hardly dispose of the issue. But they are highly suggestive. They indicate that a world without aggressive judicial review might well suffer from increases in lawlessness, carelessness, overzealous regulatory controls, and inadequate regulatory protection. Aggressive judicial review has produced important ex ante and ex post benefits in numerous settings; and although the evidence is largely anecdotal and far from systematic, it must suffice absent a more sustained investigation into the issue. 
III. 
PROPOSED PRINCIPLES TO INCREASE "NET BENEFITS" 
We have seen that it is difficult to say in the abstract whether aggressive judicial review of administrative action has produced, or will produce, significant advantages. In these circumstances, a major task is to develop principles of interpretation that will improve the situation. Public law thus far lacks a set of interpretive norms that are well-adapted to the purposes, operation, and occasional failures of regulatory legislation. For this reason, the area of statutory construction of administrative behavior remains undeveloped. In this section, I outline, in summary fashion, some principles that courts might bring to bear on regulatory problems. 37 Most of these principles, which might be embodied in clear statements principles or interpretive "canons," already have some support in existing law. 
Statutes should be construed so that the aggregate social benefits are proportionate to the aggregate social costs. This principle, implicit in some of the recent cases, 38 recognizes that a proportionality principle will likely produce sensible regulation and therefore is the appropriate understanding to attribute to Congress under normal circumstances. The principle also recognizes that well-organized groups are sometimes able to obtain legislation that would not be the outcome of a well-functioning deliberative process; that bureaucratic incentives can press agencies in the direction of overzealous enforcement; that the statutory text is sometimes an impulsive reaction to short-term problems; that temporary public concern can result in hasty drafting; and that Congress is not able to focus on all applications of statutory standards. The purpose of the proportionality principle is to ensure that in the absence of a clear legislative statement, statutes are understood to impose costs commensurate with their benefits. Under this view, of course, costs and benefits need not be measured technically, in accordance with the willingness-to-pay criterion, but instead would be assessed in accordance with looser understandings about proportionality. 
The proportionality principle has played a role in two important recent decisions. In Industrial Union Department v. American Petroleum Institute, the Supreme Court interpreted the toxic substances provision of the Occupational Safety and Health Act to require a showing of a "significant risk" before the Secretary of Labor can regulate toxic substances.3 9 The plurality referred explicitly to the problem of de minimis health benefits imposed for huge expense.40 In NRDC v. EPA, the United States Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit concluded that the EPA could take account of economic and technological feasibility in setting the "margin of safety" for hazardous pollutants. 4 1 Here too the court expressed concern that an alternative interpretation might require Sunstein, InterpretingStatutesin the RegulatoryState, 103 HARV. L. REv. (forthcoming 1989) and a forthcoming book, C. SUNSTEIN, THE REGULATORY STATE (1989 draft). Both deal with numerous interpretive principles with which to approach regulatory statutes. 
Cir. 1987). 
regulation that was irrational because it imposed enormous costs for minimal gains.42 
Both of these decisions can be understood as responsive to the fact that stringent statutory requirements tend to bring about a paradoxical regime of simultaneous over-regulation and under-regulation. When the statute does not contain a proportionality principle, agencies tend to over-regulate those substances that get on the agenda; but they are simultaneously reluctant to regulate many substances at all, which therefore go entirely uncontrolled. One consequence of draconian standards is thus to leave the marketplace unregulated in many settings.43 A proportionality principle is a useful corrective. 
It follows from the proportionality principle that administrators should generally be authorized to refuse to impose costly regulations for highly speculative or minimal gains."4 Many courts have reached precisely this conclusion, holding that in the absence of a clear congressional statement, administrators may make de minimis exceptions to regulatory controls.4 5 Indeed, courts probably should require such exceptions in the absence of explicit statutory text or plausible substantive justifications to the contrary. 

OVERREGULATION CAUSES UNDERREGULATION AT OSHA 90-99 (1988); Rose-Ackerman, supra note 35, at 361-64. 
background rule seems to be in favor of de minimis exceptions. See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108, 1122 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (Delaney Clause does not contain implicit de minimis exception for carcinogenic dyes), cerL denied, 108 S.Ct. 1470 (1988); Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 360-61 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (courts should be reluctant to apply literal terms of statute to mandate pointless expenditures of effort); Monsanto Co. v. Kentucky, 613 F.2d 947, 954 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (statutory scheme permits de minimis exceptions in situations that clearly present no public health or safety concerns). See generally Gilhooley, Plain Meaning, Absurd Results and the Legislative Purpose: The Interpretationofthe Delaney Clause, 40 ADMIN. L. REV. 267 (1988) (examining rejection of de minimis exception to the Delaney Clause). 
Transp., Inc. v. Dole, 826 F.2d 60, 63 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (end use statute broad enough to include minimal "uses" of parkland); Sierra Club v. United States Dep't of Transp., 753 F.2d 120, 126 (D.C. Cir. 1985) (agency has broad discretion to waive the statutory requirement of producing an Environment Impact Statement); Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d at 360 (EPA may exempt de minimis situations). See generally Fiksel, Toward a De Minimis Policy in Risk Regulation, 5 RISK ANALYSIS 2 benzene and proposing a series of fundamental principles and societal objectives to be considered in setting similar thresholds); Mumpower, An Analysis of the De Minimis Strategyfor Risk Management, 6 RISK ANALYSIS 437 (1986) (analysis of risks and risk management decisions should include both old and new risks, as well as organizational, institutional, political, and societal factors). 
Regulation is frequently unsuccessful, or less successful than it should be, because of a legislative or administrative failure to understand the complex systemic effects of governmental controls. The problem of perverse unintended consequences is a pervasive one.4 6 A similar failure has undermined interpretive efforts by the federal courts. Consider, for example, the court's creation-in the face of an ambiguous text-of the "prevention of significant deterioration" (PSD) program in SierraClub v. Ruckleshaus.4 7 In that case, the court ruled that state implementation plans under the Clean Air Act 48 must include provisions not merely complying with national air quality standards, but also designed to prevent the degradation of air currently cleaner than required by those standards.49 One of the court's apparent goals was to ensure that federal environmental policy would protect visibility in currently pristine areas. 50 While its decision has promoted that goal to some degree, it also has been immensely expensive, has delayed the substitution of lowsulphur western coal for high-sulfur eastern coal, and has perversely protected dirty existing plants against replacement with cleaner new ones.5 1 It is far from clear that the environment is better off as a result. The Sierra Club court was unaware of these effects. Because the statutory basis for the decision was quite thin, an understanding of the environmental and nonenvironmental costs associated with the PSD program might well have led to a narrower or even contrary result. 
Similar examples are provided by the Supreme Court's OSHA decisions, in which the Court, or several of its members, appeared to assume that greater protection for workers would follow automatically from more stringent statutory requirements.5 2 As we have seen, this assumption disregards the fact that stringent requirements tend to lead an agency not to regulate at all, thus producing under-regulation. It also under-regulation); R. CRANDALL, REGULATING THE AUTOMOBILE 5 (1986) (discussing how regulation of new cars keeps old dirty cars on road longer); R. CRANDALL, CONTROLLING INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION: THE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF CLEAN AIR 41 (1984) (discussing ways in which regulation of new sources perpetuates dirty sources). 

visibility in pristine areas). 

54041 (1982) (OSHA places pre-eminent value on safe and healthful workplace, limited only by feasibilty). ignores the risk that such requirements might impose costs that ultimately will be borne by workers themselves. 
In short, courts dealing with regulatory issues commonly misunderstand the systemic effects of administrative controls, and act as if the decision will create only ex post winners and losers in the particular case. This misunderstanding leads to statutory construction that is uninformed by the real-world impact of regulation-and the real-world impact, while not by itself decisive, is frequently relevant to the question of statutory meaning. 
Legislative history is sometimes written by one or another side in a dispute over the content of the law, and the history will sometimes reflect a view whose advocates were unable to prevail during congressional deliberations.5 3 Moreover, Congress enacts laws, not the comments of some of its members about what those laws mean. All this supports a firm principle in favor of the priority of statutory text to statutory history. 
Properly understood, this principle does not call on courts to disregard the history, but counsels them to give the history limited weight in cases of arguable conflict. Consider, for example, section 111 of the Clean Air Act,54 an ambiguous provision that could be interpreted to call for administrative concentration on environmental benefits, but whose conference report language suggests an effort-unsuccessful in Congress as a whole-to convert the environmental laws into protectionism for eastern coal producers.5 5 A court that accorded great weight to the history to clarify ambiguous text might well have permitted the conference report to bring about that conversion. But a court that accepted the priority of the text would interpret it to ensure against a statutory "deal" destructive of both the environment and the economy. 
E. 
It should come as no surprise that the post-New Deal proliferation of regulatory programs has led to inconsistency and sometimes incoherence in the law. For example, the standards for regulating carcinogens (1981); see also the discussion by Justice Scalia in Scalia, JudicialDeference to Administrative InterpretationsofLaw, 1989 DUKE L.J. 510-12; see generally INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 45254 (1987) (concurrence by Scalia on congressional intent and agency interpretation of statutory language). 
are notoriously variable, calling for excessive controls in some areas and unduly weak regulation in others.5 6 The absence of centralization has led to regulatory failures in numerous areas.57 
A partial solution would call on courts to employ clear statement principles of statutory construction so as to help bring about consistency and coordination in the law. A judicial role of this sort has clear precedent both in the old idea that statutes governing the same subject matter should be construed together5 8 and in contemporary administrative law. In Bob Jones University v. UnitedStates, for example, the Supreme Court held that the Internal Revenue Service could not grant tax deductions to private schools that discriminate on the basis of race.5 9 The source of the prohibition was a statute giving deductions to institutions serving charitable purposes, but with an implicit exception when "public policy" requires denial of the deduction. There is no doubt that, when the statute was initially enacted, "public policy" did not prohibit deductions to institutions that discriminated on the basis of race. Racial discrimination in education was common at the time, and it could not plausibly be suggested that the enacting Congress thought that discriminatory schools violated public policy. The Bob Jones decision is best understood as an effort to ensure that the IRS takes account of the widespread social antagonism toward racial discrimination, since that antagonism now forms a part of the general thrust of contemporary "public policy." The underlying idea was that the statute should be construed in a way that conforms to current views about racial discrimination in education. Some cases limiting agency authority to impose significant costs for uncertain or speculative benefits can be understood in similar terms, as an effort to bring about coherence in the law and conformity with current norms and practices.60 
A large problem for modem regulation is that of obsolescence-statutory requirements that are inconsistent with new developments of fact, policy, and law. Statutes may no longer be consistent with widely held social norms. The legal background may have changed dramatically as a result of judicial and legislative innovations; the factual assumptions underlying an old statute may no longer hold. In all of these cases, the question is whether changing circumstances justify a change in interpretation. 
In the areas of banking, broadcasting, and carcinogen regulation, judicial interpretation has sometimes been a straightforward response to changed circumstances. 61 Here it is implausible to resolve statutory ambiguities by asking how Congress would have answered the question at the time of enactment. In light of the changed nature of the relevant markets, such an approach would be a recipe for absurdity. At least if the language so permits, there is no alternative but to extrapolate purposes at a certain level of generality and to assess the changed circumstances in light of those purposes. 
Consider, as a particular example, the problem of interpreting the Delaney Clause. 62 As was seen, the Clause contains a general prohibition on the use of substances that "induce" cancer as food additives, and was enacted in a period when carcinogens could be detected only at high-risk levels. The enacting Congress assumed that carcinogenic substances were both rare and extremely dangerous. Now, however, carcinogenic substances appear omnipresent, and often pose little danger. Should the statute be interpreted to permit de minimis exceptions in a time in which carcinogens can be detected at exceptionally low levels posing trivial risks to health? 
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), invoking the changed character of scientific knowledge, says yes; a federal court has said no. 63 In the court's view, the provision said what it meant and meant what it said, and that was that. But read in its context, there was no such clarity in the Delaney Clause. Congress simply did not focus on the question of de minimis risks. Indeed, it could not have done so in light of the state of scientific knowledge with respect to carcinogenic substances. It was therefore a myth to say that the congressional enactment resolved the "risk free workplace"); NRDC v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 1164 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (restricting EPA from considering cost and technical feasibility in determining what is "safe"). 
Courts in FederalBankingRegulation, 85 MICH. L. REv. 672 (1987). 
question in the face of unanticipated scientific developments. Nor can it be said that the FDA's de minimis exception "amended" the Clause. The question is the meaning of the clause in light of the new circumstances. Might the word "induce" contain a de minimis exception? The answer to that question will inevitably depend on interpretation. 
A more nuanced approach to the problem of obsolescence can be found in judicial constructions of statutes of the 1920s and 1930s requiring old-line agencies to take account of environmental concerns. 64 Here the legal background has changed so dramatically that what might seem to be a straightforward interpretation of the old statutes would produce incoherence. The problem of obsolescence also helps explain the courts' narrow construction of provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) that had not anticipated the consumer revolution in the law of products liability. 65 
Dean Calabresi has argued that courts should have the power to invalidate obsolete statutes, returning them to the legislature for reconsideration. 6 6 A judicial role of this sort would be extremely controversial, and properly so. The principal problem posed by obsolescence or changed circumstances is that it makes interpretation in the ordinary sense far more difficult. Efforts to translate statutes into new settings cannot be made simply by asking what the statute meant when it was enacted. A principle that calls for courts to exercise some creativity here provides a far less intrusive function for the courts, and it has unmistakable foundations in current law. 
CONCLUSION 
The question whether aggressive judicial review of administrative action has produced "net benefits" poses difficulty most notably because of the absence of clear criteria by which to make the assessment. Courts have the responsibility both to ensure legality and to prevent arbitrariness, and a decision to bring about compliance with the governing statute may or may not produce more sensible regulation. The absence of clear criteria and the lack of good empirical data make it exceptionally difficult to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of aggressive judicial review. In the abstract, one could imagine scenarios in which such review would be alternatively indispensable and disastrous. Nonetheless, there is some basis for believing that aggressive judicial review has, in many settings, increased the incidence of legality, prevented arbitrariness, ensured against undesirable regulation, and brought about regulatory controls that have saved lives or otherwise accomplished considerable good. 
A major gap in current administrative law is the lack of an understanding of the characteristic functions and failures of the regulatory process, and a derivative understanding of the judicial role. Sympathetic engagement with regulatory purposes, together with a solid understanding of regulatory pathologies, ultimately might lead to a set of principles by which courts could indeed bring about "net benefits" through judicial review. No one should argue that the judiciary should play the central role in ensuring legality, rationality, or justice in the administrative process. But it would be difficult to deny that a judiciary suitably sensitive to the functions and failures of the regulatory state might well make things better rather than worse. 
SIX THESES ON INTERPRETATION 
Cass R. Sunstein * 
This discussion will come in two parts. First, I will make a somewhat unconventional constitutional argument about how the privacy cases should be understood. Second, I will venture a few observations about the character of this argument and about the nature of legal interpretation. 
In essence, my substantive argument is that the Supreme Court's privacy cases should be understood as involving not only privacy, but also, and much more fundamentally, discrimination, usually on the basis of sex. The applicable constitutional provision is the equal protection clause, not the due process clause. I suggest that this claim should be understood as a legal argument; that interpretation is critical rather than conventional, and inevitably so; that the claims of legal indeterminacy depend on crudely positivist notions of interpretation; that analogies to interpretation in theology, literature, and philosophy offer limited help; and that it is time to turn away from questions about the nature of interpretation and toward more in the way of substantive legal argument. 
I 
The statute at issue in Griswold v. Connecticut forbade the use of contraceptives by married couples. The statute was defended as a means of preventing extramarital sex. Its origins suggested that it was intended to ensure that sex would occur only for purposes of procreation. 
In the real world, it is principally women rather than men who are responsible for contraception. The consequences of a prohibition on use of contraceptives are visited principally on women. A system that denies use of and access to contraceptives will disadvantage women uniquely, and relative to men, by forcing them to choose between carrying the child to term with the attendant disabilities, or having an abortion with its emotional and physical risks. 
* Karl N. Llewelyn, Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. Some of the arguments offered here are spelled out in more detail in Sunstein, Revisiting Constitutional Privacy (unpublished manuscript). Such a system calls for a powerful defense by the state. In the Griswold case, no such defense was forthcoming. 
Under current law, of course, the equal protection clause is aimed primarily at impermissible motivations, not primarily at social subordination as such. Anti-contraceptive laws do not classify on the basis of sex; it is therefore necessary to prove discriminatory motive on the part of the state. Under the best reconstruction of current law, a discriminatory motive exists if and only if a state would not have done what it did if the distribution of benefits and burdens among the relevant groups were reversed., If the state's decision would have been the same regardless of which group was helped and which hurt, it would be fair to say that it was neutral with respect to sex (or race). If the state's decision would have been different, it is infected by a discriminatory motive. This analysis of impermissible motivation has the advantage of being a fully plausible approach to the constitutional criterion of equality. 
In the context at hand, the question of discriminatory intent becomes: Would a state have imposed restrictions on the right to use contraceptives if the costs of pregnancy were visited on men rather than women? There are two possible answers to this question. The first is, Clearly no. No legislature would punish men in this way for having had sex. 
Another response is that the question is itself not susceptible to an answer. Most counterfactuals are based on situations that have some analogue in the real world. But in the counterfactual in question, the problem is that if men could become pregnant, they would not be men. The inability to become pregnant is one of the defining characteristics of being a man. In this view, the question is so speculative and otherworldly that it is not sensible even to pose it. 
Undoubtedly this view has a good deal of plausibility to it. But it also suggests reasons to be extremely skeptical about-perhaps to abandon altogether-the inquiry into discriminatory intent. In a large class of cases, the intent inquiry, phrased as an equality question, will suffer from precisely these problems. A plausible substitute for the discriminatory intent test, one also having roots in constitutional law, would ask whether the practice at issue contributed to the social subordination of a disadvantaged group. Under that substitute approach, which I cannot spell out in detail here, Griswold was rightly decided as an equality case. 
It is time to summarize what has been a quite simple point. The disabilities imposed by laws that restrict access to contracep1. I rely in the next few paragraphs on the analysis in Strauss, Discriminating Intent and the Timing of Brown, 55 U. CHi. L. REv. (forthcoming 1989). tives are visited principally on women. If social subordination is the target of the equal protection clause, such laws are presumptively unconstitutional, and the presumption cannot easily be rebutted. If the equal protection clause is aimed at discriminatory motive, there is good reason to believe that such laws are also unconstitutional. If the discriminatory intent standard is not satisfied, the problem is with the standard itself, and such laws are unconstitutional under the most plausible alternative approach as well. 
Arguments of this sort apply not only to Griswold, but to Eisenstadt and Carey as well. Roe v. Wade and its successor cases are easier in some ways but harder in others. Antiabortion statutes are of course directed exclusively at women. Thus they amount to de jure discrimination on the basis of sex. It will not do to suggest that the discrimination is merely in terms of effects. The disadvantaged class consists exclusively of women. There is authority in the Supreme Court distinguishing sex discrimination from discrimination against pregnant people, but this distinction is hard to take seriously. 
It is sometimes suggested that antiabortion laws do not treat people who are similarly situated differently; hence they are said not to discriminate on the basis of sex. But the Aristotelian criterion ("treat likes alike") is unhelpful when biological differences are at work, or when the claim is that equality requires the differently situated to be treated differently. In cases of biological difference, legal disabilities that make those differences count raise questions of discrimination, at least when the removal of those disabilities would tend in the direction of equality. If women were permitted to control their own reproductive processes, more in the way of equality would result: neither men nor women would be subject to the risk of pregnancy from sex. Antiabortion laws thus represent a legal disability that removes a possible source of equality, or that create a source of inequality. They are therefore a form of sex discrimination, unconstitutional unless this can be defended quite persuasively. 
Here too the case can be understood in terms of social subordination or, more conventionally, discriminatory intent. There is no doubt that compulsory childbearing is an element of the social subordination of women, imposing on them a burden nowhere imposed on men; and the burden has significant consequences in the real world. Under an intent test, the simple point is that it is highly doubtful that antiabortion laws would exist if men could become pregnant. If this conclusion is to be resisted, it is because the question is itself an implausible one, not susceptible to reasoned answer; and in that case we have reason to reject the test itself. 
Even if the case is understood in this way, it is not clear that Roe was rightly decided. Perhaps the state could justify the disability placed on women as a means of protecting an extremely important interest: fetal life. But the absence of the imposition of any comparable burden on men, and the real-world consequences of selective abortion regulation, increase the state's difficulties in defending its statute. Selective restrictions of abortion, varying from one state to another, would produce an economically and racially skewed system that would preserve far fewer fetal lives, and impose more disabilities on women, than might be expected. 
I might add that the central problem in Bowers v. Hardwick was also one of equal protection. Justice Stevens rightly struck this theme in his dissent. Prohibitions on homosexual conduct deny to gay people sexual liberty that the majority allows to itself: it is principally for this reason that anti-sodomy laws are constitutionally problematic. 
II 
What does it mean to say that the argument just offered is a constitutional argument? In what sense do arguments of this sort represent "law"? Notably missing from the argument is explicit emphasis on some of the conventional sources of constitutional argument-language, history, structure. On the other hand, the argument is not simply moral theory or normative argument in the abstract. The claim that the privacy decisions should be understood as involving sex discrimination is not a claim that the best political theory would understand them as such. The claim is instead that the equal protection clause is best interpreted to treat the cases in these terms. That claim in turn depends on a theory of the meaning of the notion of constitutional equality. That theory attempts to link race and sex discrimination-understanding both practices, for constitutional purposes, as a reflection either of a kind of prejudice or of social subordination. The argument offered above receives some support from cases suggesting that neutrality as between blacks and whites and women and men is a constitutional requirement, at least outside of the setting of affirmative action. It is buttressed as well by cases suggesting that the equal protection clause is designed to combat social subordination. 
Considerations of this sort lead me to six basic claims about constitutional interpretation. 
"perfectionism"-embodied perhaps in the idea that the Constitution should be interpreted so as to coalesce with the best political and moral ideals-and "hard law" approaches to constitutional law is based on confusions that might be cleared up by paying attention to actual constitutional argument. It would be a large mistake to suggest that constitutional claims of the sort made here-even if,for example, the intent of the framers, narrowly understood, is put to one sideput everything up for grabs. Whether the argument is to be accepted or rejected will depend on the reasons offered in its behalf. Those reasons-as in Brown v. Board of Education-involve the meaning of constitutional equality in light of the decided cases and the appropriate conception of the constitutional text. To ask whether Brown is "hard law" or personal preference is to assume a dichotomy that misdescribes the process. The same is true of constitutional argument quite generally. 
sense-as understood in the common law and in many cases of statutory construction-and constitutional law as represented in arguments like that offered above. The sources of legal argument are in both cases the same, broadly speaking. The principal difference is that institutional constraints make the Supreme Court quite reluctant to invalidate legislative and executive decisions, and properly so. Moreover, precedent plays a different role in constitutional and common law cases; there are other differences as well. But in terms of interpretive methodology, there is no sharp break. 
understood, misconceives the process of constitutional argument (and legal argument generally). I assert that the argument offered above is correct. So to assert is not to deny that the argument depends partly on judgments of value. It is sometimes said, as against interpretive approaches to law, that if something depends on judgments of value, all bets are off. But this idea turns on crudely positivist notions of social science. The argument made above is not in any simple sense a mere assertion of personal preference. If it is wrong, it must be because constitutional argument, properly understood, makes it wrong; and that is a question that must be discussed. 
the one hand and religious interpretation, literary criticism, and moral argument on the other. In some respects these analogies may be illuminating. But one cannot think about questions of interpretive practice in the abstract. The appropriate nature of interpretation turns on the purposes for which one is interpreting. Law is coercive; federal judges are unelected; some sources of interpretation are permissible and others are not; the Supreme Court operates in a highly pluralistic society; the rulings of the Court are authoritative-all of these features distinguish legal interpretation from interpretive practices in literature, theology, and philosophy. 
and this is inevitable. It is often misleading or unhelpful to understand legal interpretation as an appeal to an "interpretive community" or to conventional understandings of what words mean. The interpretive community is usually quite diverse. There is no conventional understanding of whether the equal protection clause is violated by a law banning abortion. The courts must choose among competing plausible understandings. But to repeat: to say this is not to say that judges are at sea, or that there are not right and wrong answers. And it is important to emphasize that correctness and incorrectness will be highly contextual. The privacy cases raise equal protection issues only contingently; they might be analyzed quite differently in a world of gender equality. 
of whether constitutional interpretation is law, and more attention to how constitutional argument operates in concrete cases. A related point: What is needed is more and better in the way of substantive constitutional argument. The privacy cases, I claim, involve impermissible discrimination. Why should they not be understood in those terms? 
I am grateful to the editors of the Journalfor inviting me to reply to Professor Chevigny's thoughtful response' to my essay in these pages. 2 I find myself in agreement with much of Professor Chevigny's argument. A purely Cartesian account of human thought would indeed be hard to sustain. Human beings do not approach problems linearly or through propositions alone. Drives, selective empathy and identification, heuristics of various sorts, prior experience'and beliefs, desires, recognizable patterns, and various verbal and nonverbal cues also play a crucial role. Moreover, much speech with noncognitive components is entitled to the highest degree of constitutional protection. Political speech, for example, frequently appeals to the heart as well as to the head. The fact that an appeal is emotionally loaded is hardly a good reason to allow the government to control it. 
Notwithstanding these points, it would, I think, be a mistake to abandon the view that some narrowly defined categories of speechthreats, involuntary hypnosis, and most notably, for present purposes, pornography-merit less than the usual protection, and precisely because of the way these kinds of speech communicate their "message." My claim comes in two simple parts. (1) Some narrowly drawn categories of speech may be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing of harm-a proposition that is in fact a staple of current first amendment doctrine. (2) To decide whether speech falls within those categories, it is relevant whether the material in question appeals to cognitive or noncognitive capacities. I arrive at this conclusion through two different routes. 
First: I think Professor Chevigny overstates his case. The distinction between cognitive and noncognitive speech is not "dangerously incoherent."' 3 Indeed, Professor Chevigny's own terms suggest that he believes that the distinction is intelligible, at least in the important sense that it is possible to identify polar cases. For example, he distinguishes * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
between "the most professorial" and the "most 'intuitive' ,,;4 between "propagandistic persuasion" and other kinds of thought;5 between "prejudgments ...in patterns" and "logic"; 6 between "arous[al]" and "abstract" argument. 7 To be sure, Professor Chevigny often invokes these distinctions to suggest that they are less crisp and clear than we normally recognize-a claim I accept-but it is hard to read his essay without getting the sense that it would be difficult indeed to proceed without distinctions of this general sort. For this reason, Professor Chevigny's colleague is on to something true and important when she says, in response to his essential argument, that what makes pornography different is that people "get off on it." But more on this below. 
More fundamentally, the proposition that "our judgments [appear] 'detached' or contemplative, but they are as much rooted in our prejudgments as are snap decisions," 9 is not merely a counsel of despair. This proposition-to which I very much doubt Professor Chevigny entirely subscribes-is also antithetical to the basic logic of a system of free expression, which places a high premium on the process of discussion and deliberation among people with different views. If judgments, contemplative judgments, snap judgments, and prej.dgments are essentially all one, it will not be easy to specify the sorts of values our system of free speech should serve. Indeed, common practices of deliberation, communication, change in perspective, and learning will be hard to sustain. 
In any case, Professor Chevigny's effort to collapse the distinction between the cognitive and noncognitive is emphatically not the lesson of the various writings on which he relies. Those writings convey no single message, but make a variety of quite distinct claims, some of them fundamentally at odds with Professor Chevigny's position. Either separately or together, they do not support Professor Chevigny's effort to collapse the distinction between reasoned judgments and bare intuition. 10 
or 'detachment' because they are the principal tools we have."). The same position-a form of conventionalism--can be found in S.FISH, DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY (1989); it is criticized in Sunstein, InterpretingStatutes in the RegulatoryState, 103 HARV. L. REV. - (forthcoming 1989). 
that people use in evaluating probabilities. JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES (D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, A. Tversky eds. 1982). Their goal is to show how rationality breaks down, or is compromised, in different settings; they do not identify the snap decision with the considered judgment, or suggest that the cognitive/noncognitive distinction is incoherent. Indeed, the exact opposite is true: the introduction to the very volume on which Professor Chevigny relies 
An effort to collapse the distinction between the cognitive and noncognitive would also be wildly untrue to human experience, in which prejudgments and uninformed intuitions are subject to various forms of testing and reassessment during the process of making a decision."1 The most obvious examples here involve means-end rationality of the simplest sort, in which people ask themselves whether a particular course of action will in fact produce the goals they seek, or whether there are superior alternatives. It would be peculiar to denigrate the role of "logic" here, and snap judgments are often reassessed. Modern social science, moreover, has provided extremely helpful information on such issues.12 The cognitive testing of prejudgments occurs in other contexts as well. Values themselves emerge partly through a process of deliberation. 
All this suggests that the distinction between the cognitive and noncognitive is not incoherent; we can distinguish between forms of expression based on their appeal to different capacities. To say this is not to deny that communication frequently involves noncognitive elements, 13 and it is not to claim that communication is ever purely cognitive or that the presence of noncognitive elements removes speech from first amendment protection. 14 Indeed, the cognitive/noncognitive distinction should arise only infrequently in first amendment cases, as in fact it does. 15 But the question remains whether first amendment doctrine ought to treat some forms of speech-threats, assaults, some pornography--differently says that some such heuristics "lead to severe and systematic errors." Id. at 3. A considered judgment necessarily depends on a belief in logic, and that belief underlies most of the modern work in social psychology on heuristics and biases. See also J.ELSTER, SOLOMONIC JUDGMENTS ch. 1 (1989) (discussing breakdowns in rationality). 
I cannot deal with Professor Chevigny's various other sources in this space, but one of the mistakes in his analysis, I think, is to take what is an essentially descriptive work about mental processes-showing various cognitive breakdowns and complexities-as support for the quite different claim that moral or constitutional theory ought not to distinguish between the cognitive and the noncognitive, or that such a distinction is "incoherent." Chevigny, supra note 1, at 422. 
state reached "after a person has weighed various proposed conceptions and he has either revised his judgments to accord with one of them or held fast to his initial convictions (and the corresponding conception)). Education in general, including legal education, involves precisely these sorts of processes. See M. NUSSBAUM, THE FRAGILITY OF GOODNESS: LuCK AND ETHICS IN GREEK TRAGEDY AND PHILOSOPHY (1985). 
healthnot to mention pornography-should be based on a careful understanding of the likely effects of different enforcement strategies. See, eg., Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics-and the New AdministrativeLaw, 98 YALE L.J. 341, 354-60 (1988) (well-informed policy analysis demonstrates that occupational safety and health regulations poorly achieve democratic government's goals of redistribution and aid to working people). 
from others because of the way they communicate their message; and it is to this question to which I now turn. 
Second: Those interpreting the first amendment must distinguish between activities that count as "speech" and those that do not. That task is hard enough, but a system of free expression must also distinguish between speech that is and is not central to the purposes of the free speech guarantee. This latter task-to set out categories of "low value" and "high value" expression-is crucial to modern first amendment doctrine; indeed, judge-made doctrine could hardly function without it. 16 
Unless I misread him, Professor Chevigny's approach would make it difficult or impossible to distinguish between activities that count as speech and activities that do not; his approach also would make it hard to distinguish between low- and high-value speech. I am confident that Professor Chevigny would not claim that a long look at a rock formation, a visit to a prostitute, or a summer vacation in Paris, count as constitutionally protected speech-but all of these activities are subject to precisely the same sorts of mental intermediation that Professor Chevigny treats as characteristic to all forms of speech. If so, Professor Chevigny will be forced either to assimilate a quite dazzling range of activity to the category of constitutionally protected speech-an implausible innovation, I think, on existing doctrine-or to rely on the discredited and untenable distinction between "speech" and "conduct."' 7 
In brief, the first amendment makes it necessary to identify the distinctive characteristics entitling "speech," and not other forms of human experience, to constitutional protection. Any approach that refuses to undertake such a task will be at best incomplete and more likely a muddle. And any approach that does undertake this task will probably conclude that speech is protected at least partly because it involves cognition. In the public realm, cognition-understood to involve deliberative capacities of a wide-ranging sort-provides a central clue to the American commitment to self-government through political processes; and it is here that a central purpose of the first amendment can be found.' However oversimplified the Enlightenment understanding of 
(1948); J. ELY, DEMOCRACY AND DISTRUST 112 (1980) (must minimize assessment of message's danger if first amendment is to serve its central function of ensuring open political process and dialogue). these problems might be, I remain unconvinced that a sensible system of free expression must treat violent pornography in the same way that it treats political speech, or the works of Albert Einstein. 19 
