NO. 8 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
................................. 2072 * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Eric Braun, Stephen Gilles, Larry Kramer, Larry Lessig, Michael McConnell, Geoffrey Miller, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for helpful comments on a previous draft. Simon Steel provided valuable research assistance and helpful comments. For financial support, I am grateful to theJames H. Douglas,Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. 
Governmental Bias ................................... 2115 F. Norms Designed to Protect Legislative Processes ...... 2116 G. Norms Against Regulatory Irrationality ............... 2116 Conclusion .................................................... 2119 
INTRODUCTION 
Throughout its brief history, administrative law has often been concerned with the question whether the name of its own subject is an oxymoron. We might distinguish among three positions on that question. The first treats law and administration as largely incompatible; the second sees traditional legal checks as a bulwark against administrative tyranny; the third suggests that these traditional checks must be adapted to the values, functions, and failures of the administrative state. 
The incompatibility of law and administration was a prominent theme during the 1920s and the New Deal period, which produced a fundamental reformation in the structure of American constitutionalism.' Indeed, the creation of the administrative state was largely a selfconscious repudiation of legalism. The New Deal reformers believed that modern problems required institutions having flexibility, expertise, managerial capacity, political accountability, and powers of initiative far beyond those of the courts. On this view, the appropriate response of the legal system to the rise of administration is one of retreat.2 
The view that legal checks, in their traditional form, are an indispensable constraint on regulatory administration played a large role in the constitutional assault on the administrative state 3 and, in more modest form, helped give rise to the Administrative Procedure Act ("APA") 4 in 1946. 5 This view can also be found in the old idea, per1990] haps enjoying a renaissance, that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed. 6 On this account, legal checks of the pre-New Deal sort are a crucial mechanism for domesticating regulation by limiting governmental interference with private markets and by promoting a range of original constitutional goals. Hearing rights, independent judicial interpretation of law, separation of functions, and procedural safeguards are all necessary quid pro quos for the creation of administrative agencies combining traditionally separated functions and exercising broad discretionary authority.' 
A number of observers have argued that law should continue to play a large role in the administrative state, but that it must be adapted to take account of the new forms and values represented by the rise of social and economic regulation.8 On this view, regulatory controls protecting interests such as environmental quality, nondiscrimination, safe work places, and fair trade practices should be treated hospitably by the legal culture. This view can be found in a number of ideas: that private law principles ought not to play a large role in administrative law; that courts should attempt to prevent arbitrary or overzealous regulation, but also to help bring about regulatory controls when they are legally required; that courts should attempt both to promote the goals of regulation, understood in a public-regarding way, and to ensure against its pathologies. Here the relationship of law to administration is neither acquiescence nor hostility but instead adaptation. 
All of these views have played a large role in legal developments of the last two decades. In particular, the view that law and administration (1946); Sherwood, The Federal Administrative Procedure Act, 41 Am. Pol. Sci. Rev. 271, 271-73 (1947), and sources cited therein. See generally Verkuil, The Emerging Concept of Administrative Procedure, 78 Colum. L. Rev. 258, 268-74 (1978) (discussing the Walter-Logan Bill, an earlier proposal to limit administrative agencies that laid the foundation for the APA). 
Consider in this regard Roscoe Pound's claim that autonomous administration is a "Marxian idea" or a system of "administrative absolutism," in Dodd, Garfield, Maguire, McGuire & Pound, Report of the Special Committee on Administrative Law, 63 Ann. Rep. A.B.A. 331, 339-40 (1938). 
Law, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 438,440-41 (1950). For cases suggesting a possible modern revival of narrow interpretation of regulatory statutes, see Independent Fed'n of Flight Attendants v. Zipes, 109 S. Ct. 2732, 2735-37 ( attorneys' fees provision); Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 109 S. Ct. 2115, 2123-27 ( Pennhurst State School & Hosp. v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 24-25 ( construing Developmentally Disabled Assistance and Bill of Rights Act). 
§§ 551-706 (1988), and its history, see supra notes 4-5. 
Rev. 363, 364-65 ( Quasi-Constitutional Law in Judicial Review of Environmental Decisionmaking: Lessons from the Clean Air Act, 62 Iowa L. Rev. 713, 714 (1977); C. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution 227-33 (1990). are incompatible has enjoyed a revival-ironically, mostly at the hands of people with little sympathy for regulation in general or the New Deal reformation in particular.9 This view can be found in the revival of serious limits on standing to review administrative action, on reviewability of agency inaction, and on the courts' ability to impose procedural requirements beyond those in the Administrative Procedure Act.' 0 But of all of the Supreme Court's decisions raising issues of this sort, by far the most important is Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense 
directly addressed the precise question at issue," courts should accept reasonable administrative interpretations of law. 12 The Chevron principle means that in the face of ambiguity, agency interpretations will prevail so long as they are "reasonable." This principle is quite jarring to those who recall the suggestion, found in Marbury v. Madison 13 and repeated time and again in American public law, that it is for judges, and no one else, to "say what the law is."1 4 But it is also strikingly reminiscent of the New Deal enthusiasm for agency autonomy and the New Deal belief in a sharp disjunction between the realm of law and the realm of administration. 15 In view of the breadth and importance of the decision, it should be unsurprising that the case has been cited limit intervention in agency process to protection of individual rights to liberty and property, rather than considering policy arguments of various interest groups). An exception isJ. Mashaw & D. Harfst, The Struggle for Auto Safety (1990), which argues that legal checks have slowed down desirable regulation; see also Strauss, Considering Political Alternatives to "Hard Look" Review, 1989 Duke LJ. 538, 544 (arguing against judicial "hard look" because of availability of political safeguards). 
It is not surprising that many commentators with little sympathy for regulation recently have adopted the view that law and administration are incompatible. Since the 1980s, the Republican party, enthusiastic for deregulation, has occupied the executive branch and thus dominated federal agencies. The majority in Congress generally has been Democratic and more receptive to social and economic regulation. Part of the debate over Chevron undoubtedly turns on competing views about regulation, and the outcome of that debate will have consequences for the scope of regulatory intervention. The reach of Chevron should depend, however, on broader institutional considerations, not on political alliances, which may be short-term. 
Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 837-38 ( Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 435 U.S. 519, 546-49 (1978) (additional procedural requirements). 

Brown-PacificMaxon, Inc., 340 U.S. 504, 507-08 (1951) (characterizing agency determination of law as one of fact in order to support deference to agency); Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402, 411 -12 (1941) (deferring to agency interpretation of law). 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2074 1990 more than 1000 times since its publication in 1984.16 Chevron promises to be a pillar in administrative law for many years to come. It has become a kind of Marbury, or counter-Marbury, for the administrative state. 
Perhaps more importantly, the decision has established itself as one of the very few defining cases in the last twenty years of American public law. Chevron defines a cluster of ideas about who is entrusted with interpreting ambiguous statutes and, less obviously, about what legal interpretation actually is. t7 In its allocation of governmental authority and in its production of outcomes in the real world, the importance of the case far exceeds that of the Supreme Court's more celebrated constitutional rulings on the subject of separation of powers in the 1980s, probably even if all of these are taken together.1 8 In an extraordinarily wide range of areas-including the environment, 19 welfare benefits, 20 labor relations, 2 ' civil rights, 2 2 energy, 2 3 food and drugs,2 4 banking,2 5 and many others-Chevron has altered the distribution of national powers among courts, Congress, and administrative agencies. 
To say this is not to say that Chevron is self-applying. As is usual with important rulings, the case raises at least as many questions as it answers. The Court's reasoning has been subject to sharp criticism, 2 6 and it would not be altogether surprising to see departures from a broad interpretation of Chevron. Indeed, the decision's own author, Justice Stevens, has suggested a relatively narrow reading. 2 7 Perhaps the principle of deference will apply only when the agency is carrying out delegated lawmaking authority. 28 Perhaps the principle applies only to cases calling for the agency's specialized fact-finding and policymaking competence, most notably those involving applications of law to fact, rather than pure questions of law.2 9 Perhaps an agency's views about its own jurisdiction will have little or no weight, or perhaps, more generally, an agency view will not warrant deference when its self-interest is conspicuously at stake.3 0 
In this Article, I examine a range of questions about the rationale and reach of Chevron. My most general goal is to give the decision its appropriate place in mediating the relationship between law and administration. To carry out that task, it will be necessary to explore quite general questions about the relationship between the original constitutional structure and modern regulatory government. 
of the initial conflicts between law and administration and examine the role of Chevron in reconciling these conflicts. In Part II, I explore Chevron's reach, treating the case as if it set forth the only applicable interpretive principle and discussing the limitations of that principle. My principal claim here is that Chevron is best defended as a sensible reconstruction of congressional instructions in light of the relevant institutional capacities, and that this understanding requires certain limitations on the Chevron principle as much as a general endorsement of the principle itself. Most important, I argue that because Chevron applies only in cases of congressional delegation of law-making authority, Administrative Interpretation of Statutes: An Analysis of Chevron'sStep Two, 2 Admin. LJ. 255, 260-61 (1988); Farina, Statutory Interpretation and the Balance of Power in the Administrative State, 89 Colum. L. Rev. 452, 475-78 ( Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv. L. Rev. 405, 444-46 ( 
the Court's decision to defer to the Food and Drug Administration in Young v. Community Nutrition Inst., 476 U.S. at 981, was the source ofJustice Stevens's dissatisfaction with the broadest understandings of Chevron. See Young, 476 U.S. at 984-88 (Stevens, J., dissenting). 
precondition to deference under Chevron is a congressional delegation of administrative authority."); Crandon v. United States, 110 S. Ct. 997, 1011 (1990) (Scalia, J., concurring in thejudgment); Monaghan, Marbury and the Administrative State, 83 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 25-28 ( Inc. v. NRDC, 87 Colum. L. Rev. 986, 993-95 ( accompanying text. 
at 262-63 (court has reviewing role in "Statute-defining" but not in "Statute-applying"); infra notes 111-120 and accompanying text. 

HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2076 1990 agency interpretations in a number of contexts are not entitled to deference at all. 
In Part III, I deal with a problem that has only begun to be addressed in the courts. That question involves the relationship between the Chevron principle and other prevailing norms or principles of statutory construction.3 1 What is a court to do when an administrative agency interprets an ambiguous statute in a way that conflicts with an established interpretive principle?3 2 The question is of both considerable theoretical interest and immense practical importance. If Chevron allows agency interpretations to defeat well-established interpretive principles, it will indeed have worked a revolution in the law. 
In Part III, I contend that many interpretive principles serve an important separation of powers function by requiring legislative rather than merely administrative deliberation on certain questions. For this reason, the Chevron principle ought not to be understood to overcome all otherwise applicable interpretive norms, though some of these norms are in fact defeated by Chevron. 
many of its applications, Chevron is a salutary recognition of a largescale shift in the allocation of authority within American institutions. It embodies, in those applications, a plausible reconstruction of congressional desires and a sound understanding of the comparative advantages of agencies in administering complex statutes. At the same time, Chevron is in tension with deeply engrained ideas, traceable to the earliest days of the American republic, to the effect that those who are limited by law ought not to be entrusted with the power to define the limitation. But if other interpretive norms counter the Chevron approach in contexts in which the risks are especially serious, it may be possible to reconcile that approach with principles of separation of powers and statutory construction that are both time-honored and entitled to current respect. An effort to explain the relationship between Chevron and other interpretive principles is therefore part of the continuing and far larger enterprise of sorting out the relationship between the original constitutional framework and traditional legal constraints accompanying text. For general discussion, see Eskridge, Public Values in Statutory Interpretation, 137 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1007, 1019-33 ( Indeed, it is mistaken to suggest that language and history exist independent of interpretive principles. The very notion of statutory text cannot make sense without simultaneous reference to principles of statutory construction. See infra note 159. 
agency interpretation by using principle against interpreting statutes to apply retroactively); DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Bldg. & Constr. Trades Council, 108 S. Ct. 1392, 1404 (1988) (defeating agency interpretation by using principle against interpreting statutes to raise constitutional doubts); Michigan Citizens for an Indep. Press v. Thornburgh, 868 F.2d 1285, 1292 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (allowing agency interpretation to override principle calling for narrow interpretation of exemptions from antitrust law), aff'd mem., 110 S. Ct. 398 ( 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2077 1990 on the one hand, and, on the other, a regulatory state that was intended in large part to displace them. 
I. COURTS, ADMINISTRATION, AND THE NEW DEAL 
In this Part, I undertake two tasks. First, I outline the origins of the perceived tension between law and administration, and I explore various efforts by courts to mediate that tension in the wake of the New Deal. Second, I discuss the origins and setting of the Chevron principle, attempting to defend that principle by reference to certain understandings about both the administrative state and the nature of statutory interpretation. 
Before the rise of the regulatory state, the allocation of authority between the executive branch and the judiciary was relatively clear: it was for the courts, not the executive, to "say what the law is,"'3 3 at least in litigated cases. This understanding extended to interpretation of statutes no less than to interpretation of the Constitution.3 4 Most statutory disputes did not involve the executive branch as a party. Since government almost always acted without the mediation of a policy-making, fact-finding administrative agency, it was only natural that questions of statutory meaning would be decided by the courts. And when the executive branch was a party, it was treated like any other litigant in the sense that its own views would not be entitled to special weight. 35 
The judicial power of interpretation existed even when the task of resolving ambiguities depended not only on statutory language and history, but also on assessments of what sort of approach would produce rationality or justice in federal law. When traditional sources of interpretation left doubt, ambiguities were sometimes resolved by precisely these assessments.3 6 To be sure, assessments of this sort called for judicial inquiries into both policy and principle. But these inquiries were not especially troublesome, forjudge-made regulatory principles-embodied in the common law of torts, contracts, and property-had been woven into the fabric of American public and private law from the out1990] set. Statutory interpretation that involved a measure of policy-making discretion existed comfortably in a legal order in which policy frequently had been determined by the judges.3 7 
All this was changed by the creation in the twentieth century of a massive administrative apparatus, which was of course a self-conscious repudiation of regulation through the judiciary. For the twentieth century reformers, courts lacked the flexibility, powers of coordination, initiative, democratic accountability, and expertise necessary to deal with complex social problems.3 8 The administrative framework resulting from these reform efforts disrupted every essential element of American constitutionalism, including its three cornerstones: The original conception of individual rights, the system of checks and balances, and 3 9 federalism. 
Perhaps the most fundamental point is that the new framework called into question the original understanding that individual rights lay principally in immunity from governmental constraints.40 For the New Dealers, individual rights were in fact a product of legal decisions; they were hardly prepolitical or even "negative." Having rejected the view that the common law system was part of the state of nature, the New Deal reformers saw government action as a necessary guarantor of economic productivity, distributive equity, and even rights, properly only intermittent statutory interference, it is misleading to suggest, as some do, see, e.g., J. Rabkin, supra note 9, at 6-18, that the period ofjudicial lawmaking is a creature of the late twentieth century. Of course the use of the Constitution as a source ofjudge-made law raises quite different questions from the use of the common law, especially because the former is much more difficult to correct through the political process. 
State: The Expansion of National Administrative Capacities, 1877-1920, at 253-55, 263 (1982). 
(chronicling New Deal programs and criticisms against them by defenders of traditional conception of the American polity); R. Hofstadter, The Age of Reform 300-28 (1955) (comparing political thinking of New Deal, populism, and progressivism); B. Karl, The Uneasy State 128-29, 180-81 ( constitutionalism was averted during President Franklin Roosevelt's second term); J. Patterson, Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal (1967) (analyzing federalstate relations in the 1930s); J. Patterson, The New Deal and the States: Federalism in Transition 194-207 (1969) (detailing changes in state government during New Deal); see also Ackerman, Constitutional Politics/Constitutional Law, 99 Yale LJ. 453, 510-15 ( Reconstruction era); Sunstein, supra note 1, at 425-30 (describing problems in administrative state, and arguing for system of "aggressive legislative, judicial, and executive control" to reproduce safeguards provided by original constitutional framework). 
Of course regulatory programs, and administrative law, predated the New Deal. See S. Skowronek, supra note 38, at 165-211, 248-84. But it was the New Deal that signalled a large-scale reformation of the constitutional framework. See T. Lowi, The End of Liberalism 273-74 (2d ed. 1979). 
note 8, at 19-24, and Sunstein, supra note 1, at 437-52. understood. In these circumstances, the common law catalogue of private rights was inadequate because it included both too much and too little-too much in the way of protection of rights of property and market ordering; too little because it excluded rights of economic security deemed indispensable in the wake of the Depression. 
Institutional lessons followed from these substantive claims. Traditionally separated powers and the system of checks and balances seemed an obstacle to the enactment and implementation of protections at the national level. New governmental bodies- combining powers and not subject to the constraints of checks and balanceswere necessary to carry out the agenda of the New Deal. Far from being a valuable safeguard against national tyranny, federalism appeared to be a faction-driven obstacle to necessary social change. So too, traditional legal constraints on administration seemed to defeat the goal of providing new entities with unique self-starting capacities, a high degree of democratic accountability, and, not incidentally, enthusiasm for the new regulatory missions set for the national government by Congress and the President. 
It was inevitable that this set of claims-the continuing source of most major debates in American public law-would ultimately draw into question the idea that interpretation of regulatory statutes was for the judiciary alone. Indeed, during the constitutional and nonconstitutionaljudicial assault on administration, independent judicial interpretation of law was seen as a constitutional requirement under article 111.41 Judicial review was thought to serve identifiable substantive goals as well. Invoking the principle that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed, 42 and insisting that interpretation of law was for judges, courts often sharply circumscribed administrative power by drawing on principles of private autonomy and free markets that regulation was intended to displace.43 
The idea that courts, and not administrators, were responsible for discerning the meaning of statutes seemed to win legislative endorsement through the enactment of the APA in 1946. 44 That statute was a compromise between New Dealers enthusiastic about administrative power and conservative critics who saw this power as a veil for tyranny, particularly in the context of labor relations.4 5 Despite its ambivalence on the question of agency autonomy, the APA appeared to endorse judicial control of administration and to direct courts to interpret statutes on their own. Thus the APA states: "To the extent necessary to decision and when presented, the reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, [and]interpret constitutionaland statutoryprovisions .... ,,46 
administration, courts sometimes said that agencies were entitled to interpret the statutes that they administer, and that courts would defer as long as agency interpretations were reasonable. 4 7 This idea repreProcedure Act: The Beginnings, 72 Va. L. Rev. 219 ( and passage and arguing that vituperation gave way to calm reasoning). 
sometimes should resolve the relevant question of law by holding that statutory ambiguities are to be resolved by the agency. On that view, part of the answer to the legal question is that ambiguities are for agency resolution. But when Congress has not specifically conferred that power on the agency through the organic statute, that argument seems weak. 
The legislative history emphasizes the need for judicial constraints on administration. See, e.g., Legislative History, Administrative Procedure Act, S. Doc. No. 248, 79th Cong., 2d Sess. 305 (1946) (remarks of Sen. McCarran, Chairman, House Judiciary Comm.) ("I desire to emphasize the . . .provisions for judicial review, because it is something in which the American public has been and is much concerned, harkening back, if we may, to the Constitution of the United States, which sets up the judicial branch of the Government for the redress of human wrongs"); id. at 217 (Report of the Senate Judiciary Comm.) ("the enforcement of the bill, by the independent judicial interpretation and application of its terms, is a function which is clearly conferred upon the courts.... Judicial review is of utmost importance .... It is indispensable since its mere existence generally precludes the arbitrary exercise of powers not granted"); id. at 251,311-12, 382-85. 
The influential Attorney General's Committee on Administrative Procedure was uncertain on the point: 
The question of statutory interpretation might be approached by the court de novo and given the answer which the court thinks to be the "right interpretation." Or the court might approach it, somewhat as a question offact, to ascertain, not the "right interpretation," but only whether the administrative interpretation has substantial support .... Thus, where the statute is reasonably susceptible of more than one interpretation, the court may accept that of the administrative body.... This may be particularly significant when the legislation deals with complex matters calling for expert knowledge and judgment. Final Report of the Attorney General's Comm. on Administrative Procedure, in Administrative Procedure in Government Agencies, S. Doc. No. 8, 77th Cong., 1st Sess. 90-91 (1941). Note, however, that the Attorney General's Committee is entitled to far less weight than the text of the APA and even its history in Congress, both of which argue for independent review. Moreover, the Committee may well have been biased against independent judicial review because it was allied with the institutional interests of the executive branch, and because it consisted in large part of New Deal enthusiasts skeptical about judicial checks on administration. 
The useful treatment in Scalia, Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L.J. 511, 512-14, properly draws attention to this passage from the Attorney General's Committee's report. But it overstates the extent to which deference to administrative interpretations was contemplated by the APA as evidenced by its text and underlying purposes, both of which argue in favor of independent review. 
Labor's definition of" 'area of production' " in Fair Labor Standards Act, noting that Secsented a firm endorsement of the allied principles, prominent during the New Deal, of administrative autonomy and limited judicial interference with the process of regulation. It also recognized that the very arguments that called for the rise of regulatory entities raised sharp questions about whether judicial interpretation of regulatory law should continue to be independent. Marbury, in short, no longer seemed well adapted to American public law. At the same time, many courts continued to insist that the interpretation of statutes was first and foremost a judicial task.48 
It is ironic but true that this insistence became particularly pronounced in the 1960s and 1970s, a period in which those enthusiastic about regulation were especially dissatisfied with administrative autonomy. In this period, agencies appeared unenthusiastic about their mandates. The phenomenon of "capture" received widespread attention, and judicial controls seemed to be an important part of the project of ensuring that regulatory statutes, especially in the environmental area, would produce change in the real world.49 In a surprising reversal of New Deal alliances, those who were critical of the effects of regulation in the 1980s were frequently insistent on administrative autonomy and the perverse effects of legalism 5 0-whereas critics seeking to bring about greater regulatory protections saw administrative independence and autonomy as the problem rather than the solution.5 1 The rule of law, including firm judicial constraints on the bureaucracy, was a mechanism for ensuring that agencies would carry out the will of Congress. 
Before 1984, the law thus reflected a puzzling and relatively ad hoc set of doctrines about when courts should defer to administrative interpretations of law. All this was changed by Chevron. retary "fulfills his role when he makes a reasoned definition"); Federal Sec. Adm'r v. Quaker Oats Co., 318 U.S. 218, 227-28 (1943) (deferring to FDA administrator's rulemaking, noting "we have repeatedly emphasized the scope that must be allowed to the discretion and informed judgment of an expert administrative body. These considerations are especially appropriate where the review is of regulations of general application adopted by an administrative agency under its rule-making power in carrying out the policy of a statute with whose enforcement it is charged."); Gray v. Powell, 314 U.S. 402, 412 (1941) (deferring to Department of Interior definition of coal "producer" under Bituminous Coal Act); cf. Udall v. Tallman, 380 U.S. 1, 16-18 (1965) (deferring to Interior Secretary's interpretation of Executive Order, which was reasonable but not only possible interpretation). 
Publications, Inc., 322 U.S. 111, 130-31 (1944); Pittston Stevedoring Corp. v. Dellaventura, 544 F.2d 35, 48-50 (2d Cir. 1976), aff'd sub nom. Northeast Marine Terminal v. Caputo, 432 U.S. 249 (1977). 
of American Administrative Law, 88 Harv. L. Rev. 1667, 1711-16 (1975). 
In Chevron, the Supreme Court confronted an important decision by the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") under the Clean Air Act.52 The case involved permit programs in "nonattainment" states, that is, states that have not met federal ambient air quality requirements. These states are required to establish a permit program for "new or modified major stationary sources" of air pollution.5 3 No new or modified source may receive a permit unless it meets stringent requirements. 54 
Before the 1980s, the EPA had treated as a "source" any pollutionemitting device in a plant.5 5 If a plant had ten of these devices, it had to apply for a permit to modify any of them or to add a new one. In 1981, however, the EPA decided that it would not require a permit if the modification of an existing device or the installation of a new device did not increase total emissions from the plant.56 In other words, the plant, and not each emitting entity within it, would be treated as a "source." This plantwide definition of source enabled a company to add or modify pollution-emitting devices as long as it reduced emissions from another part of the same plant, producing no aggregate increase in emissions. The question for decision in Chevron was whether the plantwide definition of "source" violated the Clean Air Act.57 
The court of appeals held that it did.58 For the lower court, the purpose of the nonattainment program was to bring about rapid state compliance with federal air quality requirements, and the plantwide definition of source was inconsistent with that overriding goal. The court was unable to point to a particular provision that barred the EPA's plantwide definition, but it said that that definition was inconsistent with the general purposes of the nonattainment program. 59 
for usurping the agency's policy-making authority, the Court said that nothing in the statute or its history spoke to the issue whether the plant or each emitting device within it amounted to a "source." The general purposes of the nonattainment program, embodying an effort to promote environmental quality with minimal restrictions on economic growth, were simply too broad to bear on that issue. Because Congress had not "directly spoken to the precise question at issue," the question 
(D.C. Cir. 1982), rev'd sub nor. Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984). 
was "whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute." 6 1 For the Court, "considerable weight should be accorded to an executive department's construction of a statutory scheme it is entrusted to administer."' 62 The Court thus created a twostep inquiry. The first question was whether Congress had explicitly foreclosed the agency's decision. The second was whether that decision was reasonable or permissible. 
All this was sufficient to dispose of the specific problem in Chevron. Congress had not decided against a plantwide definition of source. Moreover, the agency's decision was an exceedingly reasonable means of accommodating the economic and environmental goals that underlay the Clean Air Act. Indeed, the plantwide definition achieved economic savings without jeopardizing environmental degradation, and may even have helped to diminish it.63 
In addition, a principle of deference was appropriate in Chevron. The agency's fact-finding and policy-making competence, and its electoral accountability, were highly relevant to the issue of how "source" should be defined. In Chevron itself, the Court quite rightly implied that any principle of deference is a product of Congress's explicit or implicit instructions on that question. The central point is this: Courtsmust defer to agency interpretationsif and when Congress has told them to do so. 64 And when agency competence is relevant, deference is particularly appropriate, since it is the most plausible instruction to attribute to Congress if the legislature has issued no clear statement on the point-a subject to which I return below. 6 5 
Since Chevron itself, the general principle of deference has been invoked on numerous occasions and produced considerable controversy. In INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca6, 6 the Supreme Court appeared to say that Chevron would apply only in cases involving mixed questions of law and fact, rather than pure questions of law: courts would decide pure questions of law on their own. In a concurring opinion, Justice Scalia vigorously rejected this suggestion, 67 and the Court has failed to take it 
EPA's Bubble 97-103 ( 
that constitutional problems sometimes will arise in these situations, see Farina, supra note 26, at 456, but that Will be rare. Because the delegation to the agency to implement the statute is (by hypothesis) permissible, the delegation of power to give meaning to statutory terms should be seen as a legitimate part of the authority of implementation. 
and accompanying text. 
relevant cases, dominated by the Republican party, whereas the Congress is dominated by Democrats. A principle ofjudicial deference to executive interpretations will, at least in the short run, increase the power of the Republican branch-one that is far less hosup in subsequent cases. In other cases the Supreme Court has held that at least arguably ambiguous statutes admitted of only a single interpretation, sometimes producing sharp dissenting opinions that invoked Chevron.6 8 Most strikingly, the Supreme Court has rejected a number of agency interpretations of law even in the aftermath of Chevron.69 
It is not my purpose here to say whether or not the analysis in Chevron was correct.70 The nature and reach of the case can best be ascertained, however, by considering what might be said in its favor. 
Before the discretionary, policy-making administrative agency became pervasive, the notion that courts would interpret the law, including federal statutes, seemed axiomatic. In the twentieth century, however, Congress frequently has delegated basic implementing authority to regulatory agencies, and the allocation of interpretive power has become far more complex. Any principles of deference to administrators must of course depend on congressional instructions, at least as a general rule. 
When Congress has expressly said that deference is or is not appitable to regulatory controls than Congress. This fact is probably not irrelevant to the debate over Chevron. See supra note 9. 
Pittston Coal Group v. Sebben, 109 S. Ct. 414, 420-21 (1988); Connecticut Dep't of Income Maintenance v. Heckler, 471 U.S. 524, 537-38 ( notes 96-104 and accompanying text. Some Justices have suggested that Chevron also applies to an agency's views about its ownjurisdiction. See United Steelworkers ofAm., 110 S. Ct. at 944 (White, J., dissenting); Mississippi Power & Light Co. v. Mississippi, 108 S. Ct. 2428, 2443-44 (1988) (Scalia,J., concurring); infra notes 128-139 and accompanying text. 
(1990) (rejecting ICC interpretation that would permit carrier to recover less than filed rate); Department of Treasury, IRS v. Federal Labor Relations Auth., 110 S. Ct. 1623, 1627 (1990) (rejecting FLRA interpretation of Civil Service Reform Act that would require IRS to bargain with union over union proposal); United Steelworkers ofAm., 110 S. Ct. at 938 (declining to defer to OMB interpretation of Paperwork Reduction Act that would authorize OMB to review agency rules mandating disclosure by regulated entities to third parties); Sullivan v. Zebley, 110 S. Ct. 885, 890 (1990) (rejecting social security regulations as inconsistent with statutory provision on child disability); Pittston Coal Group, 109 S. Ct. at 420 (rejecting Secretary of Labor's interim regulation on criteria for presumptive entitlement to black lung disease benefits); Board of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys. v. Dimension Fin. Corp., 474 U.S. 361, 368 ( Reserve Board definition of "bank" under Bank Holding Company Act). 
not take issue with the Chevron result. For defenses, see Pierce, The Role of Constitutional and Political Theory in Administrative Law, 64 Tex. L. Rev. 469, 486-88 ( Scalia, supra note 46, at 516-19; Strauss, One Hundred and Fifty Cases Per Year: Some Implications of the Supreme Court's Limited Resources for Judicial Review of Agency Action, 87 Colum. L. Rev. 1093, 1117-29 ( the Administrative State, 133 U. Pa. L. Rev. 549, 592-99 ( principle, but without discussing Chevron). propriate, the matter is relatively simple. 7 ' As stated above, the text and background of the APA suggest a firm belief in the need for judicial checks on administration, particularly with respect to the interpretation of law. 7 2 The view that courts should always defer to agency interpretations is, therefore, a poor reconstruction of the instructions of the APA. It remains possible, however, that particular substantive statutes displace the APA and accord law-interpreting power to the agency. If so, the courts should defer in such cases on the ground that the relevant law is what the agency says that it is. The APA's provision for independent judicial interpretation of law is not inconsistent, then, with Chevron's deference to the agency's interpretation if Congress has, under particular statutes, granted the relevant authority to administrative agencies. 
Frequently, however, Congress does not speak in explicit terms on the question of deference. When this is so, the court's task is to make the best reconstruction that it can of congressional instructions. 73 And if Congress has not made a clear decision one way or the other, the choice among the alternatives will call for an assessment of which strategy is the most sensible one to attribute to Congress under the circumstances. This assessment is not a mechanical exercise of uncovering an actual legislative decision. It calls for a frankly value-laden judgment about comparative competence, undertaken in light of the regulatory structure and applicable constitutional considerations. 
If all this is so, the Chevron approach might well be defended on the ground that the resolution of ambiguities in statutes is sometimes a question of policy as much as it is one of law, narrowly understood, and that agencies are uniquely well situated to make the relevant policy decisions. In some cases, there is simply no answer to the interpretive question if it is posed as an inquiry into some real or unitary instruction of the legislature. Sometimes congressional views cannot plausibly be aggregated in a way that reflects a clear resolution of regulatory problems, many of them barely foreseen or indeed unforeseeable.7 4 In these circumstances, legal competence, as narrowly understood, is insufficient for decision. The resolution of the ambiguity calls for an inquiry into something other than the instructions of the enacting legislature. And in examining those other considerations, the institution entrusted with the decision must make reference to considerations 468-69. 

interpretation is a process of making a statute "the best piece of statesmanship it can be" by finding "the best justification ... of a past legislative event"). 
837, 865 (1984); cf. K. Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values 10-11 (2d ed. 1963) (discussing difficulties in aggregating social desires to produce a social welfare function). of both fact and policy.75 
Chevron nicely illustrates the point. The decision about whether to adopt a plantwide definition of "source" required distinctly administrative competence because it called for a complex inquiry, not foreseen by Congress, into the environmental and economic consequences of the various possibilities. If regulatory decisions in the face of ambiguities amount in large part to choices of policy, and if Congress has delegated basic implementing authority to the agency, the Chevron approach might reflect a belief, attributable to Congress in the absence of a clear contrary legislative statement, in the comparative advantages of the agency in making those choices. 
All this suggests that Chevron reflects not merely a particular view about who ought to interpret ambiguous statutes, but also, and perhaps more interestingly, a distinctive theory of interpretation. In the last generation it has frequently been suggested that the process of interpretation is often not merely a mechanical reconstruction of legislative desires. 76 Instead that process sometimes calls for an inquiry into questions of both policy and principle. Thus, for example, it has been said that statutory ambiguities should or must be sorted out on the basis of an assessment of which interpretation is "reasonable," 7 7 or makes the statute "the best piece of statesmanship it can be, ' 7 8 or takes account of appropriate background norms dealing with the functions and failures of the regulatory state. 79 
At least as a general rule, these suggestions argue powerfully in favor of administrative rather than judicial resolution of hard statutory questions. The fact-finding capacity and electoral accountability of the administrators are far greater than those of courts.8 0 Chevron is best interpretation of law itself is an example. Congress has not explicitly resolved that question, and so it must be answered on the basis ofan attempted reconstruction invoking extratextual considerations. 
mechanical, since it always depends on background norms. Even the easiest cases are decided by reference to norms and practices that are in fact present, but are so widely shared as to seem invisible. A denial that interpretive norms are at work should be taken as a reflection of interpretive unself-consciousness. Usually, of course, the norms are supported by a sufficiently broad consensus to make interpretation relatively simple-which, again, is not to say mechanical. 
System 1175 (tent. ed. 1956). 
the judge should interpret the statute so as to effectuate what she thinks is the best policy, but rather "to find the best justification ... of a past legislative event." Id. at 

agenciesthose whose heads are appointed for fixed terms and are not subject to plenary removal power-are to a degree insulated from presidential policy making. But see Moe, Regulatory Performance and Presidential Administration, 26 Am. J. Pol. Sci. 197, 220-21 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2087 1990 
understood and defended as a frank recognition that sometimes interpretation is not simply a matter of uncovering legislative will, but also involves extratextual considerations of various kinds, including judgments about how a statute is best or most sensibly implemented. Chevron reflects a salutary understanding that these judgments of policy and principle should be made by administrators rather than judges.8 1 
The point can be made more vivid by examining some of the characteristic problems in modem regulation. 82 Often the regulatory process is confounded by the difficulty of coordinating numerous statutes with one another. For example, the problems of air and water pollution are closely entangled. Efforts to control the one may aggravate the other, and there are complex interactions among various cleanup strategies. If the problems are treated separately, they will not be treated well. The EPA is charged with implementing numerous statutes, and it is in a far better position than the judiciary, reacting as it must to single cases, to respond to difficulties of this sort.83 
Sometimes regulation is made more difficult because of the pervasive problem of changed circumstances. New developments involving technological capacity, economics, the international situation, or even law may affect regulatory performance. Congress is unable to amend every statute to account for these changes, a situation that creates a genuine problem for those who must apply the statute. Here as well, administrators are in a far better position than courts to interpret ambiguous statutes in a way that takes account of new conditions8. 4 Or to put the point slightly differently: Because of its focus on individual cases, and because decisions are made after the dispute has arisen, the common law process has a significant advantage over legislation in its capacity to respond to changing conditions and mores. The shift from the common law to legislation, embodied in the New Deal, therefore gave rise to a serious risk of obsolescence, one that is often realized in practice. 8 5 In these circumstances, a grant of interpretive authority to (1982) (suggesting that NLRB's policies may be closely tied to those of the administration). Moreover, shifts in the judiciary are a predictable consequence of shifts in the administration, and in this sense courts are not wholly independent. Finally, agencies are sometimes subject to narrow or parochial pressures. Their decisions can hardly be said to track the public will in all cases. These qualifications do not, however, undermine the basic claim that the democratic pedigree of the agency is usually superior to that of the court. 
Rev. 821, 822-24 (1990). 

& W. Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air 14-21 ( from sulfur dioxide, but also produce sludge. 
text. 
argues for judicial responses to this problem through "overruling" statutes, which in his 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2088 1990 administrators, allowing them to take changed circumstances into consideration, seems to be a valuable if partial corrective.8 6 The result is to confer a power of adaptation on institutions that combine the judicial virtue of continuing attention to individual contexts and new settings with the legislative virtue of a fair degree of electoral accountability. 
Sometimes regulation fails because of the excessive rigidity of statutory commands.8 7 In light of the wide variety of contexts to which statutes must be applied, a degree of flexibility in implementation is quite healthy. Congress cannot possibly foresee all of the problems to be dealt with under broad statutory terms.8 8 Statutory terms may offer ambiguous guidance to agencies that must establish regulations in complex areas.8 9 Such agencies are in a much better position than courts to approach are to be treated as precedents. See also G. Gilmore, The Ages of American Law 95-98 (1977) (arguing forjudicial overruling of outdated statutes). But a system in which administrators respond to changed conditions through statutory construction seems far preferable. Administrators have a better democratic pedigree and more knowledge with which to undertake this task. Moreover, changed circumstances often produce ambiguities that agencies are in a uniquely good position to resolve. See Sunstein, supra note 26, at 493-97. 
appropriate when agency modifies or reverses prior interpretations); Scalia, supra note 46, at 518-19 (same). 
environmental statutes, which requires all firms to adopt the same technology. A far better strategy would allow for greater flexibility, allowing nontechnological means of reducing pollution-when that approach is effective and cheap-and permitting diversity in different parts of the country. See Ackerman & Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market Incentives, 13 Colum.J. Envtl. L. 171, 178-88 (1988). 
Kagan, Going by the Book: The Problem of Regulatory Unreasonableness 309-10 (1982) ("A busy and politically divided legislature has generally found it difficult to enact specific standards or to engage in detailed supervision or review of specific regulatory agency actions."). 
form of literalism to defeat a fully sensible administrative initiative. In American Mining Congress v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1177, 1180 (D.C. Cir. 1987), the EPA issued regulations to deal with the problem of disposal of material held for recycling. The EPA decided to control, as solid wastes, "secondary materials" (spent materials, sludges, byproducts, commercial chemical products, and scrap metals) unless these materials (a) are directly reused as an ingredient or as an effective substitute for a commercial product, or (b) are reused as a raw material substitute in the original manufacturing process. This definition meant that material burned for energy recovery or that is reclaimed or accumulated speculatively would be subject to government regulation as "solid waste." 
The court of appeals rejected the definition. According to the court, the statutory definition of waste as "any garbage, refuse, sludge ... and other discarded material," 42 U.S.C. § 6903(27), meant that the secondary materials were not subject to EPA regulation. 824 F.2d at 1179-85. According to the court, "discarded" means, simply, discarded as that term is understood in the dictionary, and materials that would flow from one production process to another were not "discarded." Id. 
The problems with this analysis are twofold. First, the statutory definition of waste was not written with attention to the particular problems of materials held for recycling. 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2089 1990 that while "agency determinations within the scope of delegated authority are entitled to deference," an agency" 'may not bootstrap itself into an area in which it has no jurisdiction.' "127 The passage suggests that jurisdictional determinations will not receive deference. But it is somewhat ambiguous, and there is as yet no clear answer to this question. 
Because congressional instructions are crucial here, courts should probably refuse to defer to agency decisions with respect to issues of jurisdiction-again, if we assume that the distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions is easily administrable. The principal reason is that Congress would be unlikely to want agencies to have the authority to decide on the extent of their own powers. To accord such power to agencies would be to allow them to be judges in their own cause, in which they are of course susceptible to bias. 
Consider, for example, Dole v. United Steelworkers of America.128 There the issue was whether the Office of Management and Budget ("OMB") had the authority under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980129 to approve or disapprove agency rules requiring regulated entities to disclose information directly to consumers, employees, or others. OMB argued that the statutory words allowing it to review rules regarding the "'obtaining or soliciting of facts by an agency through ... reporting or recordkeeping requirements'" included disclosure rules.13 0 The Court concluded otherwise, saying that the words "by an agency" meant information gathered by the agency for its own use rather than for disclosure to others.13 1 Because the Court found the statute unambiguous in denying reviewing authority to OMB, it did not have to explore the issue of deference. But it would have seemed exceedingly odd to suggest that OMB should be allowed to resolve ambiguities in a statute governing its own jurisdiction. The danger of bias and self-dealing is so great as to make OMB an interested party. 
As Justice Scalia has emphasized, however, there would be some difficulty in administering the sometimes elusive distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions.13 2 In some cases in which an agency is said to have exceeded its authority, or acted unlawfully, it might also be said to have exceeded its jurisdiction.13 3 Moreover, agency expertise and accountability are often relevant to the resolution of a jurisdictional ambiguity. In the absence of a clear congressional answer to the question, for example, the comparative competence of the FCC might well bear on whether federal regulatory authority extends to cable television.1 34 When Congress has not spoken clearly, whether the Commodity Futures Trading Commission has adjudicative authority over common law counterclaims might well depend on the consequences of the exercise of that authority for the fair and efficient administration of the Commodity Exchange Act. 135 For these reasons, it would be at least plausible to suggest that a general rule of deference would be preferable even on jurisdictional questions, because of its greater ease of application and because the agency's competence bears on the resolution ofjurisdictional ambiguities. 
Probably the best reconciliation of the competing considerations of expertise, accountability, and partiality is to say that no deference will be accorded to the agency when the issue is whether the agency's authority extends to a broad area of regulation, or to a large category of cases, except to the extent that the answer to that question calls for determinations of fact and policy.1 3 6 On this approach, there is no magic in the word "jurisdiction." Instead, the question is whether the agency is seeking to extend its legal power to an entire category of cases, rather than disposing of certain cases in a certain way or acting in one or a few cases. This distinction it is not always extremely sharp, and it will call for an exercise ofjudgment. But in the vast majority of cases, it is easily administered. 
It should also follow that agencies will not receive deference when they are denying their authority to deal with a large category of cases.1 3 7 Here too the agency determination is jurisdictional. Here too there is a risk of bias, in the form not of self-dealing, but instead of an abdication of enforcement power. Because abdication has been a major legislative fear,13 8 and because deference doctrine should not contain an antiregulatory bias, Chevron should be inapplicable here as well. 13 9 tional determinations by the definition offered at infra notes 135-139 and accompanying text. 

In the same vein, see EEOC v. Commercial Office Prods. Co., 108 S. Ct. 1666, 1671 (1988), in which the Court deferred to the EEOC's determination that it had jurisdiction over a complaint filed with it 290 days after dismissal by the state-in the face of a provision stating that the EEOC had jurisdiction, and the complaint was timely filed, only if state proceedings "have been earlier terminated." 
notes 128-131 and accompanying text, because the agency's competence was irrelevant to the question of statutory meaning. 
review of agency inaction might be available in the face of an abdication of enforcement power); id. at 839 (Brennan, J., concurring) (same). 
ofjurisdictional determinations by supposing that the question at issue is one with respect to which agency bias is peculiarly likely to be at work. The agency might be deciding whether its own decisions are reviewable, whether it has the power to issue fines, whether its authority extends to new or unforeseen areas, or, perhaps more controversially, whether it is compelled to undertake action that it prefers not to undertake-for example, vigorous enforcement of federal environmental controlsperhaps because of the pressures imposed by well-organized private groups. In all of these cases, the likelihood of agency bias and selfdealing might be serious. It would be peculiar, therefore, to defer to the agency's views. This issue is one of particular importance, especially in a period in which Congress is likely to be enacting regulatory controls toward which the executive branch has expressed ambivalence.140 
If Chevron applies only when the agency has been delegated lawmaking authority, much of this problem will disappear. To be sure, an agency's view that its own decisions are unreviewable, that it need not undertake certain action, or that it has (or does not have) the power to issue fines will amount to an "interpretation." But the expression of these views is unlikely to be part of the exercise of authority that has been congressionally granted. In these cases, an agency's claim of immunity from the judiciary could not easily be seen as part of its delegated rulemaking power. In rare cases, however, an agency might interpret a statute in a way that predictably lines up with agency selfinterest or bias even while exercising delegated authority. In these cases, the rule of deference should probably be inapplicable, since deference would be a poor reading of congressional instructions. 
Chevron's principle of deference, then, is an attempted reconstruction of congressional instructions, one that is responsive to the comparative advantages of the agency in administering complex statutes. It follows that the principle is inapplicable when the best reconstruction argues against deference. We have seen that when the agency has not been accorded law-interpreting power, no deference is due. Independent judicial assessments are also appropriate in other contexts involving predictable bias, most notably jurisdictional determinations, but also in other cases in which the agency's self-interest is conspicuously at stake. 
Before Chevron, agency decisions were entitled to deference if they were longstanding, consistent, and contemporaneous; but new interpreta140. The new Clean Air Act, Pub. L. No. 10 1-549, 104 Stat. 2399 (1990), is a plausible candidate for this analysis. See, e.g., Benhan, Clean Air Bill Gets Harder Look Amid Crisis, Investor's Daily, Aug. 29, 1990, at 1; Lobsenz, Administration Ups Clean Air Cost Estimate, United Press Int'l, Aug. 2, 1990 (available on NEXIS). tions were subject to more stringent judicial scrutiny.1 4 1 The reasons for this distinction never have been entirely clear. Perhaps the special deference accorded to longstanding interpretations embodied an effort to import principles of stare decisis into administrative processes in order to protect reliance and expectations. Perhaps the distinction was part of an effort to constrain administrative wilfulness or the use of "politics," perhaps understood as interest group power, to distort statutory meaning. Perhaps this distinction was built on a belief that a longstanding interpretation probably tracked congressional will, at the stage of enactment and after, and was therefore correct as a matter of statutory meaning. If these were the underlying ideas, an agency decision that was novel or merely one of an inconsistent line of decisions would not warrant deference. That decision would hardly protect expectations and reliance, and it could not confidently be said to be a correct understanding of what Congress wanted. 
On several occasions after Chevron the Court has reasserted precisely this position. 14 2 But if Chevron is right, this position is wrong, or at least it draws the distinction between longstanding and novel interpretations too sharply.' 4 3 As we have seen, Chevron is best defended in part as a means of counteracting problems of rigidity, obsolescence, and changed circumstances in the regulatory process.' 4 4 The problem of changed circumstances is a serious one for textual commands, which are difficult to amend in light of competing demands on the legislators' time. As a result, courts have sometimes taken account of changed circumstances in order to render a novel interpretation, one that makes sense of those commands or even remains faithful to them in light of new developments. 145 But because of their fact-finding capacities, electoral accountability, and continuing attention to changed circumstances, agencies are far better situated than courts to soften statutory rigidities or to adapt their terms to unanticipated conditions.14 6 
All this might suggest that an agency's new interpretations should be entitled to the same basic deference as old ones. Agency decisions about the meaning of ambiguous statutes often turn in part on questions of policy. For an agency to interpret a statute one way rather than another is for it to set out a view that is permissible rather than mandatory. Under Chevron, agency views receive deference not because they capture a unitary intended meaning, but because the resolution of statutory ambiguities should be undertaken by accountable, specialized administrators, not by courts. Under this approach, it matters relatively little whether the agency decision is longstanding and consistent or not. Regulatory shifts from one administration to another should be entirely expected and indeed welcomed as a healthy part of democratic selfgovernment or as a recognition of changed circumstances. So long as the statute is ambiguous, those shifts reflect legitimate changes of policy. One might expect, then, that after Chevron agency decisions will be entitled to deference even if they are novel. 
The question is somewhat more complex, however, than the discussion thus far suggests. As we have seen, a longstanding agency interpretation might receive deference because of an interest in a form of administrative stare decisis. If this is so, a new interpretation is entitled to somewhat less deference than one that is longstanding. In a recent case, the Supreme Court has recognized this point and, indeed, gone somewhat further. In a partial qualification of Chevron, the Court held in Maislin Industries, U.S., Inc. v. Primary Steel, Inc. 147 that agencies may not depart from an agency interpretation that the Court has upheld, even in the face of changed circumstances.' 48 The case should probably be read to say that an agency may not depart from an interpretation that the Court has held to be statutorily mandated. It should not be taken to say that a merely permissible interpretation is set in stone, or that an agency may not take account of changed circumstances in giving meaning to an ambiguous mandate, or a mandate that new developments have rendered ambiguous. 4 9 
adhere to that determination under the doctrine of staredecisis, and we judge an agency's later interpretation of the statute against our prior determination of the statute's meaning."); accord California v. FERC, 110 S. Ct. 2024, 2029 (1990). 
expertise generally to adopt new policies when faced with new developments in the industry," agency "does not have the power to adopt a policy that directly conflicts with its governing statute"); id. at 2771-72 (Scalia, J., concurring) (emphasizing the statutory text). This is not to say that Maislin was correctly decided. The case involved a decision by the Interstate Commerce Commission ("ICC") to permit a shipper not to pay the rate filed with it ("filed rate") when the shipper and the carrier had privately negotiated a lower rate. According to the ICC, two changed circumstances required this shift. First, carriers and shippers had frequently negotiated lower rates that were not filed with the 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2103 1990 
Two conclusions follow. First, and most importantly, agencies should be allowed to depart from interpretations by prior administrations, certainly in the face of changed conditions, but also to reflect new views about policy. What is necessary is that the new interpretation be explained as reasonable in light of statutorily permissible factors. 15 0 Second, new departures should be accorded somewhat less deference than longstanding interpretations, for reasons analogous to those that justify stare decisis in the judicial context. 
I have noted that Chevron sets out a two-step process for analyzing agency interpretations. Even if Congress has not directly addressed the issue in question, and even if deference is due, the agency's decision must be "reasonable." 1'15 The Supreme Court has given little explicit guidance for determining when interpretations will be found reasonable. In most of the cases rejecting an agency's view, the Court has relied on the first step of Chevron, finding an explicit congressional decision on the point. 
ICC. In some of those cases, the carrier later filed for bankruptcy, and the trustee billed the shipper for the difference between the tariff and the negotiated rate. The ICC concluded that in these circumstances it would be unfair and irrational not to consider the shipper's equitable defenses to a claim for undercharges. Second, the Motor Carrier Act of 1980, significantly deregulating the motor carrier industry, justified the change in policy, since under the new circumstances of competition strict application of the filed rate was unnecessary to deter discrimination. See id. at 2762-64. 
In rejecting the ICC's position, the Court emphasized some of its early decisions, e.g., Louisville & N. Ry. v. Maxwell, 237 U.S. 94 (1915); Texas & P. Ry. v. Mugg, 202 U.S. 242 (1906), creating a requirement of strict adherence to the filed rate requirements and disallowing equitable defenses to collection of the filed tariff. See Maislin, 110 S. Ct. at 2766-67. But it is not clear that those decisions meant that the agency's view was required rather than merely permitted, and in any case statutory changes had converted a system of regulated monopoly into an extremely competitive market. Nothing in the statute's text expressly prohibited the agency's shift in position. The central statutory term is "reasonable," and the change in the nature of the industry made it plausible for the agency to find reasonable what was once unreasonable. Indeed, the agency's shift adapted legislative instructions sensibly to new conditions; little or nothing could be said, as a matter of sound policy, against the agency's view. It is in these circumstances that deference to the agency, rather than mechanical use of an ambiguous statute, is especially appropriate. Cf. supra note 89, infra note 216 (discussing mechanical definition of "solid waste"). But see Pittston Coal Group v. Sebben, 109 S. Ct. 414, 419-21 (1988) (literal interpretation used to forbid agency from reaching sensible result not realistically inconsistent with statute); Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108, 1113 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (mechanically interpreting Delaney Clause of Color Additive Amendments of Food, Drug & Cosmetic Act to forbid agency from allowing de minimis exceptions), cert. denied, 108 S. Ct. 1470 (1988). 
Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 109 S. Ct. 1835, 1848-49 ( Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 860 F.2d 465, 470-71 (D.C. Cir. 1988). 
837, 843-44 (1984). 
On the question of reasonableness, it seems clear that the agency must be given considerable latitude. But this is not to say that the agency may do whatever it wishes. The reasonableness inquiry should probably be seen as similar to the inquiry into whether the agency's decision is "arbitrary" or "capricious" within the meaning of the APA. 15 2 That inquiry requires the agency to give a detailed explanation of its decision by reference to factors that are relevant under the governing statute.1 55 And while some decisions will be reversed or remanded under this approach, 154 it is clear that within a wide range the choice of policy is for the agency. 15 5 
III. INTERPRETIVE PRINCIPLES 
Thus far I have discussed the Chevron principle as if it stood alone-that is, as if it provided the only applicable interpretive principle, and was not in conflict with other possible principles. In fact, however, the principle of deference is merely one of a large number of interpretive principles or norms playing a major role in statutory construction as that process occurs in courts, agencies, and elsewhere. In some cases in which Chevron would otherwise govern, other interpretive norms may require a rejection of the agency's position. 
In this Part, I discuss the relationship between Chevron and other relevant principles. I conclude that Chevron is plainly overcome by principles that help to ascertain congressional instructions. Norms calling for an explicit legislative statement before certain results may be reached also overcome the principle of deference; the reason is that those norms are designed to ensure congressional deliberation on the questions involved. The same is true for other norms designed to counteract governmental bias or to protect legislative processes. Norms against regulatory irrationality or absurdity, however, are usually defeated by Chevron, since determinations of rationality are for agencies rather than courts. 156 
Notwithstanding Karl Llewellyn's celebrated effort to demolish the canons of construction by showing their tendency toward vacuity and self-contradiction, 15 7 interpretive principles of various sorts continue to be an important part of current law.' 58 Statutory ambiguity is common. In the face of ambiguity, outcomes must turn on interpretive principles of various sorts; there is simply no other way to decide hard cases.1 59 Any volume of the Federal Reporter or the United States Reports will turn up a wide range of interpretive principles. These principles exist not only because they are indispensable to decision, but also because many of them ieflect grammatical, institutional, or substantive understandings that have or warrant widespread support. 
The point goes deeper still. Whether there is ambiguity-the nominal trigger for deference under Chevron-is a function not "simply" of text, but of text as it interacts with principles of interpretation, some of them deeply engrained in the legal culture or even the culture more generally. A major current task is to assign Chevron its place within the universe of these principles. That task raises the question of what constitutes "ambiguity" and of why and when "ambiguity" is a sufficient reason for deference. 
For present purposes it will be useful to begin by distinguishing among three sorts of interpretive principles. All of them are pervasive. Syntactic principles help to discern statutory meaning in the particular case. Courts sometimes rely on explicit and implicit interpretive instructions from Congress about how statutes should be construed. Substantive principles attempt to carry out policies, some of them with constitutional status, that cannot be tied to any legislative judgment. 
Syntactic principles include a wide range of practices and ideas: not merely the ordinary rules of language, but also the frequently stated notions that a specific provision will trump a general provision when there is a conflict;' 60 that when general words follow a particular date agency decisions, since the agency is in a better position to judge whether a particular rule is rational or not. 
Canons About How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 395 (1950). 
interchangeably in this discussion. 
appearing to contain no ambiguity. Cases are easy only when and because the relevant interpretive principles are not a matter of dispute. See Sunstein, supra note 26, at 464-65. There are no easy cases without interpretive principles, which are necessary to give context, and hence meaning, to language. To say that interpretive principles are not at stake is actually to say that the relevant principles are supported by a consensus, so that there is no dispute about their application or meaning. 
I deal here with interpretive principles that are conspicuous or contestable, in the sense that they are self-consciously invoked as part of the process of resolving ambiguities or cases otherwise in or close to equipoise. 

HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2106 1990 1990] enumeration, they will be defined by reference to the particular enumeration; 16 1 that every word in a statute will be given effect; 16 2 that when Congress has specified the category of people entitled to a good, there might be an inference that the people not expressly mentioned are not so entitled. 16 3 Some of these principles are controversial, and their application in particular cases will of course be a source of dispute. But the use of syntactic principles, as a way of discerning legislative instructions, is an ordinary part of statutory interpretation. 
Interpretive instructions include, least controversially, explicit legislative guidance about statutory interpretation. The first provisions of the United States Code provide a long list of these instructions, 164 and other more particular statutes furnish similar guidance. 16 5 Some principles of interpretation reflect implicit rather than explicit interpretive instructions. Thus, for example, the idea that statutes will be construed to be valid rather than invalid, 166 and the principle that appropriations statutes will be narrowly construed,' 6 7 seem to be an accurate reconstruction of likely legislative wishes. Congress would prefer validation to invalidation, and its own rules and practices limit the consequences of appropriations measures. 
Substantive principles are sometimes highly controversial, but they play an extremely prominent role in statutory interpretation. Some of these principles are designed to allocate authority among various governmental entities. Some of them are more frankly designed to produce particular outcomes. Many of these principles are constitutionally inspired, as in the idea that federal statutes will not lightly be construed so as to preempt state law; 168 that judicial review of agency action will be presumed available;' 6 9 that statutes will be construed so as not to interfere with the power of the President. 170 Some of these principles serve other defensible substantive goals; these include the idea that exemptions from the antitrust and tax laws will be narrowly construed,' 7 ' that statutes will be interpreted so as not to apply retroactively, 172 that implied repeals will be disfavored, 173 and that federal statutes and treaties will be construed generously to the Indian tribes. 17 4 The category of substantive norms is not fixed but changes over time, with new assessments of what norms are well adapted to the functions and failures of government. 
What bearing does Chevron have on the principles of construction? Notably, Chevron itself creates an interpretive principle, and if it is to be defended, it must probably be as one that reflects implicit interpretive instructions or that satisfies institutional goals.' 75 It is not difficult to imagine a conflict between the Chevron principle and one or more of the other interpretive principles. Imagine, for example, that an agency interprets a statute in a manner that raises a serious constitutional question, preempt state law, or unfavorably to the Indian tribes. The problem has arisen specifically in cases in which agency interpretations competed with the norms against retroactivity 76 and against implied exemptions from antitrust laws. 177 
In these cases, the issue is whether Chevron will displace or be displaced by otherwise applicable interpretive norms. That issue in turn implicates a wide range of questions about the relationships among different interpretive norms, created as they were in vastly different periods and designed for dramatically different institutional arrangements and substantive concerns. Here as well the traditional legal culture is confronted by an administrative system built on a novel set of substantive and institutional premises. 
by disentangling the functions of interpretive norms and by examining their relationship with Chevron. Not surprisingly, the answers require an assessment of the interaction between the original constitutional framework and governmental structures that self-consciously depart from that framework. Each of the norms outlined here might fall in more than one category, and the judgment about which category applies will be contestable. The particular judgments are less important than the general conclusion that norms that serve different functions will interact with Chevron in different ways. I order the norms in se(D.C. Cir.) (R.B. Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (antitrust), aff'd mem., 110 S. Ct. 398 ( (equally divided court). 

1292 (D.C. Cir.), aff'd mem., 110 S. Ct. 398 ( 
HeinOnline -- 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2108 1990 1990) quence, beginning with those that pose the strongest case for overcoming Chevron and ending with those that in all likelihood should be defeated by agency interpretations. 
It seems clear that agency interpretations will not prevail when they conflict with syntactic norms. Chevron speaks of "the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress" as the basis for rejecting an agency's view, and many syntactic principles are explicitly designed to help capture legislative instructions. The idea that specific terms prevail over general, 178 that each word in a statute will be construed to have independent meaning,' 79 and that words will be taken in the context of the statute as a whole,' 80 are part of the process of uncovering "legislative intent."1 8 1 These norms therefore overcome the agency's view, at least if they operate reliably in the case at hand. The Supreme Court has indicated as much in so many words.' 8 2 
The agency interpretation will also be defeated when Congress has issued interpretive instructions. When explicit instructions appear in the statutory text, they should prevail over contrary agency interpretations. Interpretive instructions that do not appear on the face of the statute, but that derive from the legislative history or background of the statute, or from understandings about likely legislative desires, are also part and parcel of the process of discerning Congress's instructions (its "intent"). These instructions should also prevail over conflicting agency views. 
The question is somewhat more difficult when the interpretive instructions are implicit rather than explicit-as, for example, in the notion that appropriations statutes will be narrowly construed, or that statutes will be construed so as to be valid rather than invalid. 18 3 The problem here is that implicit interpretive instructions are in a sense a judicial rather than a legislative creation-a formulation of legislative will that, while highly plausible, has been nowhere expressly stated, and that may therefore be controversial. As the interpretive instructions track legislative desires more controversially, they come closer to falling into the category of substantive or institutional principles, which provide a weaker case for rejection of Chevron. But when the principle is closely traceable to a likely congressional judgment, it plainly defeats the Chevron principle. The Court has so indicated in cases before and after Chevron. 184 
The discussion thus far has involved norms that are invoked to uncover congressional "intent." The remaining categories of norms do not involve legislative instructions or "intent" at all. It is plausible to suggest that these norms should always be trumped by Chevron. In Chevron, after all, the Court emphasized that the agency's view will prevail unless there is a direct congressional judgment to the contrary. When a court is dealing with norms that do not relate to congressional instructions, it seems reasonable that the agency's view should prevail. On this account, only intent and intent-related canons can defeat the agency's view. 18 5 
On the other hand, Chevron does refer to and endorse the "traditional tools of statutory construction." 18 6 This point has frequently been emphasized in subsequent cases. 18 7 Constitutionally inspired norms, along with many others that serve institutional or substantive goals, stand as part of those traditional tools. If the traditional tools include the substantive norms, then these norms can defeat agency interpretations consistently with Chevron. In many cases, powerful arguments support this conclusion. 
It will be useful to begin with norms designed to require that statutes contain an explicit statement from Congress. "Clear statement" principles are omnipresent in current law. A subset of the category of interpretive norms, they are designed to ensure an unambiguous state1990] ment from Congress before allowing certain results to be reached. One of their targets is governmental outcomes that reflect views that can be traced only to the executive branch, and not to the national legislature as well. Principles that require a clear legislative statement, I argue, overcome Chevron. 
constitutional foundations. Examples include the principle that statutes ordinarily will be construed to be valid rather than invalid, to steer clear of serious constitutional doubts, so as not to intrude on the traditional power of the President or preempt state law. 188 Principles of this sort require a clear statement from Congress before courts will interpret statutes as intruding into constitutionally troublesome areas. 
If these principles cannot be understood as a way of discerning legislative instructions, and if Congress can displace them with a clear statement, how might they be defended? The process of statutory construction is often thought to be a means of discerning the meaning of statutory words, and here substantive principles might be considered irrelevant or indeed illegitimate. By using these principles, courts decide cases of statutory meaning by reference to something external to legislative desires, even though the interpretation in question would not ordinarily violate the Constitution. 
There are, however, at least three reasons for the continued use of constitutionally inspired interpretive principles. First, it is sometimes impossible to decide hard cases without resorting to these principles. Some cases are genuinely in equipoise, and courts (or agencies) need tie breakers. It is hard to object to tie breakers that are rooted in constitutionally grounded structural principles. 
Second, some principles are justified as an effort to ensure legislative rather than merely administrative deliberation about constitutionally troublesome issues. 18 9 This idea is itself based on considerations of constitutional structure. For example, the Supreme Court no longer enforces the nondelegation doctrine with much vigor, and probably for good reasons.1 90 But in the wake of the downfall of that doctrine, the use of constitutionally based clear statement principles serves as a nar188. See supra notes 168-170 and accompanying text. 
the principle of state autonomy, in California State Bd. of Optometry v. FTC, 910 F.2d 976, 981-82 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 
principle universally recognized as vital to the integrity and maintenance of the system of government ordained by the Constitution." Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649, 692 (1892). The Court has not struck down a statute on nondelegation grounds since the New Deal. For a justification of its unwillingness to do so, see Stewart, Beyond Delegation Doctrine, 36 Am. U.L. Rev. 323, 328-29 ( Union Dep't v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 673-75, 685-87 (1980) (Rehnquist, J., concurring), and sources cited id. at 687 n.6; J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 131-34 (1980). rower and more targeted means of ensuring that Congress, rather than bureaucrats, will deliberate on questions that raise serious constitutional difficulties or intrude into constitutionally sensitive areas. 
In this respect, clear statement principles operate like the nondelegation doctrine. Both have roots in article I, and these principles can be understood as a second-best surrogate for that doctrine-a surrogate that is responsive to the intrusiveness and unwieldiness of a largescale judicial revival of the nondelegation doctrine. In Kent v. Du~les,19 1 for example, the Supreme Court held that a seemingly open-ended grant of authority to the President to issue and deny passports did not include the power to refuse to allow Communists to leave the country because of their political commitments. 19 2 The decision should be understood as an effort to ensure that the national legislature, not simply the executive branch, has deliberated on a question raising difficult constitutional questions relating to freedom of expression and the right to travel. This approach therefore responds to the delegation problem that would result from a decision to allow the executive branch to undertake constitutionally troublesome acts pursuant to an open-ended delegation of authority. 
Third, clear statement principles help to promote fidelity to constitutional norms that, while having a solid constitutional pedigree, are judicially underenforced. 19 3 Because judicial invalidation of statutes is troublesome in a constitutional democracy, courts are properly reluctant to enforce the Constitution with the vigor that might be appropriate for institutions having a better electoral pedigree. Since the Court "underenforces" the Constitution, certain constitutional norms in fact reach beyond the place where courts have vindicated those norms. It follows that an aggressive judicial role in statutory interpretation, one that removes statutes from the terrain of constitutional doubt, will promote greater conformity with norms that in fact do have constitutional status. 
When constitutionally based norms conflict with an agency's interpretation, it is highly probable that the agency's view will not prevail. As we have seen, the Supreme Court has held that a statute apparently conferring broad power to forbid Americans from leaving the country would not be interpreted to allow the Secretary of State to deny passports to American citizens who were members of the Communist 
Constitutional Norms, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1212, 1213-28 (1978) (arguing that courts are constrained by their institutional role from fully enforcing constitutional norms). The point is reflected in the fact that the Supreme Court often interprets constitutional provisions with reference to its own limited fact-finding and policy-making competence. See, e.g., Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, 194-95 ( Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 442-43 ( ( party. 19 4 According to the Court, a general grant of authority to the executive branch should not allow the Secretary of State to intrude on what might be a constitutionally protected right to travel. If Congress intends to authorize this result, it must express its will clearly.' 9 5 Indeed, in a large number of cases, many of them postdating Chevron, the Court has invoked constitutionally inspired principles in order to reject agency interpretations of law.' 9 6 The most conspicuous of these principles is the idea that ambiguous statutes will be construed so as not to raise serious constitutional questions. 
It is thus implausible that, after Chevron, agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes will prevail even if the consequence of those interpretations is to produce invalidity or to raise serious constitutional doubts. The very reason for the interpretive principle in favor of avoiding invalidity or serious doubts is to ensure explicit congressionalauthorization before certain results may be reached. As the Court held in unambiguous terms in DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & ConstructionTrades Council,197 a statute should not be interpreted to confer that authority simply on the agency's say-so. 
Other constitutionally inspired principles will produce a similar tension with Chevron. For example, the idea that judicial review of ad194. See Kent, 357 U.S. at 130; supra notes 191-192 and accompanying text. the nondelegation doctrine is especially conspicuous: courts demand a clear statement from the principal lawmaker and do not regard a vague or general grant of authority as genuine democratic authorization for constitutionally troublesome decisions. 
108 S. Ct. 1392, 1397 (1988) (construing NLRA narrowly to avoid potential first amendment problem); Industrial Union Dep't v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 645-46 (1980) (construing OSHA narrowly so as to avoid unconstitutional delegation); NLRB v. Catholic Bishop, 440 U.S. 490, 507 (1979) (construing NLRA narrowly so as to avoid violation of free exercise clause). 
But see Massachusetts v. Secretary of HHS, 899 F.2d 53, 59-64 (1st Cir. 1990) (en banc); Planned Parenthood Fed'n ofAm. v. Sullivan, 913 F.2d 1492, 1497-98 (10th Cir. 1990); New York v. Sullivan, 889 F.2d 401, 407-10 (2d Cir. 1989), cert. granted sub nom. Rust v. Sullivan, 110 S. Ct. 2559 (1990), in which lower courts have held that the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has the statutory authority to deny funds for clinics that counsel pregnant women about abortion but that do not actually perform abortions. Under the relevant statute, HHS must deny funds to clinics in which "abortion is [used as] a method of family planning." 42 U.S.C. § 300a-6 (1988). There is a substantial question about whether those cases were rightly decided. (The issue is currently before the Supreme Court in Rust.) Serious constitutional questions would be raised by a congressional effort to prevent clinics from speaking to patients about the abortion alternative, and the text of the statute is ambiguous. In the absence of a clear legislative statement, it should probably be interpreted so as to avoid the constitutional question. 
agency, but "[a]nother rule of statutory construction [is] pertinent here: where an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious constitutional problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid such problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of Congress." Id. at 1397. ministrative action will be presumed available 9 8 and the principle that federal statutes will not lightly be taken to preempt state law1 99 might well conflict with agency interpretations. 
In these cases too, the Chevron principle will probably be held inapplicable.20 0 These norms are in significant part an effort to promote congressional-rather than executive or bureaucratic- deliberation on certain issues, and to cabin executive officials by calling for express legislative authorization. If constitutionally inspired interpretive norms are understood in this way, they cannot be trumped by Chevron. The comparative advantages of the agencies are not at stake when a constitutional norm that argues in favor of legislative deliberation is involved; indeed, the institutional considerations counsel against acceptance of the agency's view. 
Statement. - A number of norms without constitutional status are also designed to ensure a clear congressional statement before certain results might be reached. By limiting administrative discretion to make law, these interpretive principles also act as surrogates for, or particularized versions of, the nondelegation doctrine. This is so even though the principles cannot be linked cleanly to a constitutional provision. 
Principles of this sort have been used throughout the history of American law. They require the legislature to express itself clearly if it wants to depart from ordinary understandings about the scope and nature of regulatory policy. Though these understandings are at best indirectly rooted in the Constitution, they draw considerable weight from history, usual practice, and time-honored notions of equity and comity. They require general legislative authorization for new departures. 
Examples include the principle that appropriations statutes do not amend substantive statutes, 201 the presumption against retroactivity, 2 02 and the idea that laws will apply only within the territory of the United States. 203 Because these norms also are designed to produce a clear 
1350, 1355 (1988). 
U.S. 656, 670 ( case involving an ambiguous statute governing the obligations imposed on states due to acceptance of federal funding. See also California State Bd. of Optometry v. FTC, 910 F.2d 976, 981-82 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (invalidating FTC rule despite Chevron because of federalism canon); Amalgamated Transit Union v. Skinner, 894 F.2d 1362, 1368 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (invalidating drug testing regulations in part by reference to concerns of federalism). 

idea has some connection with the due process and ex post facto clauses, although these clauses usually would not be violated by retroactive application of statutes. statement from Congress, they probably cannot be defeated by the agency's contrary view. 
To be sure, the argument for this result is weaker than in the case of constitutionally inspired norms, and perhaps some nonconstitutional norms can be defeated by an agency interpretation. But if the norm is an effort to require a clear legislative statement, it should usually prevail. For example, the idea that statutes generally will apply only within the territory of the United States is an attempt to conform to the reasonable expectations of both the legislature and affected persons. It also performs an important function in sorting out the relations between domestic law and that of other nations. An administrative agency should not be permitted to displace a principle designed to ensure that if American law is to apply outside of American borders, Congress must say so explicitly. Quite similar ideas account for the presumption against retroactivity-a straightforward effort to promote reasonable expectations-and the notion that appropriations measures, usually assembled quickly and without much deliberation, will not be taken to amend substantive statutes. Since these norms are intended to require legislative deliberation, Chevron should not overcome them. 
biases in governmental processes and thus to promote principles of fair dealing. These norms are not designed merely to require a clear statement from Congress; they represent a quite general effort to resolve ambiguities in a way that fairly allocates both burdens and benefits in governmental processes. The idea that treaties and statutes should be construed generously to the Indian tribes is a prominent example. 20 4 This principle is designed to require a clear congressional statement before allowing a statute to be interpreted unfavorably to a group that has been mistreated in the past. Similarly, criminal statutes are interpreted favorably to criminal defendants 20 5 and to require mens rea.206 The same idea accounts for the notion that it is not for agencies to discussion of how ideas of this sort might be justified, see Eskridge, supra note 31, at 1047-48; Sunstein, supra note 26, at 483-84. 
United States, 471 U.S. 419, 427 ( (1971); United States v. Nofziger, 878 F.2d 442,452 (D.C. Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 110 S. Ct. 564 ( 
States v. Park, 421 U.S. 658, 670 (1975) (corporate agent may be sued under criminal statute, even absent mens rea showing); United States v. Dotterweich, 320 U.S. 277, 281 (1943) (corporate agent with "responsible relation to a public danger" may be charged with violating criminal statute). decide whether statutes impose on them the duty to act at all. 20 7 
It would be odd to suggest that these principles can be overcome by an agency interpretation. Principles of this sort are self-conscious efforts to counteract administrative or governmental bias, by requiring an express congressional judgment on the point before allowing certain results to be reached. These principles should not be overridden simply because the agency wants them to be. 
Some norms are designed to protect the legislative process by increasing rationality and integrity in that process. In this category belong the ideas that implied repeals are disfavored; that exemptions from taxation or antitrust will be narrowly construed; and that appropriations statutes will rarely be understood to amend substantive statutes. 208 
There is a legitimate argument that Chevron overcomes norms of this sort. Through these norms, courts attempt to coordinate statutes with one another and to promote the coherence of statutory law. The agency is in a superior position to perform that task. Its expertise and experience with related statutes make it better able to fit statutes with one another or to coordinate seemingly inconsistent enactments. 209 Norms designed to promote the coherence of statutory law probably should counteract the agency's view if, but only if, the purpose of the relevant norm is to ensure a clear congressional statement or to carry out likely interpretive instructions from the legislature. If the norm merely reflects the court's own view about how statutes ought to be fit together, Chevron should require the agency's position to prevail. This conclusion is consistent with the Chevron Court's recognition that in the aftermath of the rise of the administrative state, the role of coordinating and making sense of regulatory enactments falls principally on agencies rather than judges. 
The strongest cases for allowing Chevron to prevail involve norms NRC, 901 F.2d 147, 153-56 (D.C. Cir. 1990); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Train, 545 F.2d 320, 327 (2d Cir. 1976); cf. Ohio v. Department of Interior, 880 F.2d 432, 447-48 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (invalidating regulations embodying market-oriented valuation of natural resources). 

conspicuous example. The Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401-7642 (1988), includes a large number of awkwardly related provisions, and the EPA is uniquely able to have an overview of the system as a whole. Moreover, the Clean Air Act relates to the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251-1387 (1988), in important ways, with regulation of the air, for example, possibly increasing pollution of the water. The EPA is in a special position to take account of these effects. 1990) " that are designed to counteract absurd or unjust results. The judgment about what approach is absurd or unjust is likely to be made by reference to traditional legal understandings. At least in general, a contrary administrative judgment ought to be respected. Indeed, a decision by the court to apply its own judgment in this context would, in effect, substitute a judicial for an administrative determination in circumstances in which Congress has delegated policy-making power to the agency. 
An example of the central idea here is the time-honored view that general language ought not lightly be taken to require irrational or absurd consequences. 2 10 General language is quite frequently overinclusive-in the sense that it has unforeseen but perverse applicationsand courts usually will not interpret the statutory text to apply if it would produce absurdity that was not clearly intended by Congress. More particular versions of this idea, with some support in the cases, are that de minimis exceptions will be permitted 21 1 and that the costs and benefits of regulation will usually be subject to some sort of weighing process. 2 12 
In these areas, displacement of ordinary interpretive norms by the agency's view is highly plausible. The agency's specialized fact-finding capacity and policy-making competence are highly likely to be relevant in resolving any ambiguities. Here the court ought to be especially cautious in attributing irrationality or absurdity to the agency's view. It is the agency that is most likely to be in a good position to know whether the application, taken in context of the statutory scheme as a whole, is in fact irrational or absurd. 
to regulatory statutes are usually permitted, agencies should be permitted to decide that de minimis exceptions should not be allowed, because (for example) of the high costs of inquiry into whether a particular exception is or is not de minimis. 21 3 Whether or not this is a persuasive argument, the agency is in a better position than the courts to decide. The salutary interpretive principle in favor of de minimis ( United States, 143 U.S. 457, 459-60 (1892). 
1979); Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy, 613 F.2d 947, 955-56 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 
54-55 ( 655-57 (1980) (plurality opinion); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 1163-65 (D.C. Cir. 1987). But see American Textile Mfrs. Inst. v. Donovan, 452 U.S. 490, 508-12 ( analysis). 
Uniform Standards and "Fine-Tuning" Regulatory Reform, 37 Stan. L. Rev. 1267, 1328-32 ( exceptions, therefore, ought not to defeat an agency construction to the contrary. 
For another example, there may be a question of whether courts are authorized to require a showing of "irreparable injury" and to conduct the ordinary form of balancing before issuing an injunction. The question is of considerable importance to environmental policy. One answer to this question can be found in the Supreme Court's interpretive principle in favor of equitable balancing. 2 14 Whether or not this principle is justified, it should be defeasible upon a showing that the agency disagrees. The Court's choice of a background rule here is not realistically attributable to Congress; it represents instead a contestable judgment about how the statute is best implemented. On that score, the agency's contrary judgment should prevail. 
In many other cases, the meaning of a statute turns at least in part on the rationality of one or another interpretation. 2 15 When this is so, deference is due to the agency's view, unless it is inconsistent with an interpretive norm having another source, or unless the absurdity or irrationality is so palpable as to be something on which reasonable people could not differ. Significantly, it would follow that an agency should be permitted to depart from the literal meaning of the statute in cases involving issues that Congress has not specifically considered, especially when such departures plausibly make sense of the statute in light of Congress's general purposes. 21 6 
common law ordering, courts often departed from the literal meaning of statutes in cases in which literalism produced absurdity or irrationality. In the modem period, similar departures should also be expected, but here the principal agent is the agency rather than the judiciary. The task of softening rigid statutes, and of adapting them to unantici214. See Amoco Prod. Co. v. Village of Gambell, 480 U.S. 531, 544-46 ( Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 U.S. 305, 311-13, 320 (1982). 
interpretation in part because that interpretation would require huge expenditures by regulated industries for few gains in terms of health and safety); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. EPA, 824 F.2d at 1159 n.6 (same under ambiguous provision of Clean Air Act); see also EEOC v. Commercial Office Prods. Co., 108 S. Ct. 1666, 1674 (1988) (deferring to agency interpretation in part because alternative view would lead to "absurd or futile results"). 
Of course, the agency's position must be assessed for arbitrariness under § 706 of the APA, see supra notes 152-155 and accompanying text, and for reasonableness under Chevron's step two, see supra notes 151-155 and accompanying text. 
Mining Congress v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1177, 1193 (D.C. Cir. 1987), in which the court relied on the literal meaning of the word "discarded" to forbid the EPA from applying solid waste regulations to materials held for recycling. It is implausible to think that Congress considered the exceptionally complex issues of policy in American Mining Congress. In light of the complexities, deference was due to an agency that had thought long and hard about the problem. See supra note 149. pated or changed circumstances, has fallen principally to nonjudicial actors. 
CONCLUSION 
Many disputes in contemporary public law involve the relationship between original constitutional principles and a twentieth century governmental apparatus that was created in self-conscious rejection of those principles. Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbu y for the administrative state, is one of many efforts at synthesis. Despite its seemingly technical character, the Chevron principle-in far more substantial ways than more visible decisions of the 1980s-has altered the fabric of modern public law, influencing an enormous range of substantive outcomes in the process. 
In these circumstances, the controversy over the principle is hardly surprising. Chevron has been defended as a plausible reconstruction of legislative instructions, one that amounts to a desirable device for allowing the will of democratically controlled, specialized agencies to prevail over that of unaccountable, generalist judges. In particular, the principle might serve as a means of counteracting characteristic problems in the regulatory process-including, above all, the problems posed by lack of coordination, changed circumstances, statutory rigidity, and complex systemic effects. For the resolution of these problems, agencies have significant advantages over courts. On the other hand, Chevron has been criticized as an inaccurate reading of congressional instructions and as a departure from the principle, central to the system of checks and balances, that those limited by law ought not to be allowed to decide on the meaning of the limitation. 
Both the defenses and the criticisms have force in particular contexts. The effort to mediate between them calls for an attempt to sort out the relationship between the New Deal reformation and the principles of institutional authority that preceded it. More narrowly, it calls for an assessment of likely congressional instructions, often undertaken in the absence of clear legislative guidance and therefore based on an understanding of relevant institutional capacities and biases. I have suggested that the Chevron principle does not apply unless Congress has given law-interpreting power to the agency. This basic principle, calls for deference to an agency's determination when the agency has been granted the basic authority to implement the statute through rulemaking or adjudication. It argues against deference most powerfully when there has been no grant of implementing power at all, but also when an agency has been granted but has not exercised implementing power, when it is deciding on its own jurisdiction, or when it is otherwise likely to have a bias. 
Whether or not a narrow formulation of the Chevron principle is desirable, it is possible to find a place for the competing considerations by exploring ,the relationship between that principle and other norms of statutory interpretation. Indeed, it is precisely here that the legal system will resolve many of the struggles over the roles of Congress, agency, and court in the development of federal regulatory law. 
When the relevant interpretive norm is part of an effort to discern legislative instructions, Chevron is uncontroversially subordinate to that norm. Harder questions arise in cases involving norms that serve substantive or institutional goals not directly connected to a congressional judgment. When these norms are traceable to constitutional considerations, or to other efforts to ensure a clear congressional statement before government may go forward on a particular matter, the Chevron principle should be overcome. And when the norm is an effort to counteract some form of bias, Chevron should be inapplicable. The Chevron principle should prevail, however, when the relevant norm reflects an effort to promote rationality in regulation and when it is intended to ensure coherence and integrity in the administrative process. Here deference to the agency is especially important. 
The meaning of a statute can usually be discerned without the benefit of interpretive principles of the sort that I have discussed here.2 17 But cases of ambiguity are frequent, and it is in these cases that Chevron and other interpretive principles are called into play. By developing a clear view of the relationship among those principles, we might ultimately be able to reconcile Chevron, even in its broader formulations, with approaches to statutory interpretation that help to discipline the administrative state through legal constraints on the exercise of public power. A reconciliation of this sort would count as one among a wide range of steps designed to adapt a legal system founded on common law principles to the aspirations and pathologies of the administrative state. 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
This content downloaded from 195.34.79.253 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 09:58:33 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Philosophers,politicalscientists,and lawyershave devoted considerable attentionto therole ofnormsin thetwoareas forwhichAnglo-American legal systemsare mostfrequentlycelebrated: the common law and constitutionallaw. Thus, for example,judicial elaboration of common law principlesofcontract,tort,and propertyhas been described(alternately) as an efforto promoteeconomicefficiencoyr to protectprivateautonomy; and backgroundnormsof varioussortshave been developed fromthese premises.So too,theroleofnormsin thechoiceamongdifferensttrategies forinterpretingtheopen-ended phrasesoftheConstitutionis reasonably well understood. 
There is a conspicuous gap, however,in the treatmentof statutory interpretationT.he gap is strikingin lightofthefactthattheinterpretation of statuteshas become by farthe mostfrequentand importanttaskfor judges (and administrators)in industrializeddemocracies. Although interpretationof regulatorystatutesfrequentlydeterminesthe content and scope of programsaffecting(forexample) pollution,energy,nuclear power, endangered species, workers,and victimsof discriminationi,t is in thissettingthatcourtsare said to have littleor no room to move. On theusual view,theirroleis to actas agentsofthelegislaturei,mplementing itscommands. Indeed, it is here thatcourtsare said to act,at least most of the time,without"interpretation"or "norms"at all. In these circumstances,thenotionthatnormsplaya major role in statutoryconstruction mightseem iconoclasticor even bizarre. 
In thisessay,I want to argue thatextratextualnorms-understood as principlesabout constitutionaglovernmenti,nstitutionaalrrangements, basic fairness,and regulatoryfailure-do in factplay a crucial role in the interpretationof statutes.Indeed, descriptiveand prescriptivework on thistopicis impossiblewithoutan understandingoftheroleofnorms. My argumentcomes in twobasic parts.In the firstpart,I rejectthe view * Many of the argumentsin thisessayare givenin more detailin a forthcomingbook, AftertheRightsRevolution:ReconceivingtheRegulatoryState (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UniversityPress,1990), and also in "InterpretingStatutesin theRegulatoryState,"Harvard Law Review,vol. 103 (December 1989). 803 that courts can be "agents" of the legislatureand suggest instead that extratextualnorms are a necessarypart of statutoryinterpretationI.n thesecond part,whichis morespeculative,I describepossiblefoundations forextratextualnorms and outline theirrole in statutoryconstruction. Above all, I urge thatit is desirable,not to limitthe role of such norms, but to identifythem,to evaluate them,and to develop and apply norms thatare wellsuitedto,and improvetheperformanceof,modernregulatory systems. 
It is sometimessuggestedthatthestatutor ylanguageis theonlylegitimate basis forinterpretationT.he principalfeatureof the textualistcreed is the belief that courts have no license to rely on "outside sources." A particulartargethere is theuse of normsthatcannotbe tiedto statutory textitself.The language of thestatute-and nothingelse-is thesource ofjudicial power and the object ofjudicial concern. 
Textualism appears to be enjoying a renaissance in a number of recentcases, and perhaps in the academy as well. Whateverits precise form,however,thetextualistapproach is inadequate.The centralproblem isthatwordsare notself-definingt;heirmeaningdepends on bothculture and context.There is no such thingas a preinterpretivetext,and words have no meaning beforeor withoutinterpretationT.o say thisis not to say thatwords used in statutescan mean anythingat all. (Confusion of thetwoquite separatepointshas been frequentin recentworkon literary interpretationand on linguistics.)But itis to say thatstatutorytermsare indeterminatestanding"bythemselves,"and, more important,thatthey never stand by themselves.For thisreason, backgroundnormsof interpretation,orientingthejudicial reader to the textbut not "in" it,are an indispensable part of interpretation. 
Usually the backgroundnormsare so widelyshared-for example, that Congress is speaking in English, that Congress is not joking or attemptingto mislead, or that courts should not decide cases simply according to theirpredilections-that theyare invisible.But in easy as well as hard cases, courtsmustresortto such normsifinterpretationis to proceed. For example, thequestion whetherthe enactmentof federal environmentalstatutespreemptsall of statetortlaw is an easy one-it does not-not because of the statutorytext"itself"but because of universallyshared understandingsabout the limitedpreemptiveeffectof federalenactments. 
So far,perhaps, those who accept textualistapproaches mightbe in agreement.Perhapstheywould agree thatthemeaningofwordsis largely a functionofbackgroundnormsabout how textsshould be approached. Indeed, we maydefinean easy case as one in whichthereis a consensus about thegoverningnorms.But theproblemfortextualismgoes deeper. 
In manyhard cases, thesource ofthedifficultiys thattheparticularkind of background norm and the nature of its application will be highly controversial. 
Assume,forexample, thatthequestion is whethera statutecreating a regulatoryagencyto bar racialdiscriminationin employmentimplicitly authorizes privatesuits by victimsof discriminationagainst employers who have engaged in discrimination.If the statuteand its historyare silenton the question, the case cannot be decided withoutintroducing background norms, which are necessaryto tell interpreterswhat such silencemeans. Thus itshould be unsurprisingthatjudges skepticalabout implied causes of action have relied, not on statutory"text,"but on a backgroundassumption,traceableto a particularunderstandingof separation of powers,thatonly the legislaturemay create such rights,and thatstatutorysilence should be assumed not to do so. 
These considerationsaccount forthe pervasivedifficultiewsithtextualistapproaches to statutoryconstruction:ambiguity,delegation or gaps, overinclusivenessu,nderinclusivenessa,nd changed circumstances. The most familiarproblem is thatstatutorylanguage is sometimesambiguous. It is not clear, for example, whetherthe term"feasible"contemplatescost-benefitanalysis,whethera statutoryreferenceto "wages" is meantto includeemployercontributiontso a pensionprogram,whether regulatorypoweroverthebroadcastingindustryincludescable television, or whethera prohibitionof "discriminationb"arsvoluntaryrace-conscious measures designed to counteractthe effectsof past and presentdiscrimination against blacks.' In all of these cases, moreover,it is uncertain whetherthe language should be taken to referto the originalmeaning of those words for the enacting legislature(assuming thatidea can be made intelligiblein lightof the problems of aggregatingthe views of numerous actors) or should instead take account of contemporaryunderstandingsofwhatthewordsmean. By itself,textualismcannotanswer these questions. 
Statutesmightalso representa delegation of lawmakingpower to courts,or containgaps thatinterpretersmustfill.For example, thebasic termsof the most importantAmerican antitrustlaw-forbidding "conspiracies in restraintof trade"-are uninformativeabout the sorts of norms that mightbe broughtto bear in deciding preciselywhich conspiraciesare unlawful.So too,thestatutoryprohibitionon "discrimination" in civilrightslaw is silenton burdens of pleading and production,the appropriatestatuteof limitationsa,nd a rangeof additionalimplementing rules. In such cases, the problemis thatthe textrequiresinterpretersto look to sources outside of its fourconcerns. 
Sometimes,language thatwould in many contextsbe entirelyunambiguous should not be the only basis for interpretationT.he literal language of a statute-the meaning of itstermsin ordinarysettingswillsuggestan outcome thatwould make littleor no sense. Suppose, for example, that a state law says that no vehicles are permittedin public parksand thata cityproposes to build in a parka monumentconsisting oftanksused in WorldWar 11.2 Here whatappears tobe theunambiguous language must yield,for the statutecould not reasonablybe taken to forbidsuch a monument,which causes none of the harms the statute could be thoughtto prevent. 
The example is not fanciful.The Supreme Court recentlysaid that a statuteexempting state and local public housing agencies "fromall taxation... imposed bythe United States"should not be interpretedto include an exemptionfromfederalestatetax.3The Court held thatthe exemptiondid not mean whatit appeared to say in lightof the contemporaneous understandingthatan excise tax was not ordinarilycomprehended withinthecategoryof"taxation."Or suppose thatthelegislature has said thatan employermay dischargean employee "forany reason." Is the employertherebyauthorizedto fireworkerswho have refusedto commitcrimeson his behalf? Mighta man who has murderedhis wife inheritfromher under a statuteallowing spouses to inherit"under all circumstances"?These are examples of what mightbe describedas the overinclusivenessof textualism:the possibilitythat statutorylanguage, read withoutregard to context,willreach situationsthatitought not to cover. 
Courts encounter the problem frequently.4A passage fromWittgensteinindicatesthe basic difficulty":Someone says to me: 'Shew the childrena game.' I teach them gaming withdice, and the other says 'I didn'tmean thatsortof game.' Must theexclusionof the game withdice have come beforehis mind when he gave me the order?"5The example shows that sometimesthe best interpretationof a textualcommand is one thatruns counter to itsapparent literalmeaning-even in cases in which the author did not have in mind the particularcase at issue or make a judgment about how thatcase should be resolved. 
Although it arises less frequently,there is also a possibilitythat textualismwill be underinclusive.This problem occurs when the text, read outside of context,does not regulateconductthatthe statute,most 
plausiblyread, should be understood to control.A particulardifficulty here is thata statutemay be "evaded" by privateingenuity.The literal language of the statutedoes not cover the situation,but because the privateconduct causes all of the harmsthatthe statuteprevents,courts sometimeshold a statuteapplicable notwithstandingits precise terms.6 ConsiderJusticeHolmes's suggestionthatcourtsare "apt to errbysticking too close to the words of a law where those words importa policythat goes beyond them."7 
The discussion thus far has assumed that circumstanceshave not changed significantlysince the statutewas enacted. But the difficulties of textualismbecome all the more severe when time has affectedthe assumptionsunder whichthestatutewas originallywrittenC.onsiderthe Delaney Clause, which forbidsthe use as food additivesof substances that "induce" cancer. The Delaney Clause was enacted at a timewhen carcinogenicsubstances were difficultto detect,and all detectablecarcinogenswereextremelydangerous.Currentlyc,arcinogensare detectable at exceptionallylow levels,and manyof them pose trivialrisks.In such circumstances,mighttheword"induce" allowthegovernmenttoexempt fromregulationcarcinogensthatpose trivialrisks?Mechanicalapplication ofthetextin newcircumstancesislikelytoproduce interpretivbelunders. 
All thissuggeststwoprincipalpoints.First,and mostfundamentally, there is no such thingas an acontextual "text"thatcan be used as the exclusiveguide to interpretationI.n easy cases, backgroundnorms-on which there is wide or universalconsensus-are part of the process of ascertainingstatutorymeaning.Preciselybecause thenormsare so widely shared, theyappear invisibleand are not an object of controversyI.n othercases,usuallytreatedas hardones,courtsmustresortto a contestable background norm in order to resolve an interpretivedispute. It is in these settings,and in thissense, thattextualismis inevitablyincomplete. 
Second, it is by no means obvious thatcourtsshould alwaysrelyon the textor on the "plain meaning" of wordseven in cases in whichsuch relianceis possibleand leads to determineresults.An interpretivsetrategy thatrelies exclusivelyon the ordinary,dictionarydefinitionof words is preciselythat-an interpretivestrategythatreflectsa choiceamong competing possibilities-and in manycases it willproduce irrationalitya,bsurdityo,r an inferiorsystemoflaw.The invocationofbackgroundnorms of various sortspromisesto be a salutarycorrective. 
Thus far we have seen that the most prominentspecies of the agency viewof thejudicial role appears to fail.It is timeto see whatconclusions emergefromthatfailure.On whatremainsthemostwellknownapproach to the matter,the processof statutoryconstructioninvolvesascertaining the meaning of the legislativecommand in the particularcase. This approach sees the courtsas agents or servantsof the legislature. 
On the agency view,courtsshould say what the statutemeans, and in thatprocesslanguage, historya,nd structureare relevant;and perhaps those who accept the agency view,rejectingtextualism,would concede the need forinterpretiveprinciplesto help orientreader to text.But on thisview,background norms of other sorts-taken up below-are impermissibleT.he agencyviewamountsto a formalisatpproachto statutory construction-formalistbecause it does not permitcourtsto undertake value-laden inquiries into statutoryfunctionand failureas part of the process of interpretation. 
The agency view is usually defended by a claim of legitimacy.In a democraticsystemo,ne withseparatedpowers,itis said tobe impermissible for courts to invoke norms that cannot be traced to an authoritative textualinstrumentT.he claimofillegitimacyisbuttressedby(orreducible to) a range of prudentialconsiderations:the use of backgroundnorms willtend to increasejudicial discretion,decrease legislativeattentiveness, produce uncertaintya,nd riskusurpationbyjudges of powers accorded to legislativeand executiveactors.In thissense,thedebateoverformalism in statutoryconstructionreplicatesa similardebate in constitutionalaw. As a particularlycrispexpressionof the agencyviewof thejudicial role, considerthewordsofJusticeHolmes, who, afterdescribinga regulatory statuteas "foolish,"added: "If my fellowcitizenswant to go to Hell I willhelp them. It's myjob."8 
The agencyviewcontainsan importanttruth.It would be improper forcourtsto "interpret"statutesby construingthemto mean whatever thejudges thinkwould be best. No one could defend an approach to statutoryconstructionthat would license judges to say that a statute meanswhatevera good statutewouldsay.Itfollowsfromthisunderstanding thatwherethereis neitherinterpretivdeoubtnor constitutionaolbjection, it is thejudgment of the electorallyaccountable branch,and not thatof thejudges, thatwill prevail. 
Notwithstandingthese considerations,the formalistposition,and the agency view of statutoryconstruction,are subject to two decisive objections.First,the formalistconceptionof "meaning"is fartoo crude. As we have seen,language is not self-interpretinCgo.urtscannot"simply" be agents. The instructionsof the principal are unintelligiblewithout backgroundnormsthatinterpretersalone can supply.It is importantto emphasize that this is a conceptual or logical claim, not a proposition about the appropriate distributionof powers as among administrators, courts,and legislatures. 
Suppose thismuch were acknowledged,and itwere suggestedthat courts should relyon the agency view "as much as possible." This is a 1953), vol. 1, p. 249. 
highlyambiguous concept,but perhaps itcan be takento argue in favor ofadherencetolegislativemeaningtotheextentthatitisfairlyascertainable forjudges equipped withconventionalor uncontestedbackgroundnorms. The second problem forthe agencyview is thatitsclaim of illegitimacy relies on question begging and probably indefensiblepremises. That claimmustbe defendedbya setofinstitutionaalnd substantivaerguments, and thoseargumentsare hardtosupply.The claimmustbe thata formalist approach to construction-again, to the extentthatit is possible-will lead on balance to the best or most sensible systemof law. But it is far more likelythatthe introductionof otherconsiderationswillaccomplish thatgoal. Assume,forexample,thatstatutor ylanguage,whileambiguous, is mostnaturallyread to lead in a directionthatis,bygeneralconsensus, absurd and could not plausiblyhave been intended; thata statutemight be understoodas givingopen-ended authorityto a bureaucracy;thatthe most obvious reading of a statuteprovides bizarre or unjust resultsin lightofchangesin thefiftyearssinceitsenactmentt;hatan appropriations measure appears to intrudeon a carefullyelaborated(and sensible)compromise in the environmentalfield. In all of these settings,invocation of backgroundnormswilllead to betteroutcomes. In such cases, courts thatactas somethingotherthanmereagentswillproduce a moresensible systemof law. 
How, in lightof these considerations,ought the problem of statutory constructionto be understood?Some help in thisregardmightbe found in an unlikelyplace. In interpretingstatutes,courtshave oftenreliedon canonsn" of construction.I will use the term "canons" to referto all backgroundnorms thatare used in statutoryconstruction. 
Anydefenseof thecanons mustcome to termswithone of the most important(and characteristicc)ontributionosf the legal realistmovement, whichwas to discreditthe canons. The mostimportantexample is Karl Llewellyn'scelebratedeffortto demonstratethatforeach canon thereis an equal canon pointingin the opposite direction.9In Llewellyn'sview, an inspectionof the decisions revealed thatthe canons did not help to decide cases; insteadtheyoperatedas mechanical,after-the-farcetcitations disguisingthe reasons fordecision. This view of the canons has deeply penetrated modern legal culture. Almost no one has had a favorable word to say about the canons in manyyears. 
But the canons of constructioncontinueto be a prominentfeature in the federal and state courts.The use of guides to construction-in theformofbackgroundunderstandingsand principlesrequiringa "clear statement"from Congress in various settings-can be found in every or Canons about How StatutesAre to Be Construed,"VanderbilLtaw Review3 (1950): 395. area of modern law. And thereis no sign thatcanons are decreasingin importance-partly, as we have seen, because of theirinevitabilityand partlybecause oftheirplausibilityon substantivegrounds.The deviation betweenjudicial practiceand academicconsensusis somethingofa puzzle. 
An analogy may be helpfulhere. The law of contractsis pervaded by-indeed, itconsistslargelyof-a setofprinciplesfillingin contractual gaps when the parties have been silent,or when the meaning of their words is unclear. The use of implied termsis a familiarpart of the law ofcontracta;nd itwouldbe mostpeculiartosaythattheyare an illegitimate incursion into the usual process of "interpreting"the parties' intent. Withoutimplied termsof some sort,contractssimplywould not be susceptibleto construction. 
To a large degree, interpretivenorms serve the same functionin publiclaw.They too helpjudges toconstruebothstatementsand silences; theytoo should not be seen as the intrusionof controversiajludgments into "ordinary"interpretationB.ut thereare differencesas well as similarities.In the law of contract,itis oftensaid thatimpliedtermsshould attemptto "mimic the market"by doing what the parties would do if theyhad made provisionson the subject. In the law of statutoryconstruction,by contrast,the notionof "mimickingthe market"is farfrom a complete guide. Sometimesit willbe extremelyunclear how Congress wouldhave resolvedthequestion;sometimestheresolutionoftheenacting Congress would have been differentfromthatof the currentCongress, and it is not clear whose resolutionshould control; sometimescourts properly call into play principles-many of them constitutionally inspired-that push statutesin directionsthatdivergefromtheconclusion thatCongress would have reached ifit had resolvedthe matter. 
Despite these differencest,he analogy to contractlaw revealsthatit is impossibleto dispense withbackgroundnormsin interpretingterms. In the contextof statutoryconstruction,however,such normswilloften servefunctionsotherthan thatof applyingthejudgment thatCongress would have reached ifit had addressed the question. 
Partoftheproblemiscomingtotermswiththecanons,or withbackground normsof interpretations,temsfromthe factthattheyservea varietyof differentgoals. Those goals fallin fourbasic categories. designed to orientjudicial readers to the textin order to help them to ascertainitsmeaningin theparticularcase. This is themostuncontroversial functionofinterpretivperinciplest,houghnotall ofthemsensiblypromote thisgoal. Consider,forexample,theidea thatthelanguage ofa particular provisionwillbe taken in the contextof the statuteas a whole and will not be interpretedso as to do violence to statutorystructure.The understandingthat even apparentlyunambiguous statutorytermsmight 
Normsand StatutorIynterpretation 811 have a counterintuitivemeaning if other provisionsof the statuteso indicate is a sensible way of understandingstatutorymeaning in the particularcase. whatmightbe called theinterpretiveinstructionsofthelegislature.Such principlesare designed to capture an actual or hypotheticallegislative judgment about how statutesshould be construed.They do not serveas guidance to meaning in the particularcase but, instead,attemptto incorporate explicitor implicitcongressionalcommands withrespect to the interpretiveprocess. 
The easiest cases here involveexplicitlegislativeinstructionsabout interpretationT.hus the firstsectionsof the United States Code set out a seriesofguidelinesforcourtsto followin interpretingstatutes.'0When Congress has been explicit,therecan be no objection tojudicial use of the relevantinstructions.Some interpretiveprinciples,however,are a product of an understandingof implicitratherthan explicitlegislative interpretivienstructionsC.onsidertheidea thatstatuteswillbe interpreted so as to be constitutionalratherthan unconstitutional,or thatjudicial reviewof administrativebehavior will be assumed in the absence of a clear congressionalinstructionto the contrary. promotebetterlawmaking.Such principlesmight,forexample,minimize judicialor administrativdeiscretionor pushlegislativeprocessesin desirable directions.Principlesof thissortattemptneitherto orientthe reader to the textin the particularcase nor to capture congressionalinstructions withrespecttointerpretationT. he effortisinsteadtoimprovelawmaking processes and the deliberationand accountabilitythatare supposed to accompanythem.In thisrespect,some interpretiveprinciplesfulfilgloals associated withthe separationof powers and withplausible assessments of comparativeinstitutionaclompetence.They are designed above all to channel certaindecisions throughcertaininstitutionsor to improvethe operation of those institutions.Examples include the idea that appropriationsstatutes,usuallydone hastily,willnot be understoodto amend substantivsetatutest;hatimplicitrepealsofpreviouslawswillbe disfavored; thatstatuteswillnot ordinarilybe read to interferewiththe president's power in foreignaffairs. purposes whollyapart fromstatutorymeaning, interpretiveintent,or the lawmakingprocess. The categoryof substantiveprinciplesspans a wide range. Substantiveprinciplesmay reflectan objectionablejudicial value judgment; but they mightderive instead from policies that are easy to defend. 
Interpretivenormsoftenderivefromconstitutionalprinciples.It is a familiaridea thatwhen a statutemightbe interpretedto be valid or invalid,courtsshouldconstrueitso thatitsurvivesconstitutionaclhallenge. There are numerous othersubstantivenormsas well; manyof themare withoutconstitutionailnspiration.Such normscounsel courtsnottoinfer privatecauses of actionfromregulatorystatutest,o assume thatlegislation of Congress applies onlywithinthe territoriajlurisdictionof the United States,not to inferexemptions fromtaxation,to assume that criminal statutesrequiremensrea, to avoid irrationalityto, counteractobsolescence, and (an outmoded norm) to protectcommon law rightsin the absence of a clear statementfromCongress. 
All of these considerationssuggest an alternativeto the conventional understandingsofstatutoryinterpretationT. he statutorytextisofcourse thestartingpoint,but itbecomes intelligibleonlybecause ofbackground norms that give it content.Usually, those norms are so widelyshared, and so uncontroversial,that the text"alone" appears to be a sufficient basis forinterpretations;tatementsof thissortmean thattogetherwith generallyagreed upon interpretiveprinciples,the meaning of the text is notin doubt. In manycases, however,thetextwillproduce ambiguity, overinclusiveness,or underinclusiveness. 
In such cases, courts often must resortto background norms of various sorts.Such normsare sometimesdesigned to reveal meaning in the particularcases; theyare sometimesintendedto serveproceduralor substantivepolicies. Sometimestheyserve theirintended purpose well, and those purposes are not terriblycontroversial.But sometimesthe relevantpurposesare disputable-considernormscallingfortheprotection offederalism,therule oflenityin criminalcases,theprotectionofIndian tribes-and sometimesit is unclear thatthose purposes are in factwell served by the particularprinciple. 
Backgroundnormsvaryfromone countryto another;therelevantprinciples diverge sharplyin accordance with the political understandings thatprevailin the nation'slegal culture.It is in thislightthatone should understand disagreementsabout interpretivenorms in differentlegal systemsB.ackgroundnormsalso differfromone periodtoanotherwithin any particularcountry.In the United States,forexample, the principles 
of the late nineteenthand earlytwentiethcenturiesreflecteda beliefin common law orderingthatwas largelyrepudiated in the 1930s. 
In thissection,I provide an outline of the basis forand contentof interpretivenormsthatare designedto promoteconstitutionaplurposes, and the basic goals of deliberativegovernment,in the post-New Deal period. 
Sourcesofinterpretipvreinciples 
a) In general-.Interpretive normsrequiresources;and itisimportant to be quite explicitabout themhere. The firstand moststraightforward is the Constitution.Understandingsabout constitutionalarrangements provide a significantamount of the backgroundagainstwhichstatutory constructionoccurs. To be sure, there is frequentlyuncertaintyabout constitutionalmeaning; and statutorydisputesare sometimes,in part,a functionof a broader dispute about the nature of the constitutional structure.Often,however,thereis sufficientconsensus about the Constitutionto ground a large part of interpretivepractice. 
The second source of interpretivenorms-also straightforwardconsistsofunderstandingsabout theappropriateand actualperformance of governmentalinstitutions.One might,for example, conclude that appropriationsstatutesare writtenhastilyand withoutdeliberation;that in the face of ambiguity,courtsshould deferto administrativeinterpretationsof law; or that,on the contrary,regulatoryagencies should have littlediscretion.If one weresimplydescribingstatutoryconstructiono,ne would finda number of backgroundnormstraceableto understandings of preciselythissort. 
b) The regulatorsytate.-The thirdand finalsource of background norms involves the intended functionsof regulatorystatutesand the waysin whichsuch statutestend to failin practice.A detailed discussion of thesepointswould be wellbeyondthescope ofthepresentdiscussion, but a briefoutline willbe useful. 
The goals of regulatoryregimesspan a wide range. Some statutes are designed to promote economic efficiencyo,thersto redistributeresources in public-regardingways,to reflectsocial values or aspirations, to counteractthe social subordinationof disadvantaged groups, or to enforce the termsof pure interest-groupdeals. Moreover,statutesfail fora varietyofreasons.Sometimestheyare adverselyaffectedbyinterestgroup power, collective action problems, the absence of political accountabilityor deliberation,obsolescence, or lack of coordinationwith other statutes.Other statutesfailbecause of implementationproblems. Statutesdesigned to redistributeresources,forexample, mayfailto take account of the way that the marketcan nullifythe intended effects. Statutesdesigned to reduce or eliminatethe social subordinationof disadvantaged groups, or to promote noncommodityvalues like environmental diversity,are frequentlysubject in the implementationprocess to preciselythe same obstaclesthatmake such statutesnecessaryin the firstplace. Governmentfailurethus replicatesmarketfailure.'2 
Conclusions of thissortare principallyof interestto regulatorsin thelegislativeand executivebranches;buttheyare relevanttothejudiciary as well. Legal interpretationof regulatorystatuteshas in factbeen responsiveto understandingsabout thelikelyfunctionand failureofthose statutes.Moreover,legal interpretationis likelyto be improvedby such understandings.It is notsimple,tobe sure,to make such understandings operational-to explain exactlyhow theyshould be used in hard cases. But itis not difficulto show how understandingsof regulatoryfunction and failurehave worked,and should work,to produce norms-or so I willbe arguing. 
In this section, I brieflydescribe interpretivenorms drawn from the threesources described above. statutoryinterpretationspan a wide range. The Constitutionprovides thebackdropagainstwhichstatutesare writtenand interpretedM.oreover, federal courts underenforcemany constitutionalnorms,and for good reasons.13 Institutionaclonstraints-mostnotably,the courts'limitedfactfindingabilityand weak electorallegitimation-lead courtsto be reluctant to vindicateconstitutionalprincipleswiththe vigorappropriate to governmentalbodies witha betterdemocraticpedigree. It followsthatsome statutesshould be understood as responses to Congress's constitutional responsibilitieseven if courtswould not require Congress to carryout those responsibilitiesin the firstinstance.Relativelyaggressivestatutory interpretation-pushingstatutesaway fromconstitutionalltyroublesome ground-provides a way for courts to vindicatenorms that do in fact have constitutionalstatus. 
a) Federalism.-In the systemof American public law, the basic assumptionis thatstateshave authorityto regulatetheirown citizensand territoryT.his assumptionjustifiesan interpretivenorm calling for a clear statementin order to support federalpreemptionof statelaw. 
b) Politicaldeliberationt;heconstitutionaanltipathtyonakedinterest-group transfers.-The American constitutionalregime is built on hostilityto measures thatimpose burdens or grantbenefitsmerelybecause of the politicalpower of privategroups; some public value is required forgovernmentalaction.This norm,traceableto theoriginsof theConstitution and firmlyrootedin currentlaw,has a numberofimplicationfsorstatutory interpretationI.t suggests,forexample, thatcourtsshould develop in 
Normsand StatutorIynterpretation 815 terpretivestrategiesto promote deliberationin government-by, for example, remandingissues involvingconstitutionallysensitiveinterests or groups forreconsiderationbythelegislatureor byregulatoryagencies when deliberation appears to have been absent. It also suggests that statutesthatembody mere interest-groupdeals should be narrowlyconstrued.Much ofAmericanadministrativleawis foundedon theseideas.14 c) Politicalaccountabilityth;enondelegatiopnrinciple-.In the period since the New Deal, courtshave permittedCongress to delegate exceptionallybroad policy-makingauthorityto regulatoryagencies.Such broad delegationswereatone timethoughttooffendArticleI oftheConstitution, which vestslegislativepower in Congress. In recentyears,courtshave been reluctantoenforcethenondelegationdoctrineB.utthroughstatutory construction,courts are sometimesable to vindicatethe constitutional principle against delegation of legislativepower. They can do so, for example, by narrowlyconstruingdelegationsof policy-makingpower. 
d) Propertyand contractrights.-In the aftermathof the New Deal reformationc,ourtshave been reluctantto use theConstitution'sexplicit protectionof propertyand contractin a way thatwould interferewith social and economic regulation.But courtscan vindicatethoserightsless intrusivelythroughthe narrowconstructionof regulatorystatutesthat raiseseriousconstitutionadloubtsunderthecontractsand takingsclause. 
e) Welfarerights.-In recentyears,the Supreme Court has rejected claims that the Constitutionguarantees rightsof basic subsistence;the resistancestemslargelyfromreasonsofdemocraticlegitimacyB.ut perhaps a Court thatsaw substantiveforcein the claim forconstitutionawlelfare rightswould attempttovindicatethatclaim,notthroughtheConstitution itselfb,ut throughaggressivestatutoryconstructionso as to ensureagainst irrationalor arbitrarydeprivationsof benefits.Such an approach would tend to produce even-handedness in the distributionof welfare in a democracythathas committeditselfto a "social safetynet." Aggressive statutoryconstruction,requiringa clear statementforexclusions,might produce manyof the advantagesof recognitionof constitutionawlelfare rightswithoutimposing nearlyso severe a strainon thejudiciary. 
f) Disadvantagedgroups-.Some of the most difficultconstitutional questions involve the extent of protectionaffordedto disadvantaged groups by the equal protectionclause; and in many cases, courtshave affordedless protectionthan theymightbecause of a desire to minimize interferencewiththe politicalbranchesof government.Thus the Court has required a showingof discriminatory"intent"in order to make out a violationof the equality principle,and in various ways it has limited its protectionof blacks, women, and the handicapped.'5 In this light, statutesthatprovideprotectionforsuch groups,or againstdiscriminatory effects,mightwell be seen as a legislativeresponse to its (judiciallyunderenforced)constitutionadluties.Through statutoryconstructionsc,ourts can ensure thatthe relevantnorms are vindicated. straightforwardltyo institutionalconcerns,havingto do withthe actual or appropriatefunctioningof governmentalentities.Most of theseprinciples are straightforwaradnd can be discussed quite briefly. 
a) Appropriatiosntsatutes.-Courtsconstrueappropriationsprovisions quite narrowly.That principle can be connected withjudicial understandingsabout the characterof the appropriationsprocess, in which legislativedeliberationis highlyunlikely,and interest-grouppower is peculiarlylikelytomakeitseffectsfelt.Narrowconstructionofappropriationsstatutespromotesdeliberationin government. 
b) Thepresumptioinnfavorofjudicial review-.Courts presume that thelegislaturehas notprecludedjudicial reviewofagencydecisions.This presumption is partly attributableto a belief-vindicated by recent experience' that regulatoryagencies are susceptibleto factionalism and self-interestedrepresentationJ.udicialreviewoperatesas a powerful ex ante deterrentagainstdangersof thissort;itis also an ex post corrective.IfCongressistoeliminatejudiciarleviewi,tmustdo so unambiguously. 
c) Impliedexemptionfrsomtaxation.-Courts do not inferexemptions fromtaxation.This principleis partlya resultof a desire to protectthe Treasury; it is partlya productof a viewthatexemptionsfromtaxation frequentlyreflectthe influenceof well-organizedprivategroups. 
rule oflaw. The mostconspicuous example is the rule of lenity:criminal statuteswillbe construedfavorablytothedefendant,above all topromote fairnotice.Other illustrationsinclude ajudicial assumptionthatstatutes do not apply retroactivelyt,hatadministrativediscretionis narrow,and thatadministratorshave the authorityto proceed by rule. interpretivenormsmightbe designed to counteractfailuresin social and economic regulation. In this space, it will be possible only to list the relevantnorms.Where thereis interpretivedoubt,a perceptionof characteristicpathologiesin regulatorylegislationhelpsin statutoryconstruction. Courts should, I suggest,construe regulatorystatutesso that ( politicallyunaccountable actorsare prohibitedfromdecidingimportant issues; ( ( intoa coherentwhole;( 
developments of law, policy,and fact; ( substantiverightsare kept narrow; ( regulationare taken into account; and, mostgenerally,( measuredagainstthestatute'sown purposes,isavoided. These principles apply acrosstheuniverseofregulatorystatutes,thoughtheirapplication willvarywiththe statutoryfunction. 
In lightof the conventionaldifficultieins theimplementationprocess, courtsshould also, I suggest,generouslyconstruestatutesdesigned to protecttraditionallydisadvantaged groups and noncommodityvalues. Courts should attemptto ensure as well thatthe costsof regulationare proportionateto thebenefitsand thatde minimisexceptionsto regulatory requirementsare permittedor required. Finally,statutesthat embody interestgroup transfersshould be narrowlyinterpreted. 
It shouldbe clearthatsome oftheseideas are a productofcontestable substantivetheories.Some of them depend fortheirsupport on views about the usual nature of regulatoryfailure;and it would of course be possible to accept some of the principleswhile rejectingothers. Notwithstandingtheirnumberand variety,moreover,thevariousnormsare united by certaingeneral goals. These include, above all, the effortto promote deliberationin government,to furnishsurrogatesforit when it is absent,to limitfactionalismand self-interestedrepresentation,and to help bringabout politicalequality.All of the normsare responsiveto an understandingof the various reasons forstatutesand of the various ways thattheytend to fail in practice.Of course it would be necessary to develop rules of priorityand harmonizationin cases of conflict. Illustrations prohibitsthe sale of food additivesthat "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal" or are found "aftertestswhich are appropriate for the evaluation of the safetyof food additives,to induce cancer in man and animal." As we have seen, the draftersof the clause believed that few additivescaused cancer and that those thatdid so were extremely dangerous. By the 1980s, however,it was clear that many substances were carcinogenic,but that a number of them created exceptionally minorrisks.These substancesincludednaturaldietaryconstituentpsosing dangers thatsurpass those of artificialchemicals. 
These developments severelyundermined the assumptionsof the Congress thatenacted the Delaney Clause, and indeed made it appear quite perversein manyof itsapplications-banning as itdid substances that posed littleor essentiallyno riskto health. One consequence was thatmanufacturers,havingbeen forbiddento use food additivesposing a de minimisriskof cancer,used instead additivesthatcaused farmore serious risksof other diseases-thus creatingwhat is quite possiblya significanitncreasein illnessesand deathsfromfoodadditives.In response, the Food and Drug Administration(FDA)-invoking backgroundprinciples against obsolescence and in favor of de minimisexceptionsinterpretedthe clause to permitexemptionsof trivialrisks.It said that it would approve food additivesthatposed a de minimisriskof cancer. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Districtof Columbia held that the FDA's position was unlawful.'7 In the court's view, the Delaney Clause was simplyunambiguous on the point. But this interpretationwas farfrominevitable.Read in itscontext,therewas no such clarityC.ongresssimplydid notfocuson thequestionofde minimisrisks. It is farfromclear thatthe court'smechanicalreadingof the statutewas sensiblefromthe perspectiveof itsoriginalauthors,whose assumptions simplydid not hold in the 1980s. The background against which the Delaney Clause was writtenwas so differentfrompresentcircumstances thatthe statutoryterms"induce cancer" mustbe treatedas ambiguous. Whethera substance"induces" cancer withinthe meaningof the clause mightwell be a functionof the degree of riskthat it posed. In these cirumstancesi,nterpretatioonf the clause to permitde minimisexceptions seems quite consistentwithpermissibleunderstandingsofjudicial interpretationand quite sensibleto boot. The court'sdecisionto thecontrary was thereforemisguided. group of mentallyretarded people brought suit against a facilitythat was found to contain dangerous conditions.Many of the residentshad been physicallyabused, brutallymistreated,or drugged; and the facility was utterlyinadequate forthe habilitationof the retarded.As the basis of their legal claim, the plaintiffsinvoked the "bill of rights"in the DevelopmentallyDisabled Assistanceand Bill of RightsAct.'9 The bill of rightscontained a set of legislativefindings,includingthe following: treatments,ervicesa,nd habilitatiofnorsuchdisabilities. 
personwithdevelopmentaldisabilitiesshouldbe designedto maximizethedevelopmental potentiaolf thepersonand shouldbe providedin a settingthatis least restrictivoeftheperson'spersonaliberty. 
assurethatpublicfundsare notprovidedtoanyinstitutio.n.. thatdoes notprovidetreatments,ervicesa,nd habilitatiownhichis appropriateto theneedsofsuchpersons. 
The question in Pennhurstwas whether the bill of rightscreated legallyenforceablerightsor whetherit instead set out a set of goals or aspirations that could not be vindicatedin court. Whether the bill of rightswas legallyenforceablewas an uncertainissue in lightof the text 
and historyof the act. Withouta backgroundinterpretiveprinciple,the case was probablyimpossibleto resolve. 
In holdingforthe governmentaldefendant,theSupreme Courtdid not deny thatthe conventionalsources of interpretationleftthe case in equipoise. Instead it invoked a backgroundnorm: "If Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys,it must do so unambiguously.By insistingthatCongress speak witha clear voice, we enable the States to exercise their choice knowingly,cognizant of the consequences of their participation."Pennhurstwas thus decided as a resultofan interpretivneormthatwasa resultoftheCourt'sunderstanding of the constitutionalbackground-a norm thatcould not be connected to the statuteat issue in the case. 
For reasons explored above, federalismprinciplesare properlyinvoked, at least in ordinarysettings,to require a clear statementfrom Congress forthe impositionof significantdutieson the states.If the bill of rightshad been held legallyenforceable,the stateswould have faced an enormous financialburden, one that they had not, in view of the ambiguityofthestatute,necessarilyagreedtoincur.But twoconsiderations suggestthatPennhurswtas incorrectlydecided. First,federalismprinciples have much less forcein cases in whichCongressis attemptingto protect a traditionallydisadvantaged group fromthe politicalprocesses of the states. Here the ordinarypresumption in favor of state autonomy is countered by the history and implementation of the fourteenth amendment-a self-consciouslimitationon state power. Invocation of principlesof state autonomy in the contextof a sociallysubordinated group-to justifya narrowreading of a statuteenacted on itsbehalfis positivelyperversein lightof constitutionalstructureand history. 
Second, an underenforcedconstitutionalnorm calls foraggressive constructionof statutesinvolvingthedevelopmentallydisabled.The Court has been extremelycautious in using the Constitutionto protectthe disabled, largelyforinstitutionalreasons. In holdingthatthe equal protectionclause does notentitlethementallyretardedto special protection, forexample, the Court stressedthatfederaland statelegislatureshave in fact responded to the pervasive mistreatmentof the retarded,and that courts should be reluctantto intrude in so dramatic a way into democratic processes.20In these circumstances,it remains possible to argue thatthe best substantivetheoryof the equal protectionclause in factaccordsspecialprotectiontothedisabled,and thatwhenotherbranches give such protection,theyare carryingout theirconstitutionalresponsibilities. 
It followsthatwhen Congress has takenstepsto providesafeguards forthat group, the Court should take into account the underenforced characterof the equality norm in order to give statutesinvolvingthe disabled a hospitableratherthan grudginginterpretationI.t is puzzling indeed thatthe PennhurstCourt relied on a backgroundnorm in favor of federalismin a case involvinga group and a rightsafeguardedbythe fourteenthamendment. 
Because language "by itself"is withoutmeaning, and in light of the existence of gaps or ambiguitiesin hard cases, interpretivenorms of various sorts are indispensable-desirable and in any case inevitable. Statutoryinterpretationcannotgo forwardwithoutbackgroundprinciples that orient reader to text,fillgaps in the face of legislativesilence, or provide the backdrop againstwhichto read linguisticcommands. Some such principlesaid courtsin discerningthe meaningof particularstatutes, or help toimplementCongress'sactual or likelyinterpretiveinstructions; othersarerootedin constitutionacloncerns;othersarebasedon assessments of institutionaplerformance;and stillothersattemptto respond to characteristicfailingsof regulatorylegislation.In all of theserespects,norms of statutoryconstruction,far frombeing obsolete or representingan illegitimatejudicial value judgment, mustoccupy a prominentplace in the theoryand practiceof statutoryinterpretation. 
The ultimatetaskis to develop a set of interpretivenormsor backgroundunderstandings-sensitiveto constitutionasltructurei,nstitutional design,the New Deal reformationa,nd thediversefunctionsand failings of governmentalactorsand statutoryregimes-with whichto approach social and economic regulationin a systemthathas largelyabandoned common law categories.And itis possible to generatea seriesof norms, all with support in currentlaw, that can help accomplish some of the goals of deliberativegovernmentin the post-New Deal period. In this way,statutoryconstructioncan serveas an allyof other,more ambitious strategiesdesigned to promotesome of the originalconstitutionalgoals in a dramaticallychanged legal environment.It is fartoo muchto expect statutoryconstructionto respond to all of the failingsof the regulatory state.But itis not too much to expect thatthe processof interpretation can make the situationbetterratherthan worse. 
By "paradoxes of the regulatory state," I mean self-defeating regulatory strategies-strategies that achieve an end precisely opposite to the one intended, or to the only public-regarding justification that can be brought forward in their support.' This definition excludes, and I will not discuss, a number of pathologies of the regulatory state that are clearly related to the phenomenon of regulatory paradoxes, such as strategies whose costs exceed their benefits, or that have unintended adverse consequences. An example of a regulatory paradox would be a Clean Air Act that actually made the air dirtier,2 or a civil rights law that increased the incidence of racial discrimination.' 
A large literature, inspired by public choice theory and welfare economics, has grown up around the theory that purportedly public-interested regulation is almost always an effort to create a cartel or to serve some private interest at the public expense.4 Although I shall be drawing on much of that literature here, I do not conclude, f Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Some of the arguments in this essay expand on Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State ch 3 (Harvard, forthcoming 1990). I am grateful to Frank Easterbrook, Jon Elster, Larry Kramer, Geoffrey Miller, Sam Peltzman, Richard Posner, Frederick Schauer, George Stigler, David Strauss, and Alan Sykes for helpful suggestions. For financial support, I am grateful to the James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. 
I For a more precise discussion, see Section II. 
2 The current Clean Air Act does reflect this paradox in some contexts, though its overall effect is beneficial. See text at notes 10-12 (regulatory successes) and 40-42 (shortcomings of Clean Air Act). 
generally Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of Sex DiscriminationLaws, 56 U Chi L Rev 1311 (1989); and Richard A. Posner, The Efficiency and the Efficacy of Title VII, 136 U Pa L Rev 513, 520 (1987). There is, however, a good deal of evidence that on balance, these laws have reduced discrimination. See James S. Heckman and Brook S. Payner, Determiningthe Impact of FederalAntidiscriminationPolicy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina, 79 Am Econ Rev 138 (1989); Richard B. Freeman, Black Economic Progress After 1964: Who Has Gained and Why?, in Sherwin Rosen, ed, Studies in Labor Markets 247 Workplace: An Economic Perspective,56 U Chi L Rev 1337 (1989). 
Robert D. Tollison, Rent Seeking: A Survey, 35 Kyklos 575, 591-9 as some of that literature appears to, that the appropriate response to regulatory paradoxes is to abandon regulation altogether and rest content with the operation of private markets. In many cases the market itself produces harmful or even disastrous results, measured in terms of efficiency or justice.5 The appropriate response to the paradoxes of regulation is not to return to a system of "laissez faire,"'6 but to learn from past failures. To this end, I outline the lessons, for legislators, judges, and administrators, that are to be drawn from the omnipresence of regulatory paradoxes. My most general goal is to describe some reforms by which we might restructure regulatory institutions so as to achieve their often salutory purposes, while at the same time incorporating the flexibility, respect for individual autonomy and initiative, and productive potential of economic markets. 
I. THE PERFORMANCE OF THE REGULATORY STATE: A PREFATORY 
NOTE 
In even the most prominent evaluations of the performance of the regulatory state, explorations of the real world consequences of regulatory intervention are strikingly infrequent. Work in administrative law, throughout the long history of that subject, has been conspicuously silent on the question.7 That silence is unfortunate, for evaluation of regulatory controls and legal doctrines must depend in large part on their effects in the world. The purpose of the ' Much of the relevant literature focuses on the evils of "rent-seeking"-the expenditure of resources on the transfer of wealth through law rather than on the production of wealth through markets. Insofar as this is a normative critique, it is an ideological one, and a peculiar one at that. All laws have redistributive functions, and some such laws have powerful arguments in their support. Consider measures preventing environmental degradation or race and sex discrimination. Moreover, the expenditure of resources on laws is part and parcel of the practice of citizenship, and it would be wrong to devalue that practice because of the admittedly frequent phenomenon of self-interested political behavior on behalf of causes lacking public-regarding justifications. 
I The term is of course misleading insofar as it suggests an absence of governmental controls. Even a system of laissez faire is pervaded by legal duties and disabilities that arise from contract, tort, and property law. 
performance. See Louis L. Jaffe, Judicial Control of Administrative Action (Little, Brown, 1965); and Kenneth Culp Davis, Administrative Law Treatise (K.C. Davis Co., 2d ed 1978). The problem continues with more recent work. See Richard B. Stewart, The Reformation of American AdministrativeLaw, 88 Harv L Rev 1669 (1975); and James 0. Freedman, Crisis and Legitimacy: The Administrative Process and American Government (Cambridge, 1978). For essays reflecting more concern with empirical matters, see Susan Rose-Ackerman, ProgressiveLaw and Economics And the New Administrative Law, 98 Yale L J 341 (1988); Bruce A. Ackerman and Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law, 37 Stan L Rev 1333 (1985); and John J. Donohue III, Is Title VII Efficient?, 134 U Pa L Rev 14 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is to alter the conduct of private actors in certain ways. Evaluations that refer to "checks and balances" or "legitimacy," 8 or that deal in general or speculative terms with the effects of bureaucratic incentives or well-organized private groups, are of limited use if unaccompanied by a solid understanding of the actual consequences of regulatory programs. Attention to those consequences, and their implications for legislative and administrative policy, is perhaps the principal task for administrative law in the next generation. 
Unfortunately, empirical assessments of the consequences of regulation remain in a primitive state; but it is possible to draw several general conclusions. I outline some of them here.9 Though fashionable in many circles, the view that regulation has generally proved unsuccessful is far too crude. For example, efforts to reduce air pollution have in many respects been quite successful. 10 Regulatory controls have helped to produce substantial decreases in both the levels and emissions of major pollutants, including sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, lead, and nitrogen dioxide. Ambient concentrations of lead have decreased especially dramatically, declining eighty-five percent between 1975 and 1988; transportation emissions of lead decreased from 122.6 million metric tons in 1975 to 3.5 in 1986.11 Most important, the vast majority of counties in the United States are now in compliance with air quality goals. 2 
Water pollution control has shown significant successes as well. The Great Lakes are substantially cleaner than they were in fifty percent in national rivers. Governmentally-required lead and nitrate reductions have produced significant improvements in ' See Freedman, Crisis and Legitimacy at 260-62 (cited in note 7); Stewart, 88 Harv L Rev at 1670-71 (cited in note 7). 
1 Two disclaimers are necessary. First, the methodological problems are severe, partly because of the difficulty of valuing costs and (especially) benefits, and partly because of the difficulty of holding everything else constant in measuring regulatory effects. For this reason the numbers and assessments in the text are contestable. Second, any evaluation must have a significant normative dimension; it cannot depend on the facts alone. For more details, see Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State ch 3 (Harvard, forthcoming 1990). 
10 See The Conservation Foundation, State of the Environment:A View Toward the Nineties (1987); and Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), Environmental Quality: The Eighteenth and Nineteenth Annual Report of the Council on EnvironmentalQuality together with The President'sMessage to Congress (GPO, 1987-88). 
x Conservation Foundation, State of the Environment at 152-53 (cited in note 10). 12 CEQ, EnvironmentalQuality at 49 (cited in note 10). water quality.' 3 All in all, both air and water are substantially cleaner than they would have been without regulatory controls, and despite a wide range of errors, the American experience serves in some respects as a model for the rest of the world. 
Similarly, automobile safety regulation has significantly reduced deaths and serious injuries.' 4 Automobiles are much safer for occupants. For example, highway fatalities would have been about forty percent higher in 1981 if not for governmental controls.'5 Between 1966 and 1974, the lives of about 34,000 passenger car occupants were saved as a result of occupant safety standards.' 6 The annual benefits from regulation exceed ten billion dollars.'" Moreover, for automobile regulation the ratio of benefits to costs is extremely high. Indeed, some of the regulations pay for themselves in terms of health and related savings, and the large number of deaths actually prevented is of course a bonus. 8 
More generally, studies of the costs and benefits of regulatory initiatives show that a number of other measures have produced health and other benefits at especially low costs. OSHA's regulation of asbestos prevents an estimated 396 deaths per year, and it does so at relatively low expense.' EPA's regulation of trihalomethanes saves a life at only $300,000 per year; the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) fuel system integrity controls, also $300,000; the Consumer Product Safety Commission's (CPSC) mandatory smoke detector rule, between $0 and $85,000; NHTSA's roadside hazard removal rule, $0.20 
Finally, regulatory successes are not limited to the areas of safety and health. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has led to a de 
20 See Morrall, 10 Regulation at 30 (cited in note 18); Graham and Vaupel, 1 Risk Analcrease in racial discrimination in employment.2 There have been gains in the area of sex discrimination as well.2 2 And the Endangered Species Act has saved a number of species from extinction and endangerment.23 
On the other hand, regulation has frequently failed. Sometimes it has imposed enormously high costs for speculative benefits; sometimes it has accomplished little or nothing; and sometimes it has aggravated the very problem it was designed to solve. For example, the United States spent no less than $632 billion for pollution control between 1972 and 1985, and some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at less than one-fifth the cost.24 The fuel economy standards for new cars appear to have produced no substantial independent gains in fuel economy, given consumer demands for fuel efficient cars in response to gas shortages and high gas prices. 5 Worse, they have led manufacturers to produce smaller, more dangerous cars; an estimated 2,200-3,900 mortalities are expected over the next ten years as a result of regulatory changes in 1989 alone.26 There is little question that the administration of the Natural Gas Act helped produce the energy crisis of the late 1970s-with huge attendant costs to investment and employment-by artificially restraining the price of gas.2 Some of OSHA's carcinogen regulations impose enormous costs for uncertain gains. Indeed, the pattern of OSHA regulation of carcinogens is a crazy quilt; regulations costing up to $40 million per life saved exist in some areas, with no regulations at all in others.2 8 The EPA has promulgated only seven regulations controlling toxic substances, so that a huge number of such subysis at 91-93 (cited in note 18). These studies also show a bizarre pattern of controls, with some programs saving lives at exceptionally high costs. Thus the FDA ban on DES in cattlefeed saves a life at $132 million each year, while much regulation of automobiles costs $400,000 or less per life. 
21 See text at notes 70-71; and John J. Donohue III and James J. Heckman, Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Affirmative Action and Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks, J Econ Perspectives (forthcoming, 1990). 
22 See Donohue, 56 U Chi L Rev at 1360-62 (cited in note 3). 
21 See Steven Lewis Yaffee, ProhibitivePolicy:Implementing the FederalEndangered Species Act (MIT, 1982). 
PollutionPolicy 41-45 
22 See Crandall, Regulating the Automobile at 157-58 (cited in note 14). 
26 Robert W. Crandall and John D. Graham, The Effect of FuelEconomy Standardson Automobile Safety, 32 J L & Econ 97, 115 (1989). 
21 See Stephen Breyer, Regulation and its Reform 244 (Harvard, 1982). 28 See Mendeloff, The Dilemma of Toxic Substance Regulationat 22 (cited in note 18). stances remain uncontrolled.29 By delaying the entry of beneficial drugs into the market, the Food and Drug Administration has, in many settings, dramatically increased risks to life and health. ° 
The general task of regulatory reform raises issues far beyond the scope of this discussion. Ironically, a large source of regulatory failure in the United States is the use of Soviet-style command and control regulation, which dictates, at the national level, technologies and control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies and individuals in a nation that is exceptionally diverse in terms of geography, costs and benefits of regulatory controls, attitudes, and mores. 31 A valuable perspective on this problem can be obtained by examining the paradoxes of regulation, which pose a particular dilemma for the administrative state. A government that eliminated self-defeating regulatory strategies would eliminate a significant source of regulatory failure. And although the paradoxes are numerous, six of them have been of major importance in the last generation. 
I have defined a regulatory paradox as a self-defeating regulatory strategy; but whether a strategy is self-defeating depends on how its purposes are described. Any statute that fails to produce a net benefit to society can be described as self-defeating if its purpose is described as the improvement of the world. But if the statute's purpose is to benefit a particular group or segment of society, and that purpose is achieved, then the statute is not self-defeating at all. For example, a statute benefiting the agricultural industry at the expense of the public will not be self-defeating if its purpose is described as helping farmers. Throughout this discussion I describe the relevant statutory purposes at an intermediate level of generality and as public-regarding rather than as benefitting special interest groups. Under this approach, a statute whose costs outweigh its benefits, or that produces irrationality of various sorts, is not necessarily paradoxical. 
Moreover, I mean to assess whether a statute is self-defeating by comparing the result it has produced to the likely state of affairs had Congress enacted a different and better statute or no statute at all.32 Measured against these benchmarks, regulation has produced a wide range of paradoxes. 
Importantly, nearly all of the paradoxes are a product of the government's failure to understand how the relevant actors-administrators and regulated entities-will adapt to regulatory programs. The world simply cannot be held constant after regulations have been issued. Strategic responses, the creation of perverse incentives for administrators and regulated entities, unanticipated changes in product mix and private choice-these are the hallmarks of the paradoxes of the regulatory state. The adoption of strategies that take account of these phenomena would produce enormous savings in both compliance costs and safety and health gains. In this sense, a response to the regulatory paradoxes would produce no losers, or at least no losers who have a legitimate basis for complaint. 
The first paradox is that especially aggressive statutory controls frequently produce too little regulation of the private market. This surprising outcome arises when Congress mandates overly stringent controls, so that administrators will not issue regulations at all, or will refuse to enforce whatever regulations they or Congress have issued.3 
The imposition of extremely stringent controls on regulated industries is a common strategy in Congress. Such controls typically ban cost-benefit balancing or indeed trade-offs of any sort. 4 The expectation is that these controls will bring about safety in the workplace, or clean air and water, even if both the agency and industry are reluctant to act, and even if the costs of regulation are high. This strategy was especially popular during the dramatic growth of regulation in the 1960s and 1970s. It both fueled and was fueled by the notion that a safe workplace, or clean air and water, 32 Additional benchmarks include the intended effects of the regulation and the status quo ante. Of course the "alternative statute" and "no statute" benchmarks point in different directions; the context should make those differences clear. 
3 This is similar to a more general phenomenon in the criminal law: severe or mandatory sentences can actually produce less deterrence, because they make prosecutors reluctant to bring charges and juries reluctant to convict. 
31 See Clean Air Act, 42 USC §§ 7409(b)(1), 7412(a)(1) (1982); Clean Water Act, 33 USC § 1316(a)(1) (1982); Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 USC § 655(b)(5) (1982). should be treated as involving a right to be vindicated rather than a risk to be managed. Consider President Nixon's proclamation: "Clean air, clean water, open spaces-these should again be the birthright for every American."35 This form of rights-based thinking was also inspired by evidence that recalcitrant agencies, suffering from inertia or immobilized by the power of well-organized private groups, frequently disregarded regulatory controls. 6 
The strategy of imposing stringent regulatory controls or banning cost-benefit balancing is not hard to understand. It is only natural to think that if air pollution is a severe problem, the correct response is to reduce it as much as possible; and this idea quickly translates into a command to the EPA to reduce dangerous substances in the atmosphere to a level that will not adversely affect human health. 1 Similarly, an obvious method for controlling toxic substances in the workplace is to tell OSHA to eliminate these substances "to the extent feasible."38 Such strategies might produce too much regulation, but this might be thought a small price to pay for (finally) reducing pollution in the air or deaths in the workplace.3 9 In addition, a prohibition on "balancing" might be thought desirable by those fearful that any effort to balance would be distorted by the enforcement agency's undervaluation of life and health, especially in the context of seemingly permanent political divisions between the executive and the legislature. 
But consider the record of both the EPA and OSHA in these settings. Of the several hundred toxic substances plausibly posing significant risks to human health, the EPA has regulated only seven-five as a result of court orders. 40 Of the many toxic substances in the workplace, OSHA has controlled only ten. Stunningly, this is so even though the private organization that once performed some of OSHA's functions has recommended lower exposure limits for hundreds of chemicals.4 To be sure, those substances that EPA and OSHA regulate are stringently controlled.42 " State of the Union Address, 8 Public Papers of President Richard M. Nixon 13 (GPO, 1970). See also statutes cited in note 34. 
American Democracy 63-8 
3 Clean Air Act, 42 USC § 7409(b)(1). 3' Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 USC § 655(b)(5). 
' Of course any-gain in this tradeoff depends on the magnitude of the relevant consequences. 
"' See Note, 63 NYU L Rev at 613-14; 626 (cited in note 29). 
1 See Mendeloff, The Dilemma of Toxic Substance Regulation at 2, 82 (cited in note 18). 
42 Id at 73-102. The current pattern, however, includes not only substantial overregulation of the substances that are subject to federal standards, but also, and possibly more serious, substantial underregulation of dangerous substances, such as chromium, perchloroethylene, and trichloroethylene.43 
Despite the stringency of statutory standards, many activities in the United States are entirely free from regulatory controls. There is no evidence that the United States generally does a better job than England in protecting workers and citizens from occupational and environmental hazards, even though the English system consciously allows balancing in most contexts and the American system consciously rejects it.44 
Statutes containing stringent regulatory requirements have thus yielded no protection at all in many settings. What is responsible for this astonishing outcome? One is tempted to find answers in the power of regulated industries or in the intransigence and deregulatory zeal of government officials. But the pattern of underregulation can be found in the Carter Administration as well as the Reagan Administration, even though President Carter's appointees, drawn in large number from the consumer and environmental movements, were hardly eager to prevent the government from curbing the proliferation of toxic substances. Elaborate and costly procedural requirements for the promulgation of federal regulations undoubtedly provide some explanation, since the process, including judicial review, has built into it enormous delays and perverse incentives.4 5 These requirements surely slow down and deter rulemaking. Industry has every opportunity and every incentive to fend off regulation by making plausible claims that additional information is necessary before regulation can be undertaken. This explanation is not in itself adequate, however, because organized interests have not prevented agencies from being far more aggressive in other settings. 
"3Id at 74-102. 
" See David Vogel, National Styles of Regulation: Environmental Policy in Great Britainand the United States 163 (Cornell, 1986). 
45 See Stewart, 1985 Wis L Rev 655 (cited in note 31); and Mendeloff, The Dilemma of Toxic Substance Regulation at 115-24 (cited in note 18). 
For an intriguing solution to this problem, see the discussion of California's Proposition 65 in David Roe, An Incentive-Conscious Approach to Toxic Chemical Controls, 3 Econ Dev Q 179 (1979). Proposition 65 requires businesses to warn people exposed to any one of a list of specified chemicals, unless there has been a governmental finding that the chemical in question poses no significant risk. By putting the burden of inertia on regulated industry, Proposition 65 creates incentives rather than disincentives for the issuance of regulations distinguishing safe from unsafe levels. 
A large part of the explanation lies in the stringency of the regulatory standard itself. A stringent standard-one that forbids balancing or calls for regulation to or beyond the point of "feasibility"-makes regulators reluctant to act.46 If, as is customary, regulators have discretion not to promulgate regulations at all, a stringent standard will provide them with a powerful incentive for inaction. Their inaction is not caused by venality or confusion. Instead, it reflects their quite plausible belief that the statute often requires them to regulate to an absurd point. If regulators were to issue controls under the statute, government and private resources would be unavailable to control other toxic substances; domestic industry costs would increase; and ultimately industries competing in world markets would face a serious risk of shutdown. Under these circumstances, a stringent standard will mobilize political opposition to regulation from within and without government. It will also increase the likelihood of judicial invalidation. Finally, it will require agencies to obtain greater supporting information to survive political and judicial scrutiny, while at the same time making it less likely that such information will be forthcoming from regulated class members. All the incentives are therefore in the direction of issuing fewer regulations. 
It is thus unsurprising that a draconian standard produces underregulation as well as overregulation. A crazy quilt pattern of severe controls in some areas and none in others is the predictable consequence of a statute that forbids balancing and tradeoffs. 
The problem goes deeper still. Even if the resistance of the agency has been overcome, and some or many regulations have been issued under a statute calling for stringent regulatory controls, the risk of underregulation does not disappear. Levels of enforcement-inspections and fines-will reflect the agency's reluctance.47 This has in fact been the pattern with OSHA's safety and health regulations, some of which have been effectively unenforced4 s by Democratic as well as Republican administrations. This, then, is the first paradox of the regulatory state: stringent regulatory standards produce underregulation.49 
"' See Mendeloff, The Dilemma of Toxic Substance Regulation at 11-12 (cited in note 18). 
47 Low appropriations are also a predictable consequence. 
48 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk by Choice:RegulatingHealth and Safety in the Workplace 22-24 (Harvard, 1983). 
" At least in theory, it is possible that this effect will not occur-if the agency has no enforcement discretion, or if it is determined (for example) to eliminate all risk-creating substances from the atmosphere. But the absence of enforcement discretion is rare, and an B. Paradox 2: Stringent Regulation of New Risks Can Increase Aggregate Risk Levels 
Frequently Congress is presented with a risk or problem that can be found both in existing entities and in potential entrants. For example, automobiles produce carbon monoxide; modern electricity plants emit sulfur dioxide; many existing buildings are inaccessible to the handicapped; and drugs currently on the market pose health hazards to consumers. In such situations, a common strategy has been to impose especially severe limitations on new sources but to exempt old ones. Indeed, such exemptions might be a political prerequisite for enactment of the regulation. Congress might require that new automobiles be equipped with pollution control devices, that new plants emitting pollution meet stringent regulatory controls, that new buildings be accessible to the handicapped, and that new drugs survive special safety requirements. 
This strategy is a pervasive one in current regulatory law, and it has obvious advantages.5 0 Retroactive application of regulatory requirements can be extremely costly; the expense of altering existing practices is often high. Requiring the specified approach only prospectively can achieve significant savings. In addition, it may be unfair to impose costs on people who would have ordered their affairs quite differently had they been informed beforehand of the regulatory regime.5 
As a control technique, however, the strategy of imposing costs exclusively on new sources or entrants can be self-defeating. Most important, it will discourage the addition of new sources and encourage the perpetuation of old ones. The problem is not merely that old risks will continue, but that, precisely because of regulatory programs, those risks will become more common and last longer than they otherwise would. 
Two different phenomena underlie the old risk-new risk paradox. First, those who plan regulatory programs often assume that the programs will not influence private choices. Private choices are, however, a function of current supply and demand. If the program agency determined to eliminate all risks will create paradoxes of its own-causing ancillary social harms, or producing greater risks of different sorts. Compare the Delaney Clause, discussed in the text at notes 59-60. 
50 See Peter Huber, The Old-New Division in Risk Regulation, 69 Va L Rev 1025 (1983). 
1XA recurring problem with regulatory schemes, and with this one in particular, is that the imposition of requirements on new sources imposes large opportunity costs, which are real and sometimes large but usually imperceptible. raises the price of new products it will shift choices in the direction of old risks. Second, a focus on new risks reduces the entry of potentially superior sources or technologies and thus perpetuates old ones. Regulatory controls eliminate possibilities that might have turned out to be substantially safer than currently available options. The result is to increase the life of those options. 
Examples are not difficult to find. The EPA's program requiring the installation of anti-pollution technology in new automobiles belongs in the first category. 52 This program has prolonged the use of old, dirty vehicles, retarding the ordinary, salutary retirement of major sources of environmental degradation. 3 Command and control regulation of new pollution sources creates incentives to use existing facilities longer, with harmful consequences for the environment6. 4 Prescription requirements probably discourage people from purchasing beneficial drugs and to that extent impair health.5 5 Imposition of high, safety-related costs on new airplanes may well encourage airlines to retain (and repair) old, risky planes. 
One might put the EPA's requirement of costly "scrubbing" strategies for new sources of sulfur dioxide in the second category. This rule has perpetuated the existence of old sources of sulfur dioxide, thus aggravating in many parts of the country the very problem it was designed to solve. 6 So too, the imposition of stringent barriers to nuclear power plants has perpetuated the risks produced by coal, a significantly more dangerous power source." And perhaps worst of all, the FDA's stringent regulatory standards for approving new drugs have forced consumers to resort to old drugs, which are frequently more dangerous or less beneficial than the new drugs being kept off the market.58 
A final example of the old risk/new risk paradox is the Delaney Clause,59 which prohibits manufacturers from using food additives containing carcinogens. Ironically, this provision has probably increased safety and health risks. The Clause forces manufacturers to use noncarcinogenic, but sometimes more dangerous, substances. In addition, it makes consumers resort to substances already on the market that often pose greater risks than new entrants would. Since the newest and best detection equipment is used on proposed new additives, the statutorily prohibited additive may well pose fewer risks to consumers than substances already on the market that were tested with cruder technology. Thus the Delaney Clause defeats its own purpose6. ° 
The phenomenon of careful regulation of new risks and lenient or no regulation of old ones may not simply reflect legislative myopia or confusion. Public choice theory provides a plausible explanation for the phenomenon. A system of regulation that imposes controls solely on new products or facilities should have considerable appeal for those in possession of old ones. If new sources will face regulatory costs, the system of government controls will immunize existing producers from fresh competition. Indeed, the regulatory statute will create a partial cartel, establishing a common interest among current producers and giving them a significant competitive advantage over potential new entrants. The victims of the old-new division, however, often do not yet exist. They are usually hard to identify, do not perceive themselves as victims, and are not politically organized. 
It may be for this reason that the careful regulation of new risks is such a popular strategy. It is apt to be favored both by existing industry and by many of those who seek to impose controls in the first instance. The potential victims-consumers and new entrants-often have insufficient political strength to counter the proposals. When this phenomenon is combined with the apparently sensible but sometimes self-defeating idea that a phase-in strategy is better than one that requires conversions of existing producers, it is no surprise that the old risk-new risk division remains so popular. 
s' See Richard A. Merrill, FDA's Implementation of the Delaney Clause: Repudiation of CongressionalChoice or Reasoned Adaptation to Scientific Progress?, 5 Yale J Reg 1 (1988). See also Peter W. Huber, Liability (Basic Books, 1988). 
A qualification is necessary here. It is possible that people are especially fearful of cancer and not so fearful of other, equally dangerous health risks, and that this configuration of fears underlay the Delaney Clause. In that case, the Clause would serve its specific purpose of keeping carcinogens off the market, irrespective of the relative health risks of various products. Although the Clause might in fact increase overall health risks, it would not be a regulatory paradox, since it successfully implements its primary goal. C. Paradox 3: To Require the Best Available Technology is to Retard Technological Development 
Industry frequently fails to adopt the best technology for controlling environmental or other harms. The technology exists or can be developed relatively cheaply, but polluters simply refuse to use it. Congress and the EPA have often responded by requiring that all industries use the best available technology (BAT). The BAT strategy is pervasive in federal environmental law,6 and may indeed be its most distinctive characteristic. 
The BAT strategy is motivated by a desire to produce technological innovation, and here it has a surface plausibility. As discussed above, recent years have witnessed large decreases in air and water pollution, and these decreases are partly attributable to the use of emission control technologies. Requiring the adoption of the best available control technology seems a sensible way to ensure that all industries are doing their utmost to prevent pollution. This strategy also appears inexpensive to enforce. The government simply decides on the best technology and then requires all industries to comply.2 
The BAT approach, however, can defeat its own purposes and thus produce a regulatory paradox. It is an extremely clumsy strategy for protecting the environment. To be sure, the approach is a plausible one if the goal is to ensure that all firms use currently established technology. But a large goal of regulation should be to promote technological innovation in pollution control. Regulation should increase rather than decrease incentives to innovate. Government is rarely in a good position to know what sorts of innovations are likely to be forthcoming; industry will have a huge comparative advantage here. Perversely, requiring adoption of the BAT eliminates the incentive to innovate at all, and indeed creates disincentives for innovation by imposing an economic punishment on innovators. Under the BAT approach, polluting industries have no financial interest in the development of better pollution control technology that imposes higher production costs. Indeed, the opposite is true. The BAT approach encourages industry to seek any means to delay and deter new regulation. Industry will have the information as well as the incentive to persuade administrators, "' See, for example, 42 USC § 7411(a)(1)(C) (Clean Air Act); 33 USC § 1316(a)(1) (Clean Water Act). 
2 See Howard Latin, Ideal Versus Real Regulatory Efficiency: Implementation of Uniform Standards and "Fine-Tuning"Regulatory Reforms, 37 Stan L Rev 1267 (1985). courts, and other authorities that a suggested technology is not "feasible" and should not be required. 
If government requires whatever technology is available, then, industry has no economic reason to develop new mechanisms for decreasing safety and health risks. Moreover, the BAT approach, applicable as it is only to new sources, raises the cost of retiring old facilities, which delays capital turnover and in that way aggravates environmental degradation. The paradox, in a nutshell, is this: designed to promote good control technology, the BAT strategy actually discourages innovation. It is therefore self-defeating. 
One might respond to this hypothesis by arguing that under the BAT approach outsiders should have an incentive to innovate, precisely because government will force industry to adopt the resulting technology. But no well-functioning market in pollution control technology exists for those outside of the regulated industries, and for good reasons. First, outsiders often lack the relevant information, which is unusually expensive because it turns on facts that are highly technical and known best to participants in the industry. In practice, outsiders must depend on cooperation from regulated class members, which is unlikely to be forthcoming. The start-up costs are therefore exceptionally high for third parties. Second, regulation often changes dramatically over time, a phenomenon that discourages a stable market in control technology. The result is that innovations by outsiders have not come about under BAT approaches. 4 D. Paradox 4: Redistributive Regulation Harms Those at the Bottom of the Socioeconomic Ladder 
A common justification for regulation is redistribution. The legislature imposes controls on the market to prevent what it sees as exploitation 65 or unfair dealing by those with a competitive advantage. In principle, the claim for redistribution is often a powerful one. Market wages and prices depend on a wide range of factors that are morally irrelevant: supply and demand curves at any particular point; variations in family structure and opportunities for education and employment; existing tastes; and perhaps even differences in initial endowments, including talents, intelligence, or physical strength.6 So long as the regulation can be made effective and does not produce high ancillary costs (an important qualification), government should not always take these factors as "natural," or let them be turned into social disadvantages. 
Minimum wage legislation, for example, prevents workers from having to settle for market wages that do not even approach the poverty level and thus offer minimal incentives to work; occupational safety statutes protect workers against extremely hazardous workplaces; rent control legislation prevents tenants from being subject to unanticipated price increases and perhaps thrown into significantly inferior housing;6 and implied warranties of habitability protect tenants from living in disgraceful and indeed dangerous apartments. 
In all these cases, however, regulation is a poor mechanism for redistributing resources, precisely because it is often self-defeating. 8 The problem is that if everything else is held constant,69 the market will frequently adjust to the imposition of regulation in a way that will harm the least well-off. It is a mistake to assume that regulation will directly transfer resources or create only ex post winners and losers-an idea exemplified by the assumption that the only effect of the minimum wage is to raise wages for those currently working. An important consequence of the minimum wage is to increase unemployment by raising the price of marginal labor; and those at the bottom of the ladder-the most vulnerable members of society-are the victims.70 In the same vein, rent control legislation and implied warranties of habitability create incentives for producers (landlords) to leave and disincentives to enter the housing market, with perverse redistributive consequences and especially harsh results for the poor, who may be left without housing at all.7' 
Laws forbidding discrimination or requiring affirmative action will to some extent have the same effect, since they will make it more expensive to hire blacks, women, and older people by increasing the likelihood that employers will be subject to a lawsuit in the event of a discharge.7 2 Similarly, occupational safety and health regulation does not unambiguously promote the interests of workers. By raising costs, it may depress wages and increase unemployment, thus harming the least well-off.7 3 In each of these cases, the group that is harmed is likely to be poorly organized and incapable of expressing itself through the political process. 
In sum, redistributive regulation will have complex distributive consequences, and the group particularly disadvantaged by the regulation will typically consist of those who are already most disadvantaged. Efforts to redistribute resources through regulation will therefore have a serious perverse result. 
Two often overlooked qualifications are necessary here. First, the redistributive regulation, though in some ways perverse, might be part of a system of redistribution that is effective overall. A minimum wage law might be justified as a means of protecting the working poor if it is accompanied by a welfare system to take care of those who cannot work at all. For this reason, plausible arguments can be made for the minimum wage despite its self-defeating aspect. It has been argued, for example, that an increase in the minimum wage is necessary to guarantee that work will be sufficiently remunerative to keep people out of poverty and to send a signal about the importance and value of work, thereby increasing the supply of and demand for labor. These effects might outweigh the unemployment effect. According to some estimates, a ten percent increase in the minimum wage would increase unemployment among young people by only one percent. 4 
A second qualification of the redistribution paradox relates to the fact that preferences are not static. Preferences are usually taken as exogenous to and independent of the legal rule, but sometimes this is a mistake.75 If the statute in question transforms preferences and beliefs, the self-defeating effect just described will not occur. For example, laws forbidding sexual harassment aim to alter the desires and beliefs of would-be harassers; and if the laws succeed in this goal, any perverse side effects may be minimal or nonexistent. The same argument may apply to antidiscrimination laws generally. If such laws change attitudes, they may not on balance harm the least well-off. There is, however, little empirical evidence on the effects of law in changing preferences and beliefs, and in any case this is not likely to result from such redistributive regulation as minimum wage legislation. 
E. Paradox 5: Disclosure Requirements May Make People Less Informed 
Sometimes markets fail because people are deceived or lack information.76 Regulatory agencies commonly respond by requiring correction or full disclosure. Congress and agencies have imposed disclosure regulations in many areas, ranging from occupational and environmental risks to potentially deceptive advertising.77 Here the rationale is straightforward. Whether or not ignorance is bliss, it is an obstacle to informed consumer choice. Surely, it might be asked, regulation cannot be condemned for increasing information? 
Disclosure strategies are indeed valuable in many circumstances. But for two reasons, they can be self-defeating. The first is that people sometimes process information poorly.7 8 After being given certain data, they actually "know" less than they did beforehand. In particular, when people receive information about probabilities, especially low ones, they frequently rely on heuristics that lead to systematic errors. 9 Thus, for example, people assess probabilities by asking if the event was a recent one and by misunderstanding the phenomenon of regression to the mean. 0 In addition, disclosure or corrective language can help straighten out one form of false belief but at the same time increase the level of other kinds of false beliefs."' Finally, there is a risk of information overload, causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as equivalent to no information at all.82 All this suggests that with respect to information, less may be more. Additional information can breed confusion and a weaker understanding of the situation at hand. 
The second problem is that a requirement of disclosure or perfect accuracy will sometimes lead producers or other regulated entities to furnish no information whatsoever. For example, if producers are prohibited from advertising unless they eliminate all potential deception or offer strong substantiation for their claims, they might not advertise at all. The result will be the removal from the market of information that is useful overall. 3 If advertisers must conduct extensive tests before they are permitted to make claims, they will be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at all. More generally, almost all substantive advertisements will deceive at least some people in light of the exceptional heterogeneity of listeners and viewers. If this is so, efforts to eliminate deception will significantly reduce advertising with substantive content. 
These various difficulties suggest that the recent enthusiasm for disclosure requirements is in at least some settings a mistake, for the simple reason that it defeats its own purpose. Disclosure requirements sometimes ensure that people are less informed. 
The distinctive institutional legacy of the New Deal period is the "independent" agency. An agency is independent if Congress has provided that its members can be discharged by the President only for specified causes. If Congress has so provided, it is ordinarily understood that the President cannot discharge independent commissioners simply because he disagrees with their views, and that his supervisory authority is sharply limited. 4 Independent agencies, some of them antedating the New Deal, include the Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Interstate Commerce Commission, and the National Labor Relations Board. The paradox at issue here is one of institutional design rather than substantive regulatory policy. 
The argument for the independent agency stems largely from a belief in the need for expert, apolitical, and technically sophisticated administration of the laws." Even if independent agencies achieved this end, one might question the goal itself. Independent agencies often must make important judgments of policy and principle, and on those judgments expertise is never decisive. Consider, for example, the decisions of the National Labor Relations Board defining what constitutes an unfair labor practice; the judgment of the FCC about whether licensees are obliged to present programming on public issues, or whether diversity on the basis of race or sex counts in favor of an applicant for a license; and the safety requirements of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. None of these policies is based solely on technocratic judgments, and so may properly belong in the political rather than the regulatory sphere. 
But even if one accepts the premise that political independence is necessary, the fact is that independent agencies are not independent at all. Indeed, such agencies are highly responsive to shifts in political opinion and even to the views of the President."6 But the problem is even worse than that. The independent agencies have generally been highly susceptible to the political pressure 
I question this understanding below. See text at notes 126-35. 
85 See James M. Landis, The AdministrativeProcess (Greenwood Press, 1938). See also Geoffrey P. Miller, Independent Agencies, 1986 S Ct Rev 41 (presenting but rejecting this argument and claiming that Congress may not constitutionally deny the President the power to remove a policymaking official who has refused a presidential order). 
Pol Sci 19 of well-organized private groups-perhaps even more susceptible, on balance, than executive agencies. 
Many of the most egregious illustrations of agency vulnerability to pressure groups can be found in precisely this area. Thus the Interstate Commerce Commission has created and enforced cartels in the transportation industry; the Federal Trade Commission has sometimes behaved in an anticompetitive manner, capitulating to losers in the marketplace; and the FCC has been dominated by the communications industry.8 Far from acting as disinterested experts, independent administrators often are, in practice, subject to parochial interests.89 
Why would agencies independent of the President be susceptible to factional power? The phenomenon might be explained at least in part by the fact that executive agencies, precisely because they are subject to presidential control, are able to withstand the parochial pressures imposed on "independent" agencies that lack the buffer of presidential oversight. The absence of this presidential buffer leaves agencies vulnerable both to individual members and committees of Congress," which sometimes represent narrow factions and well-organized private groups with significant stakes in the outcome of regulatory decisions. Executive agencies are at least sometimes immunized from those pressures precisely because of the protective, insulating wing of the President.9 1 Ironically, independence from the President often appears to be a mechanism for increasing susceptibility to factionalism. 
The susceptibility of the independent agencies to factionalism does not of course imply that executive officers are invulnerable to similar forces. The notion that independent agencies are systemically more susceptible to factions than their counterparts within 8 See Marvin H. Bernstein, Regulating Business By Independent Commission 170 (Princeton, 1955); and Richard A. Harris and Sidney M. Milkis, The Politics of Regulatory Change (Oxford, 1989). 
1987) 
8 The Federal Reserve Board is an independent agency, but it may be an unusual case. No well-organized group is its special target; the class of people benefited and burdened by its decisions is too large and diffuse to make it susceptible to any particular group. This independent agency may in fact be independent. 
"0See the remarks in Independent Agencies-Independent from Whom?, 41 Admin L Rev 491 (1989) (panel discussion). Compare INS v Chadha,462 US 919, 946-59 (1983) (invalidating the legislative veto on the ground that it bypasses bicameralism and presentment requirements, which promote deliberation and prevent factionalism in government). 
" See generally Symposium: The Independence of Independent Agencies, 1988 Duke L J 215. the executive branch seems overly broad.92 But if Congress wants to ensure independence in the execution of the laws, the independent agency device appears to be a most unlikely way to achieve that goal. The creation of independent agencies is usually selfdefeating." 
I have described some prominent regulatory paradoxes, but there are others as well. For example, it has been argued that the pursuit of the "best interests of the child" in custody determinations in fact disserves the best interests of children, because of the enormous time spent in resolving the complicated factual question.94 Protectionist legislation is sometimes justified on the theory that it will help domestic industries develop into potent competitive forces, but in fact protectionism may induce flabbiness and in the end defeat the goal of promoting international competitiveness. And restrictions on the availability of abortion, defended as a means of protecting human life, appear to have resulted in the death of many women per year and at the same time not to have protected a large percentage of fetuses from the practice of abortion. 5 
Many more paradoxes can be found. There is evidence that mandatory prescriptions for drugs have increased health risks by limiting the availability and raising the cost of prescription drugs; this in turn has decreased self-treatment and encouraged people to use possibly less effective over-the-counter drugs.9 6 Product safety regulation may have a "lulling effect" on consumers, leading them to take fewer precautions and to miscalculate risks.97 The government prohibition on cigarette advertising on television, designed to decrease smoking, may have increased smoking because it: (1) reduced competition among firms, thus cartelizing the industry over the advertising issue; (2) eliminated the application of the fairness doctrine to cigarettes, which would have ensured a vigorous anticigarette campaign; and (3) saved the industry substantial sums of money."8 
A final paradox can be found in the law of sex discrimination, where principles of "formal equality" have been invoked to forbid consideration of sex in custody, alimony, and divorce disputes. It is quite possible that equality principles, understood as prohibitions on any form of sex differentiation in law, have in some contexts produced less rather than more in the way of real equality between men and women. 9 When two groups are differently situated, a legal requirement that they be treated the same seems a perverse method of promoting equality between them. There is in fact evidence that the application of these principles has further disadvantaged women.1"' Here too, then, legal controls have been selfdefeating. 
One might react to the regulatory paradoxes by suggesting that the relevant strategies are not self-defeating at all. On the contrary, they might represent a conscious governmental choice and even, on one view, regulatory success. Public choice theory suggests that legislative outcomes are frequently a product of pressure applied by well-organized private groups. It is not difficult to find "cartels in the closet"'101 to account for many or all of the paradoxes and to make them seem far less mysterious. 
For example, the apparently perverse effects of redistributive regulation may be actively sought by the benefited groups. On this account, the purpose of minimum wage legislation might not be to help the poor, but rather to immunize union members from competition by people who are willing to work for low wages by limiting entry into the labor market. Far from being unintended consequences, the harmful effects on those at the bottom of the economic ladder may be actively sought. Looked at from this perspective, minimum wage legislation creates a cartel among those not threatened by unemployment, benefiting them at the expense of new entrants into the labor market. 
So too, independent agencies might be created at the behest of groups that know they will have particularly strong influence over public officials not subject to presidential oversight; or Congress might create an independent agency not to ensure technocracy or neutrality, but to increase the power of its members and committees over agency decisions. 102 Similarly, existing industry, in a bid to reduce competition, might acquiesce in or actively seek regulations distinguishing between old and new risks. It is hardly unusual for companies to enlist regulatory law in the service of cartelization. 
The overregulation-underregulation phenomenon has a similar explanation. By adopting a draconian standard, legislators can claim to support the total elimination of workplace hazards or dirty air; but legislators and regulated industries know that administrators will shrink from enforcing the law. A "deal" in the form of a stringent, unenforceable standard benefits the politically powerful actors. Hence the political economy of overregulation is similar to that of open-ended delegations of administrative authority: in both cases, legislative incentives incline Congress toward broad and appealing statutes that will not in practice harm politically powerful groups. The public is the only real loser. 
Explained in this manner, the paradoxes of the regulatory state are not mysterious at all. On the contrary, they are perfectly predictable responses to electoral self-interest and to disparities in political influence. 
While explanations of this sort have power in some settings, the evidence on their behalf is often overstated. It is of course possible that the seemingly paradoxical effects of regulatory programs actually account for their enactment. But this is only a possibility. 102 Compare Miller, 1986 S Ct Rev at 74 (cited in note 85). To explain a phenomenon by reference to its consequences is bad social science, even though it is pervasive in such widely diverse disciplines as neoclassical economics, Marxism, and sociobiology.0 3 In the context of the regulatory state, whether public choice explanations are good ones rather than merely plausible stories depends not just on the consequences of regulation, but also on a careful investigation into the actual forces that lead to regulation. In the regulatory sphere, such investigations are infrequent. 
The most one can say is that the regulatory paradoxes might reflect the influence of well-organized private groups, and that in some settings there is direct or indirect evidence to support that conclusion. At least thus far, any more global conclusion is simply not supported by the facts. 
Whether the regulatory paradoxes should cause major concern depends on their magnitude. Here too, much of the relevant information remains to be developed. For example, a decision to focus on new sources of pollution would be understandable if that decision would have only a minor effect in perpetuating old sources. But if the effect is substantial, the regulatory policy would almost certainly be ill-considered. Similarly, the minimum wage might well be justified if its effect is the unemployment of only a few additional people. The relevant question is the elasticity of the demand for labor.104 Finally, even if some people are misled by compulsory disclosure of risks, perhaps there will be sufficient gains through reducing others' ignorance to justify the regulation. And even if some producers refuse to advertise at all in the face of a substantiation requirement, perhaps the overall level of information will increase. 
Critics of regulation sometimes treat the existence of unintended side effects or partly self-defeating strategies as a reason to abandon regulatory controls altogether. 0 5 But in order to justify that conclusion, it is necessary to gather detailed evidence on the magnitude of the relevant effects in particular regulated markets "I The best discussions here are by Jon Elster. See his various criticisms of functional explanations in Explaining Technical Change: Studies in Rationality and Social Change (Cambridge, 1983); The Cement of Society: A Study of Social Order(Cambridge, 1989); and Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (Cambridge, 1989). 
104See text at note 74. 
,o1 See Richard A. Epstein, Takings: Private Propertyand the Power of Eminent Domain (Harvard, 1985). and overall. In some contexts, regulation having some self-defeating results will on the whole make things better rather than worse. It is simply a fact that even a regulatory state pervaded by paradoxes has had a number of substantial successes. 10 6 
From both theory and experience, it is possible to conclude that the regulatory paradoxes will arise frequently, and thus to prescribe efforts to avoid them. Certainly we have far too little information to say, as a general matter, that regulatory programs embodying the paradoxes are by virtue of that fact a bad idea on balance, at least when compared with the pre-regulatory status quo. Total elimination of such regulatory programs is hardly warranted. Nevertheless, a system that avoided the paradoxes would bring about major improvements. 
IV. LESSONS 
The paradoxes of regulation provide a number of concrete lessons for Congress. At the most general level, they suggest that legislators should be attentive to the incentive effects of regulatory statutes and the possibility of strategic or self-interested adaptation by administrative agencies and members of regulated classes. Statutes embodying an assumption that the preregulatory world can be held constant-that existing prices, wages, choices, and so forth will endure-are particularly likely to be confounded when implemented. 
More specifically, the paradoxes suggest that the legislature should generally avoid best available technology strategies; be concerned with old risks as well as new ones; not attempt to redistribute resources through regulation; be attentive to the possibility that disclosure requirements will simply confuse people or chill information in the first instance; create incentives for regulation when regulation is desired; as a rule place agencies under the control of the President; and call for some form of balancing between the costs and benefits of regulation. Ideas of this sort have direct implications for modern regulatory reform.10 7 
For example, Congress is in the midst of considering amendments to the Clean Air Act. One valuable strategy would be to sub"' See text at notes 10-23. 
107 It is of course unclear that Congress will listen to such advice. Perhaps the legislators' existing incentives must be altered in order to bring about lasting reform of the sort suggested here. stitute an emissions trading program for the "BAT" approach.108 Such a program would not require specified control technology for all pollution sources, but would instead force people to pay for a license to pollute and allow them to sell that "right" to other producers. People who can reduce pollution will have a large incentive to do so, because polluters will pay substantial sums for the pollution "credits" it frees them to sell. A fundamental virtue of an emissions trading program is that it would create dynamic incentives for pollution control by making it profitable for people to develop good pollution control technology. Those who developed such devices would be able both to reduce their own pollution and to sell the technology to others. In either case, innovation would be financially rewarding. There is considerable evidence that emissions trading programs are successful. 09 
The same rationale supports a trading system in the international arena, in which some countries would pay others to reduce emissions levels. International debt might be traded for protection of nature. This would be especially desirable in the frequent instances where the effects of pollution, or other environmental degradation, crosses national boundaries. Such a system would produce more efficient reduction techniques and would also be more equitable than an approach requiring all countries-rich and poor, new and old contributors to environmental hazards-to use the same control technology. 
Congress is also in the process of selecting pollution control requirements for new automobiles. Application of such controls to old automobiles, unpleasant as it might be for present car owners, would be an effective response to the old risk-new risk paradox. Similarly, the Food and Drug Administration should be discouraged from unduly delaying the entry of new drugs onto the market. Current practices slow the marketing of beneficial products by requiring extremely elaborate testing. Easier screening strategies combined with continuing, post-marketing safety examinations would increase aggregate safety. 
Ackerman and Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law, The Democratic Case for Market Incentives, 13 Colum J Envir L 1 Clean Air Act, which passed on April 3, 1990, contains an emissions trading program to deal with acid rain. See S 1630, 136 Cong Rec 52077-52086 (March 5, 1990). 
109 Tietenberg, Emissions Trading at 38-58 (cited in note 24); Richard A. Liroff, Reforming Air Pollution Regulation: The Toil and Trouble of EPA's Bubble (Conservation Foundation, 1986). 
Congress should also amend the Delaney Clause to allow de minimis exceptions. Similarly, Congress should permit administrators to balance costs and benefits in choosing the appropriate controls for toxic substances, or Congress should itself make the regulatory decisions on the basis of some such balancing process. At the same time, Congress should take steps to ensure that regulatory statutes create strong incentives for industry to seek and administrators to promulgate regulations. 110 The current system puts a premium on-and has resulted in-inaction. A system that (for example) imposes disclosure requirements or other penalties on manufacturers until regulations have established levels of relative safety would be far more productive. 
The regulatory paradoxes provide important lessons for judges and administrators as well as legislators. These officials are of course bound by legislative enactments, and to the extent that regulatory statutes unambiguously call for self-defeating strategies, officials have no choice but to honor them. But frequently the interpretation of a statute, or the filling of statutory gaps, is based on an understanding of the real world consequences of the alternative possibilities. Administrators exercise considerable discretion in giving content to ambiguous laws,111 and the legal judgment about whether an agency's decision is "arbitrary" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act" 2 should be informed by an accurate understanding of the paradoxes of the regulatory state. Attention to the often unanticipated systemic effects of regulatory controls is an imperative for administrators and judges as well as for legislators. I offer three examples here of how these officials can use the knowledge of regulatory paradoxes to inform their actions. 
In two important cases, the Supreme Court was asked to interpret the provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Act that regulate exposure to toxic substances. The pertinent language directs the Secretary of Labor to promulgate the standard that o See note 45. 
"' See Chevron USA, Inc. v NRDC, 467 US 837 (1984), which gives enormous policymaking discretion to agencies engaged in statutory construction. 
112 5 USC § 706(2)(A) (1982). 
"' In this section I adapt the discussion in Cass R. Sunstein, InterpretingStatutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv L Rev 405, 489-93 (1989). "most adequately assures, to the extent feasible . . . that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard . . . for the period of his working life."" 4 The statute also defines "occupational safety and health standard[s]" as measures that require "conditions... reasonably necessary or appropriate to provide safe or healthful employment and places of employment."" 5 
In Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO v American Petroleum Institute,"6 the Court was confronted with an OSHA regulation of benzene. Though the consequences of the regulation were sharply contested, there was reason to believe that the regulation would impose enormous costs for small or speculative gains. A plurality of the Court concluded that the Secretary of Labor must establish that a toxic substance posed a "significant risk" to health before she could regulate it. There was little direct support for the plurality's conclusion in the language or history of the Act. Unable to point to a solid textual basis for its "significant risk" requirement, the plurality invoked a clear statement principle: 
In the absence of a clear mandate in the Act, it is unreasonable to assume that Congress intended to give the Secretary the unprecedented power over American industry that would result from the Government's view .... Expert testimony that a substance is probably a human carcinogen . . . would justify the conclusion that the substance poses some risk of serious harm no matter how minute the exposure and no matter how many experts testified that they regarded the risk as insignificant. That conclusion would in turn justify pervasive regulation limited only by the constraint of feasibility .... [T]he Government's theory would give OSHA power to impose enormous costs that might produce little, if any, discernable benefit." 7 
The plurality went on to suggest that the government's interpretation would give the Secretary of Labor "open-ended" policymaking authority that might amount to an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power. In a concurring opinion advocating an interpretation of the Act that would permit cost-benefit balancing, 114 29 USC § 655(b)(5). 
29 USC § 652(8). ,, 448 US 607 (1980). 117 Id at 645. Justice Powell suggested that "a standard-setting process that ignored economic considerations would result in a serious misallocation of resources and a lower effective level of safety than could be achieved under standards set with reference to the comparative benefits available at a lower cost."" 8 
The "significant risk" requirement cannot be found explicitly in the statute; indeed, the text of the relevant provisions suggests that no such requirement was imposed on the Secretary of Labor. But the plurality's conclusion was nonetheless sound. Realistically speaking, the language of the statute need not be considered dispositive. It is simply a myth to suggest that the Congress that enacted OSHA even considered the propriety of regulation requiring enormous expenditures to redress minimal risks. Despite the broad language of the toxic substances provision, Congress never focused on that problem. 
In the context of American Petroleum, the plurality was therefore correct in considering itself free to read an implicit "significant risk" requirement into the statute. In light of the overregulation-underregulation paradox, it would make little sense to interpret the statute so as to allow-indeed, require-the Secretary to regulate to the point of "feasibility" merely because one or a few employees might suffer "material health impairment" as a result of a lifetime of exposure. Such an interpretation would make the Department of Labor reluctant to embark on a course of regulation at all, and as we have seen, would result in less, not more, protection of workers. It would ensure that there would be less regulation of carcinogens or less enforcement of those regulations that were promulgated-or, most likely, both. 
In American Textile Manufacturers Institute v Donovan," the Supreme Court decided a question left open in American Petroleum: whether the Occupational Health and Safety Act required cost-benefit analysis. In arguing that it did, the industry contended that the word "feasible" meant that the Secretary must show not only a significant risk, but also that the benefits of regulation justified the costs. "Feasibility," in the industry's view, contemplated a balancing of costs and benefits. The government contended that once OSHA had shown a significant risk, it could regulate to the point where the survival of the regulated industry would be endangered by additional controls. For the government, the term "feasi118Id at 670 (Powell concurring). 119 452 US 490 (1981). bility" connoted not cost-benefit balancing, but instead regulation to the maximum extent "possible." 
In accepting the government's argument, the Court relied on the dictionary definition of "feasible," concluding that the term meant "capable of being done, executed, or effected," rather than justified after balancing costs and benefits. 120 This approach to statutory interpretation was not entirely unreasonable. But the same principles that support the plurality view in American Petroleum cast doubt on American Textile Manufacturers. 
First, notwithstanding the statute's language, it is probably unrealistic to believe that Congress actually focused on, and resolved, the question whether the government's approach was to be favored over some kind of balancing of costs and benefits. That question never arose during the debates.1"2' Second, a system requiring the Secretary to identify a significant risk, but prohibiting her from undertaking cost-benefit analysis, seems utterly irrational. Whether a risk is "significant" depends in large part on the costs of eliminating it. A risk that is relatively small might call for regulation if the costs are also small, while a large risk might well be best left unregulated if the costs of regulation are enormous. A rational system of regulation looks not at the magnitude of the risk alone, but assesses the risk in comparison to the costs. Finally, a law requiring the Secretary to regulate all significant risks to the point of endangering the industry would be a recipe for both overregulation and underregulation. 
These considerations could not have controlled the Court's decision if the statute dictated a contrary result, but the word "feasible" was probably capacious enough to accommodate a kind of proportionality requirement. To be sure, the case was a difficult one. But by its reading of the statute, the Supreme Court has contributed to the irrationality of the Occupational Safety and Health Act-irrationality that has harmed workers, employers, consumers, and the public at large. An understanding of the overregulationunderregulation paradox might well have prevented this result. 
A number of judicial decisions might have been different if courts had been attuned to the old risk-new risk paradox. Con,,0Id at 508-09. 
2,See the detailed account in Justice Marshall's opinion in American Petroleum, 448 US at 707-19. sider, for example, one district court's creation, in the face of an ambiguous text, of the "prevention of significant deterioration" (PSD) program in Sierra Club v Ruckelshaus.122 In that case, the court ruled that state implementation plans under the Clean Air Act must include provisions not merely complying with national air quality standards, but also designed to prevent the degradation of air currently cleaner than those standards require. The consequence of the PSD program is to ensure that especially clean areas remain especially clean. They are not permitted to become dirtier even if they would continue to provide a safe and healthful environment. 
One of the court's goals was to ensure that federal environmental policy protected beauty and visibility in currently pristine areas.' 23 While the PSD program has to some degree promoted that goal, it has also had perverse side effects. For example, it has delayed the salutary substitution of clean, low-sulphur Western coal for dirty, high-sulfur Eastern coal; at the same time, it has protected dirty existing plants in the East against replacement with cleaner new ones in the West. 2 4 To protect the atmosphere in Aspen from degradation is, almost inevitably, to perpetuate the existence of old, particularly dirty producers in New York. The foreclosure of new risks has thus increased the magnitude of old ones. It is far from clear that the environment is better off as a whole. 
Indeed, it should come as no surprise that the PSD program has become a primary means of protecting eastern industry and eastern states against western interests. States in the West seeking to attract industry have found, perversely, that an environmental program can be used to create a cartel against new entry.2 5 A PSD program based on an understanding of the adverse effects of that cartel for the prevention of environmental degradation would take a quite different form. 
The court that decided the Sierra Club case was unaware of these effects. Because the statutory basis for the decision was quite thin, an understanding of the environmental and nonenvironmental costs associated with the PSD program might well have led to a contrary result. 
122 344 F Supp 253 (D DC 1972). 
123 See the discussion in R. Shep Melnick, Regulation and the Courts: The Case of the Clean Air Act (Brookings, 1983). 
124 Id at 80-83. 
121 See Ackerman and Hassler, Clean Coal/DirtyAir at 44-48 (cited in note 50); and B. Peter Pashigian, Environmental Regulation: Whose Self-Interests Are Being Served?, in Stigler, ed, Chicago Studies in PoliticalEconomy at 498 (cited in note 4). 
The precise constitutional status of the independent agency remains an uncertain question.'26 In Humphrey's Executor v United States,27 the Supreme Court, affirming the constitutional validity of the independent agency, held that Congress could constitutionally prevent the President from removing a member of the Federal Trade Commission simply because it pleased him to do so. Recent decisions have reaffirmed the authority of Humphrey's Executor insofar as it recognizes that some degree of independence from the President is permissible.'28 But suppose that members of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or the Federal Trade Commission act in ways that consistently reject the President's views about public policy. May the President discharge the relevant commissioners? It is frequently assumed that he may not. But neither Humphrey's Executor nor any other case explains what "independence" precisely means, or whether it extends to such situations. 
The problem might be solved through statutory interpretation that takes account of the independent agency paradox. The relevant provisions allow the President to discharge a commissioner "for cause," defined as "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.' 29 Although ambiguous, these words do not entirely immunize commissioners from the control of the President; instead they allow him to remove the officials under certain circumstances. For those attuned to the independent agency paradox, it might seem that the words are best read to grant the President something in the way of supervisory and removal power-allowing him, for example, to discharge as inefficient or neglectful of duty those commissioners who have frequently or on important occasions acted in ways inconsistent with his wishes. 
This result might seem counterintuitive in light of the frequent understanding that independent agencies are to be immunized from presidential policymaking. 130 But there is a plausible precedent for precisely this conclusion in a recent Supreme Court " See Miller, 1986 S Ct Rev at 96-97 (cited in note 83); Strauss, 84 Colum L Rev at 596-605 (cited in note 92). 
.27 295 US 602 (1935). 
128See Morrisonv Olson, 487 US 654 (1988); Mistretta v United States, 109 S Ct 647 (1989). 
129See, for example, Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 USC § 41 (1982). 1M This understanding is perhaps embraced, though obliquely and in dicta, in Humphrey's Executor, which describes the commissioners of the FTC as "independent of Executive authority, except in [their] selection" by the President. 295 US at 625-26. decision, Bowsher v Synar.11 In that case, the Court held that Congress could not delegate power to administer the Gramm-Rudman statute to the Comptroller General, because the Comptroller was subject to congressional will. In the Court's view, those who execute the law must not be subject to the policymaking authority of the Congress except insofar as legislative instructions are embodied in substantive law.132 The relevant statute allowed Congress to discharge the Comptroller for "inefficiency, . . . neglect of duty, . . . [or] malfeasance."'13 The Court said that these words conferred on Congress "very broad" removal power and would authorize Congress to remove the Comptroller for "any number of actual or perceived transgressions of the legislative will."' 34 
The words governing congressional power over the Comptroller General and presidential power over independent agencies are essentially identical. If those words have the same meaning in these admittedly different contexts, the President has "very broad" removal power over the commissioners of the independent agencies, with correlative powers of supervision and guidance. It would follow that the independent agencies are in fact subject to a considerable degree of presidential control. They are not, as a matter of statutory law, "independent" of him at all. 
It would of course be plausible to suggest that the different contexts require the same words to have different meanings. Perhaps a statute restricting congressional power over the Comptroller General should be understood to impose thinner limitations than does a statute controlling presidential power over independent commissioners; such a reading would hardly be an implausible reconstruction of legislative goals in light of the context and background of the relevant statutes. In view of the independent agency paradox, however, courts would do well to invoke a clear statement principle that grants the President broad supervisory power over independent agencies, unless Congress has expressly stated its will to the contrary. Such an approach would minimize the risks inherent in the independent agency form, and promote coordination and accountability in government. It would require Congress to speak unambiguously if it wants to compromise those goals.'35 131478 US 714 (1986). 132 Id at 726-27. 133 Id at 728; 31 USC § 703(e)(2) (1982). 13' 478 US at 729. 
" See Peter L. Strauss and Cass R. Sunstein, The Role of the Presidentand OMB in Informal Rulemaking, 38 Admin L Rev 181 (1986). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
There are multiple breakdowns in private markets, and government controls often successfully counteract them. The administrative state has not been a universal failure. But regulatory programs have not always succeeded, and the paradoxes of the regulatory state have been a pervasive source of its problems. Selfdefeating regulatory strategies take many forms. I have discussed six such paradoxes and referred to several others; still others undoubtedly exist. 
In proposing reforms for the regulatory state, little can be gained from generalities that point to the frequent problems created by either government regulation or private markets. These problems are too particular and too dependent on the context to allow for global prescriptions.5 6 It is far more helpful to rely on particularized understandings of how both markets and regulation tend to break down-to learn, in short, from the past. The experience of the regulatory state includes many self-defeating regulatory strategies. Enough information is in place to help legislators, administrators, and judges to minimize their adverse effects, and perhaps to prevent their occurrence. The result would be a small but firm step in the direction of an American-style perestroika-a system that is entirely unembarrassed by the use of government to reflect democratic aspirations, to promote economic welfare, and to foster distributional equity, while at the same time insisting on strategies that embody the flexibility, adaptability, productive potential, and decentralization characteristic of private markets. 
"' At least this is so for systems that, on the one hand, respect private property and freedom of contract while, on the other hand, imposing regulatory controls on the most harmful consequences of unregulated markets. General prescriptions would of course have considerable weight in collectivist systems or systems of "laissez faire." 
CASS R. SUNSTEIN University of Chicago In the last generation, writings on the regulatory state have taken three principal forms. The first, coming mostly from academic lawyers, consists of efforts to discern the logic of judge-made public law and to make recommendations to federal courts reviewing administrative action. The second, coming mostly from economists, consists of efforts to explain regulatory law by reference to the self-interest of participants in the legislative process. The third, coming from a quite eclectic group, consists of efforts to compare the current administrative state with approaches that show a better appreciation of the appropriate nature of government intervention and, especially, of the proper relationships among democratic self-government, bureaucracy, and private rights. 
Jerry Mashaw's paper on the different "stories" of legal development attempts to mediate among what he sees as the rival claims of these three different kinds of work. Mashaw suggests that the three schools generate different explanations or predictions about the administrative process; he wants to compare and test their claims. His conclusion is that none of the predictions ultimately holds up. 
I agree with a large number of Mashaw's particular arguments, and I find many of his criticisms of the three approaches both valuable and entirely persuasive. What I want to ask here is whether the task of mediation, as Journalof Law, Economics, and Organizationvol. 6, Special Issue 1990 © 1990 by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. ISSN 8756-6222 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 299 1990 Mashaw understands it, might not be misguided. If it is, there is a simple reason: only one of the different efforts amounts to an effort at explanation or prediction at all. There are no competing hypotheses here. For this reason, the task of mediation comes at a high price. It converts a large amount of work on the regulatory state into positive social science, when in fact it is something quite different. 
I also want to suggest, however, that Mashaw has provided an important service in bringing the three forms of work into contact with one another and in suggesting some of their tensions and interrelations. In Section 2 of this comment, I make some observations about what participants in the three enterprises might be able to learn from one another. In the process, I hope to join Mashaw in suggesting some of the ingredients of a unified political economy for the regulatory state. 
Let me begin by attempting to characterize the three "stories" around which Mashaw's efforts revolve. I will stay with his basic categories, but, as we shall soon see, in some ways my descriptions will depart from his. 
What Mashaw describes as the work of the "legal idealist" might be seen as the ordinary, day-to-day, mid-level enterprise of the legal academic operating largely within the existing legal culture. For the internal expositor or critic of administrative law, the central task is to discern the logic of judgemade doctrines, to unpack their assumptions, and to evaluate them. In this category one can find a large number of claims, amounting to the staple of academic work in administrative law. Herewith a sample, taken randomly from recent writing on judge-made public law: the courts' hostility to ex parte contacts in notice-and-comment rule-making reflects on emerging, quasi-adjudicative model of administration; the courts have been far more hospitable to administrative decisions that comport with traditional principles of compensatory justice than with decisions that reject those principles; post-1980 doctrines of standing and reviewability embody pre-NewDeal assumptions and indeed reflect hostility to government regulation; judicial deference to administrative interpretations of law reflects an understanding that the resolution of statutory ambiguities is actually a decision of policy; judicial requirements of elaborate explanations from administrators bring about substantial delays in the rule-making process or (alternatively) serve to decrease the risk of factionalism in government. 
These sorts of claims do have serious limitations, for reasons suggested by Mashaw and taken up further below. But do they even attempt to "explain" administrative processes? To the extent that the evaluations they offer are favorable, some of this work indeed tends to describe administrative law doctrines as if they were "designed" to accomplish some desirable social end. But these claims should not, I think, be taken as explanatory ones in the HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 300 1990 sense indicated by Mashaw. They are more on the order of the claim that Brown v. Board of Education was "designed" to impose a general principle of color blindness. In other words, they are interpretive rather than positive claims. They attempt to make the best possible sense out of a line ofjudicial decisions. They are falsifiable in the sense that they attempt to fit their claims with the data (i.e., with existing judicial decisions). Among the various possible accounts that have a plausible claim to fit, however, the choice is made on value-laden grounds. In this respect, interpretive claims are not positive in the sense that Mashaw understands the term. 
When doctrinal analysts describe what a doctrine is "intended" to do, they should not be thought to be making a claim about the subjective motivations of the judges or, much less, about what really accounts for that doctrine as a matter of social science. They are not making the functionalist error of explaining a result by reference to its consequences. Instead, they are attempting to bring out the logic of legal doctrine by positing the sorts of claims that might be invoked in its favor. This is a time-honored approach to law. It should hardly be disparaged, but it is not positive social science. 
If this is right, Mashaw goes wrong in treating efforts of this sort as an effort to provide a predictive or positive guide at all. More fundamentally, I think that Mashaw is mistaken in suggesting that what he calls the idealist conception would predict a range of judicial (rather than legislative and bureaucratic) controls on the administrative process. For the most part, the academic lawyers are not engaged in that enterprise at all. 1 
What Mashaw describes as the "CLS description of administrative law" I prefer to see as a far broader effort, from a range of starting points, to evaluate regulatory substance and process by reference to first principles with respect to (a) democratic theory and (b) substantive ideas about the proper extent and form of regulatory controls. In this category fall a number of claims about the democratic or antidemocratic character of the modern regulatory state and about the ways in which that state does more or less than it ought to do. Thus, for example, it might be said that the category of public-interest justifications for legislation is very large, including not simply responses to market failures but also a recognition of the endogenous character of certain preferences; an endorsement, through law, of social aspirations; a powerful antidiscrimination principle; and certain forms of redistribution. In one version, coming from the far left, the administrative state is said to have been defended on the basis of a number of ultimately unsuccessful strategies of legitimation. 2 On this account, administrative them: for example, do the courts consistently defer to political choices? Do they systematically disfavor regulatory beneficiaries? I do not deny that some claims of academic lawyers take the form of falsifiable predictions. 
administrative law. Mashaw relies on Frug. 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 301 1990 dominance and discretion are concealed by arguments that attempt, unsuccessfully, to discern a pedigree for modern administration in the form of democratic self-governance or neutral legal constraint. 
Mashaw attempts to translate this latter sort of claim into an argument "predicting" that administrative law doctrine will "maintain the relatively unconstrained power of bureaucratic officials to exercise state power." I doubt, however, that the critics have made any such predictive argument. Normative arguments about failed efforts at legitimation should not be taken as positive claims about what it is that administrative law doctrines will do. It would be perfectly plausible to say that efforts at the legitimation of bureaucratic authority fail, while at the same time taking no position on the question whether administrative law will, in general or in particular, maximize, minimize, or take some middle course on the question of bureaucratic discretion. Much depends, of course, on what the notion to "relatively unconstrained power" is intended to comprehend. But unless any amount of discretionary authority at all is thought to fall in this category-and perhaps Frug and others can be read to make this puzzling suggestion-the predictive claim is difficult to find in the literature. 
Indeed, it would be extremely surprising if the critics attempted to make a positive claim to the effect that administrative law will maintain unconstrained bureaucratic discretion. That claim would be hard to sustain. There are multiple actors in the administrative state, and, even if failed legitimation is the ultimate point of one's story, it would be peculiar indeed if all of those other actors-courts, Congress, the president-were simultaneously embarking on the pursuit of unconstrained bureaucratic power. 
All this suggests that the critics, taken as a broad group or as participants in something more narrow like CLS, are not making a claim with any powerful positive implications about the structure of bureaucratic decision-making. As in the case of the legal idealist, Mashaw seems to me to be mistaking a set of essentially normative claims for predictive or explanatory judgments. 3 
With respect to positive political theory, Mashaw is, of course, on firm ground. Here the task is indeed to explain why administrative process takes the form that it does. Moreover, a number of Mashaw's criticisms of positive work on administration seem to me correct. I think, however, that Mashaw may be mischaracterizing the relevant work when he suggests that it posits "legislative control" as the overarching theme of positive political science in this area. Any positive theory of the regulatory state will acknowledge that there are other actors, with other agendas, in the process. And, as several positive analysts have argued, legislative control may be something that including the decided cases. 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 302 1990 legislators themselves will work against-in favor of, for example, bureaucratic or state authority, which in some contexts will be in the interest of legislators focused on reelection. It would be a mistake to think that all positive political science in this area is designed to prove that administrative processes can be explained as if they were an effort to increase legislative control of the administrative process. 
If I am correct on this, the three enterprises with which we are dealing are in fact incommensurable, not because they have different methodologies, but because they set for themselves different tasks. Only one ol them amounts to an "explanation" in the positive sense at all. Both the idealist and the critical approaches are largely normative. To the extent that they offer explanations, it is with an eye toward describing, respectively, the logic around which some of the cases might be organized and evaluated, and the foundations from which one might understand the correspondence or noncorrespondence between the administrative state and ideals of democratic self-governance. These are explanations in a sense, but of a quite different order from those involved in positive social science. They do not predict judicial or administrative control at all. 
OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW The considerations treated thus far do not suggest that the three enterprises might not learn something from one another, nor do I deny that all of them might be making serious mistakes that an engagement with the others might help to remedy. In this section, I want to say a few words about some of the limitations of each of these enterprises, and to speculate on how work in each of them might be enriched through an understanding of the others. 
Administrative law in the law schools remains largely in the grip of the tradition set by Kenneth Culp Davis and Louis Jaffe. Focused on judicial control of administrative behavior, it sees the purposes of administrative law as embracing a constellation of related concerns: to guarantee legality; to promote procedural regularity; and to ensure against irrationality and injustice, defined by reference to common-sense intuitions. 
These ideas are far too vague to provide a full sense of the appropriate nature of judicial controls on the regulatory state. An understanding of positive political science might provide significant help. Some regulatory statutes should, for example, be seen as "deals" among self-interested private groups; they are not public-regarding at all. Moreover, regulatory stat 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 303 1990 utes have a variety of malfunctions, some of them counterintuitive. 4 Statutes are often poorly coordinated with one another. Sometimes they become obsolete. They also have complex systemic effects. Overregulation produces underregulation; concentration on new risks perpetuate old risks; redistributive regulation often hurts those at the bottom of the economic ladder; legal requirements of the "best available technology" can, ironically, retard technological development. 
An understanding of these various phenomena could prove most helpful to doctrinal analysis in administrative law. It might show, for example, that the consequences of regulatory statutes are quite different from what is anticipated, and an understanding of the consequences might well bear on statutory interpretation and on the decision about what courses of action are "arbitrary" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act. For example, an understanding of the ways in which regulatory controls on new risks perpetuate old risks might well affect judicial analysis. 5 The fact that statutes are sometimes "deals" among private actors might also bear on statutory construction, although here the implications are uncertain. Furthermore, if problems in aggregating multiple views in the legislature produce irrationality or incoherence, perhaps there is much to be gained by ensuring regulation via the president rather than the Congress. 
To the extent that criticisms of administrative legitimacy have weight, those criticisms, too, might play a role in judge-made doctrines. For example, attacks on policy-making by bureaucrats (again, if they are persuasive) might lead to a reinvigoration of the nondelegation doctrine or at least to "clear statement" principles, forbidding administrators to engage in certain activity unless Congress has expressly authorized it. In such cases, administrative doctrines always depend on understandings about political legitimacy, even if such understandings are tacit; and an engagement with theories about legitimacy and legitimation will inevitably enrich such understandings. This is true even if judge-made doctrines are highly unlikely to respond in a serious way to the most extreme versions of the "legitimation" complaint. 
regulation is organized around the notion of "rent-seeking." The notion is not always clearly explicated; at least in some hands, it seems to refer to the wasteful expenditure of funds on the redistribution of resources through politics rather than the healthy production of resources through markets. Thus, for example, efforts to obtain environmental controls, or to obtain a 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 304 1990 "fairness" doctrine to control broadcasting, are thought to represent the diversion of resources into an unproductive place. 
So described, the notion of rent-seeking rejects most of the basic workings of politics. It treats citizenship itself as an evil. And while it is intended as a tool of positive analysis, in fact it is based on a set of premises that arc rarely disentangled and that amount to tacit, and exceedingly peculiar, understandings of democratic theory. It assumes that the status quo-existing distributions-are not themselves a product of politics or in need of defense. It treats politics as a system for the transfer of wealth rather than for deliberation about values. Indeed, it assimilates the second to the first, and thu, renders it invisible. 
More generally, the notion of rent-seeking represents a peculiar reversa of the liberal tradition, which has seen political behavior not as an evil, but a! an important arena for education, for deliberation and discussion about th( nation's direction, for the development of the faculties, and for the cultiva. tion of feelings of altruism. On all of these scores, the liberal traditior remains reasonably vibrant in the United States; and it continues to describ( a wide range of individual and collective behavior. It would, of course, b( foolish to deny that much political conduct is an effort to use governmenta power to serve selfish ends. But to collapse all political behavior into th( category of "rent-seeking" is grotesquely to devalue the activities of cit izenship. An effort by those who practice positive political science to engag( with the literature of democratic theory would be most helpful here. 
As Mashaw properly points out, moreover, much of positive politica science represents a crude form of functionalism. Prominent in such divers( areas as Marxism, economics, and sociology, work of this sort deduces cause of a phenomenon from its effects. But this is bad social science. I amounts to the telling of plausible stories, but it is really no more than that The fact that a regulatory system has the effect of, for example, helpin t Eastern industry does not demonstrate that the system was enacted becaus( of that effect. 
Some work in the critical tradition seems naive about a range of issues including the consequences of governmental intervention in the mar ketplace. Such intervention does not create simple ex post winners an( losers. It has a range of distributive consequences, some of them unantici pated and perverse. An understanding of the complex systemic effects o regulatory enactments-inevitable in a market (or nonmarket) economywould be extremely helpful here. 
Moreover, positive political science helps to produce a healthy skepticisn about the possibilities of democratic politics, at least in any polity that we ar likely to have. Social choice theory has revealed a number of difficulties ii 
HeinOnline -- 6 J.L. Econ & Org. 305 1990 describing any outcome in a multimember body as reflecting a unitary "public will." An understanding of collective action problems, cycling, strategic behavior, agenda manipulation, and economies of scale should at least weaken the enthusiasm of some critical theorists for small-scale systems of participatory democracy. 
To say this is not at all to suggest that an engagement with positive work on the regulatory state leads directly to any particular set of ideas on the appropriate relationship between bureaucracy and democracy. But it does suggest that critical approaches to that question would be much improved if they took account of that work. 
It is a mistake, I think, to translate either the work of the doctrinal analyst or the various critiques of the democratic theorist into a set of positive claims about how administrative processes actually come about. At most, the doctrinal analyst is arguing, for example, that there is a discernible logic behind otherwise mysterious developments in the case law; and the democratic theorist is arguing that, for example, participants in modern liberal states make unsuccessful claims by which they attempt to legitimate the exercise of discretionary power by bureaucrats. But neither of these arguments is a prediction or explanation at all. 
To say this is not to say that the three perspectives on administrative law have nothing to learn from each other. On the contrary, there is a pressing need for a more unified political economy of administrative law. Such a political economy would reflect an understanding of the principles and pathologies of the regulatory state; of the forces that have brought it about; of the devices by which various actors have attempted to discipline it; and of the failures and successes of regulation, assessed by reference both to its real-world performance and to democratic theory. A unified political economy would indeed attempt to mediate among different perspectives on the regulatory state. It would do so not by seeing which one is more sound than the others, but instead by appreciating that each of them attempts important (although quite different) tasks, and by taking advantage of the work that performs each of those tasks well rather than poorly. 
How are courts to interpret statutory enactments? A timehonored answer is that they should do so by reference to one simple thing: the statutory "text." Despite its salutary recognition of legislative supremacy on these matters, the answer will not suffice. The meaning of any "text" is a function not of the bare words, but of its context and the relevant culture. Because of the context, words sometimes have a meaning quite different from what might be found in Webster's or the Oxford English Dictionary.Courts do not and should not "make a fortress out of the dictionary."' Even more important, the culture furnishes the interpretive principles that courts and other interpreters use in order to give meaning to any "text." Legal words are never susceptible to interpretation standing by themselves, and in any case they never stand by themselves. 
The actual and appropriate role of interpretive principles in legal interpretation remains one of the great unresolved areas of the law. But this much seems clear: some such principles are not subject to change or even to evaluation. They are simply part of what it means to be a lawyer, or even to speak the English language; they serve as conventions that determine meaning. Thus, for example, the notion that "animals" do not include inanimate objects, that Congress is (usually) not joking, that things that do not move are not "vehicles," and that interpreters should not construe statutes to mean whatever (they think) a good statute would say are taken as axioms, and rightly so.2 But some interpretive principles conspicuously reflect deliberation and choice. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Larry Lessig, Richard Posner and Simon Steel for extremely helpful comments on a previous draft. 
' This aphorism is Learned Hand's. See Cabell v Markham, 148 F2d 737, 739 (2d Cir 1945). 
2 To use a classic illustration, a provision barring vehicles from a park would be construed not to apply to a statue of a tank. Indeed, a statute barring animals would not require public officials or private citizens to eliminate rodents. See text at notes 10-16, discussing statutory ambiguity. 
Some of these principles are not, however, simply part of what English words mean. The idea that courts should not understand a statute to accomplish whatever they want it 1247 
Consider, for example, the following ideas: courts will not generally infer private rights of action from silent statutes; judicial review is presumed available; courts will defer to agency interpretations of law; statutes will be construed generously toward Indian tribes; a clear congressional statement is necessary to support displacement of state law.3 These are simply a few examples of the dozens of interpretive principles that can be found in even a casual reading of any two or three volumes of the United States Reports or the Federal Reporter. All of these principles reflect substantive judgments, and all of these judgments should be brought out into the open and evaluated. 
In an earlier essay on this subject, I attempted to outline the actual and appropriate place of the conventional sources of interpretation, to describe the role of interpretive principles in statutory construction, to catalogue various kinds of principles, and to propose principles to be used in interpreting regulatory statutes.4 In their stimulating and thoughtful response,5 Eben Moglen and Richard Pierce assemble three principal objections to my proposed approach. First, they argue that my approach would confer excessive power on the federal judiciary. Second, they claim that my approach suffers, even more than the alternative positions, from incompleteness and indeterminacy. Third, and perhaps most provocatively, they object that any interpretive system rests on "fictions" and that I use the wrong criterion to evaluate the competing fictions. I am grateful to Moglen and Pierce for their valuable reactions. In this reply, I discuss their objections in turn. to requires an argument rather than a language lesson. In a democracy, however, the argument is so straightforward that it need not be reconsidered or assessed very often. The problem with conventionalist approaches to interpretation is that they assimilate all interpretive principles to the category of conventions, and thus treat practices that require justification as simply parts of language. See, for example, Stanley Fish, Doing What Comes Naturally (Duke, 1989). In their use of the notion of "fictions," Moglen and Pierce's approach appears to bear some resemblance to conventionalism. See Eben Moglen and Richard J. Pierce, Jr., Sunstein's New Canons: Choosing the Fictions of Statutory Intepretation, 57 U Chi L Rev 1203 (1990). 
3 See, for example, Karahalios v National Federation of Federal Employees, Local 1263, 489 US 527 (1989) (implied causes of action); Johnson v Robison, 415 US 361 (1974) (judicial review presumed available); Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 US 837 (1984) (deference to agencies); Montana v Blackfeet Tribe, 471 US 759 (1985) (statute and treaties construed favorably to Indians); PuertoRico Dept. of Consumer Affairs v Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 US 495 (1988) (preemption of state law). 
' Cass R. Sunstein, InterpretingStatutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv L Rev 405 (1989). The analysis is extended and put in the context of a broader discussion of the aspirations and failures of the regulatory state in Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State (Harvard, 1990). 
1 Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1203 (cited in note 2). 
With respect to the role of the courts in statutory construction, I do not believe that there are fundamental differences between my approach and that suggested by Moglen and Pierce. I agree that courts must give full scope to the unambiguous meaning of statutory words. It follows that courts may not invoke contestable or controversial interpretive principles when there is no ambiguity.' In this respect, courts should indeed be faithful agents of the legislature, subject to the (practically unimportant) qualification that the interpretive principles that make unambiguous statutes unambiguous will sometimes be, at least in part, a judicial creation.' I agree that Congress may displace judicially created interpretive principles if it chooses to do so. 8 I agree that courts should defer to administrative interpretations where Congress has told courts to defer. In the event that Congress has not expressly addressed the issue of deference, I agree with Moglen and Pierce that courts should generally defer where distinctive administrative policymaking and factfinding competence is relevant. In this latter respect, I agree that Chevron was entirely correct. Indeed-and this is an important point-the interpretive principles I propose are directed in the first instance at regulatory agencies, not at the courts.9 In the modern administrative state, it would be highly incongruous to direct a set of interpretive principles solely to the judges who review agency decisions, and not to the administrators themselves. Where we disagree is on two questions that are not exactly fundamental, but that do have some practical importance-the category of statutory ambiguity and the precise degree of deference to agency interpretations. 
6 See Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 464-66 (cited in note 4). 
The fact of clarity reflects agreement or consensus about the governing interpretive principles. When things are clear, it is not as if no such principle is "there"; rather, the principle is simply taken so much for granted as to be invisible. In such cases there is usually no need for interpreters to consider the source of the governing principle. The key point is that everyone accepts the principle and therefore there is no interpretive doubt. 
The possibility of consensus suggests that the agency theory of the judicial role contains a large truth; indeed, it is in significant part correct. The problems are that in some cases the instructions of the principal are unclear, and in many cases courts should press unclear statutes in certain directions. 
' In some rare cases there might be constitutional obstacles here. Consider, for example, an effort by Congress to eliminate clear statement principles calling for express legislative deliberation on certain issues, as exemplified in the principle that ambiguities in the area of foreign affairs will be understood not to intrude on presidential power. See Dames & Moore v Regan, 453 US 654 (1981). But this situation will be unusual. 
I Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 504 (cited in note 4); Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution at 161-62, 232 (cited in note 4). 
I would find ambiguity in some cases in which Moglen and Pierce think that Congress has spoken clearly. For example, Congress enacted the Delaney Clause in 1955, and thereby banned the approval of any color additives that "induce cancer when ingested by man or animal."'10 When Congress enacted the Clause, few carcinogens were detectable, and those carcinogens that could be detected were extremely dangerous. By 1989, thousands of carcinogens could be detected, and many of them posed trivial risks. In light of the changed circumstances, the consequence of a literal reading of the Delaney Clause was actually to increase, not to decrease, health risks." 
In these circumstances, the FDA found an ambiguity in the 1955 enactment. Taken in its context, that enactment simply did not speak to the question whether de minimis cancer risks should be regulated-especially in light of the principle, deeply engrained in common sense, ordinary language, and law, that a literal prohibition on an activity need not foreclose exceedingly trivial transgressions. (I tell my housesitter to make sure not to get any dust on the piano. What exactly do I mean by this? Must he cover the piano with a sheet? The state of California bans the drinking of alcoholic beverages on college campuses. Does this mean that bottled water with some alcohol content must be removed from Stanford?) I wonder whether it can be argued with any seriousness that the FDA's invocation of the very old principle "de minimis non curat lex"-a principle that would actually have saved lives here-would have violated some congressional instruction. I wonder too whether it might not instead be thought that the FDA's decision was entirely consistent with congressional instructions, indeed more consistent than a "literal" interpretation of the Delaney Clause. 
Moglen and Pierce also invoke the Benzene case, in which a plurality of the Court found an implicit "significant risk" requirement in the OSHA statute. 12 The literal reading apparently favored by Moglen and Pierce would have required OSHA to regulate any risk posed by any toxic substance, no matter how trivial the risk and no matter how high the costs. A fifty billion dollar expenditure to save one life per decade would be legally mandated. The consequence would be grotesque overregulation of some risks and predictable underregulation of others."3 I doubt that Moglen and Pierce really believe that a court that so held would be following some actual congressional instruction. 
In both of these cases, Moglen and Pierce understate the interpretive problem posed by generality, which can indeed produce ambiguity. In a famous passage, Wittgenstein made the point: "Someone says to me: 'Shew the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says, 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order? 14 The example reveals that adherence to dictionary definitions can produce poor interpretations. In the law, the point is an old one, long predating Wittgenstein. Indeed, many cases reflect the same principle. 15 My support for the outcome in Benzene and my criticism of the Delaney Clause case are thus nothing new. 
I should reiterate that I do not believe that our disagreement on these matters goes to anything fundamental. Where there is no ambiguity, courts must defer. To say that generality creates ambiguity is not really to repose an "extraordinary degree of policymaking power"1 ' in the federal judiciary. It hardly allows courts to refashion statutes however they wish. It simply acknowledges that generality can produce an interpretive problem. 
Moglen and Pierce would give greater scope than I would to the principle that courts should defer to administrative interpretations of laws. They do not say exactly how far they believe this principle extends, but if we disagree, it must be because they think that that principle should apply (a) even in the face of countervailing principles and (b) even in cases involving pure questions of law in which agency bias or self-dealing is involved. In both of these categories of cases, I believe that the principle of deference is inappropriate. 
" For an explanation, see Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution at 91-92, 106 (cited in note 4); Sunstein, 57 U Chi L Rev at 418-19 (cited in note 11). 
14 Ludwig Wittgenstein (G.E.M. Anscombe, trans), PhilosophicalInvestigations 33 (Basil Blackwell, 1953). 
'5 For examples, see Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 420 nn 44-47 (cited in note 4). " Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1223 (cited in note 2). 
The first point here is that the principle of deference, stated most prominently in Chevron, is one of a large number of interpretive principles. Under current law, and under any reasonable system of interpretation, it does not stand by itself, or even at the top of the list. Suppose, for example, that an agency's interpretation of an ambiguous statute raises serious constitutional doubts, or ensures that its own decisions are unreviewable, or preempts state law, or unfavorably affects the Indian tribes. It is implausible to think that the agency's view would or should prevail in all such cases. In cases before and after Chevron, the rule of deference has not been applied in at least some contexts in which competing interpretive principles argue against the agency's view.17 
Second, the key question on the problem of deference is whether Congress has instructed courts to defer. Sometimes Congress will not have answered that question directly, and when this is so, courts must reconstruct legislative instructions on the basis of an assessment of judicial and administrative capacities. In cases involving agency bias or self-dealing with respect to pure questions of law, it seems unlikely that Congress would want courts to defer to agencies. Suppose, for example, that the question is whether the agency is under an affirmative obligation to take action against pollutants shown to cause serious harms. In view of Congress's constant effort to force agencies to take action in this area, it seems difficult to sustain the idea that agencies should be able to decide whether their own duties are mandatory.'" Or suppose that the question has to do with the extent of an agency's own jurisdiction. When Congress has not spoken on the matter, ought courts to assume that agencies have the authority to decide on the extent of their own legal authority? 
Whether or not my conclusions are correct on these points, it hardly seems right to suggest that exceptions to the rule of deference-for countervailing interpretive principles or agency bias in cases of pure questions of law-would produce anything but a modest increase in judicial power over administrative processes. These exceptions ought to be regarded not as an effort to increase the authority of the judges, but as a natural outgrowth of the fundamental idea that the authority of the administrators is subordinate to that of Congress. 
17 See generally Cass R. Sunstein, Law and AdministrationAfter Chevron, 90 Colum L Rev - (forthcoming December 1990), and cases cited therein. 
1 For a more detailed and precise discussion of these and related issues, see generally 
Moglen and Pierce believe that the system of interpretation that I propose is too complex for judicial adoption. In their view, some of the suggested norms are unjustified, or at least controversial (with "less than universal acceptance" 19); the system contains too many norms; and some of the relevant norms are highly general and subject to conflicting interpretations. All in all, Moglen and Pierce conclude, the system fails because of its unmanageability. Let me take up these claims in sequence. 
Some of the norms that I propose are certainly controversial. This is true, for example, of the norm in favor of narrow construction of statutes endangering property rights and the norm in favor of aggressive construction of statutes protecting the environment and endangered species. But the fact that a norm is controversial does not by itself count as a good argument against it. Surely some norms that are widely accepted within the existing legal culture ought on reflection to be abandoned; surely some norms now unsupported by a consensus ought to be accepted soon. The phenomenon of rejecting old norms and importing new ones has of course occurred during nearly every decade of American law. The category of interpretive principles is not static but is instead a product of a continuous process of evaluation and choice. 
Whether interpretive norms are acceptable depends not on consensus but on the reasons that can be marshaled on their behalf2. 0 In all likelihood the reasons I have offered for the many norms I discuss are frequently too thin, and in any case it would be surprising if every one of the norms for which I have argued can be supported by reasons that should ultimately be found persuasive. But this is not a question on which Moglen and Pierce spend much of their time, and surely there is considerable room for further thought here. 
Moglen and Pierce are correct in suggesting that many of the norms I propose are not self-interpreting and that there is a serious potential for conflict among the norms.2 But it is important to 19Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1227 (cited in note 2). Moglen and Pierce also ask whether the category of norms is intended to be closed or exhaustive. Id at 1233-34. Although the enumeration of syntactic norms is designed only to be illustrative, the institutional and substantive norms I develop are in fact intended to be complete, though it would be most surprising if, on reflection, additional norms did not appear justified. 
20 Note here that I am discussing norms with substantive foundations, and not syntactic norms, which are founded on the rules of grammar. Of course, a decision to reject an established norm or to bring about a new one must be based on reasons. 
21 Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1233-45 (cited in note 2); see Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 443, 497-98 (cited in note 4). understand that my effort to propose norms for the regulatory state is descriptive as well as normative. All of my proposed norms have some basis in current law. Almost all of them have been explicitly recognized as such in the cases.22 In view of the fact that some version of this system is already in place, and indeed has been in place for many years, Moglen and Pierce's claim of lack of administrability seems at least overstated. 
More broadly, almost any approach to interpretation will contain norms that are on occasion susceptible to competing interpretations and in potential conflict with one another. This is true in ordinary linguistic practice as well as in law. The fact that an approach to interpretation (normative or positive) contains a multiplicity of norms, some of them necessarily stated at a high level of generality, does not count as a powerful argument against it. At most, that fact is a reminder, salutary to be sure, of the inherent limitations of any effort to describe the "principles" of interpretation in a systemic or mechanical way.2" 
The only way to reduce the risk of conflicting interpretive principles is to produce a system with one or very few such principles-as in, for example, the idea that agency interpretations will always prevail, or that ambiguous statutes will always be interpreted favorably to the plaintiff, or that courts will resolve hard cases unfavorably to those whose names begin with the letter falling first in the alphabet. But the dangers of simplicity in this setting should be self-evident. Any simple system will contain an unacceptably high potential for an unacceptably large number of errors. And one might make this point while agreeing, with Moglen and Pierce, that one goal of a system of interpretation is to reduce the complexity, unpredictability, and cost associated with interpretation.24 It is of course possible that the system I propose is either too simple or too complex for descriptive or normative purposes, and that some alternative system would have a better level of complexity. But this would call for a long discussion. 
One final point. We should think of the process of statutory interpretation as an exercise of practical reason, not as mechanical 22 See, for example, cases cited in note 3. The exceptions include the norms in favor of generous construction of antidiscrimination measures and against exemptions from welfare programs. 
22 Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 497-98 (cited in note 4). 
24 See also Antonin Scalia, Judicial Deference to Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L J 511; Peter L. Strauss, One HundredFifty Cases Per Year: Some Implications of the Supreme Court's Limited Resources for JudicialReview of Agency Action, 87 Colum L Rev 1093, 1117-29 (1987). or deductive.25 Since statutory interpretation requires practical reason, it is inevitable, and no cause for embarrassment, that the operative principles, stated at a certain level of generality, are themselves subject to interpretation and in potential conflict with one another. To outline the relevant principles and to provide some sense of their relationship is indispensable for descriptive or normative purposes. These steps structure inquiry. They foreclose some routes and open others. But they do not decide concrete cases. An outline of the principles and their general operation is the beginning, not the end, of the process of interpreting any particular statute in any particular context. The applications have to be discussed and thought through; here there will be room for disagreement and uncertainty. 
15 See Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 497-98 (cited in note 4); see also William N. Eskridge, Jr. and Philip P. Frickey, Statutory Interpretationas PracticalReasoning, 42 Stan L Rev 321, 322 (1990); Richard A. Posner, The Problems of Jurisprudence(Harvard, 1990). For an especially helpful treatment outside of the legal context, see Martha C. Nussbaum, The Fragilityof Goodness:Luck andEthics in Greek Tragedy and Philosophy ch 10 (Cambridge, 1986). 
I do not have space to explore all of the (extremely interesting) cases discussed by Moglen and Pierce, but it might be helpful, as an illustration, to say a few words about the question whether the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) can or must avoid "scrubbing" strategies for utilities emitting sulfur dioxides. See Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1235-38 (cited in note 2). 
I believe that the EPA is unquestionably authorized to reject scrubbing strategies if it can show (as it can, and to some extent did in Sierra Club v Costle, 657 F2d 298 (DC Cir 1981)) that other approaches can produce equal or greater environmental protection at lower cost. This conclusion is a natural product of (a) the norm in favor of considering systemic effects, which argues powerfully against scrubbing strategies (such strategies perpetuate the life of old, especially dirty plants and impair technological innovation), see Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 480; (b) the norm in favor of avoiding interest group transfers-of which scrubbing strategies, benefitting eastern coal without improving the environment, are an egregious example, id at 486-87; (c) the norm in favor of giving the statutory text priority over the legislative history, id at 474-75; (d) the norm in favor of according deference to the policymaking competence of the agency, id at 475; and (e) the presumption against irrationality, id at 482-83. The norm in favor of aggressive construction of statutes protecting the environment does not argue against this result, since scrubbing strategies do not protect the environment more than the alternatives, other things being equal. 
While the question is a bit closer, I also believe that a universal scrubbing strategy, or something like it, would be unlawful even if the EPA endorsed that strategy. The only difference is that norm (d) would argue in the other direction, but I do not believe that the agency view should be accorded deference in this setting, where the outcome would not be compelled by the statutory text, would be irrational, and would conspicuously reflect interest group pressures rather than sensible efforts to protect the environment. For more discussion, see Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution at 85 (cited in note 4); Bruce A. Ackerman and William T. Hassler, Clean Coal/DirtyAir (Yale, 1981). A particularized analysis of this sort, deploying the norms in a reasoned rather than mechanical way, would be necessary to resolve the various cases that Moglen and Pierce discuss. 
The risk of uncertainty and the need to attend to particulars do not count as a criticism of a system of interpretation that embodies such a set of principles. To demand more is to demand something that such a system simply cannot provide, and that it should not attempt to provide even if it could do so. 
III. FICTIONS AND PRINCIPLES 
Moglen and Pierce's broadest claim is that I fail "to recognize the necessarily . . . fictive nature of the enterprise of interpreting texts. '26 For them, interpretive fictions help make "communication comprehensible" and "generate rules for understanding speech. 2 7 Indeed, the source of canons of construction "remains fiction.' ' 21 Moglen and Pierce attempt to support this claim by reference to past and present legal fictions and to a range of conventional ideas about statutory interpretation that they deem "fictional": collective intent on the part of the legislature, legislative history, the assumption that legislators are reasonable people acting reasonably, and the principle of deference itself. For Moglen and Pierce, statutory interpretation is, in these and other contexts, filled with fictions. For anyone to challenge a principle as fictional, as I do on occasion, seems no argument at all in these circumstances. 
Here there is a genuine disagreement between us. At least in the context of statutory interpretation, and indeed in the law generally, I believe that interpretive fictions are unhelpful and in fact harmful to legal reasoning and results. Fictions are not indispensable. The law would be better off without any of them. Indeed, an important contribution of twentieth-century jurisprudence has been a measure of self-consciousness about the existence of legal fictions, and an understanding that they are obstacles to thought. We do not need interpretive fictions. Instead we need interpretive principles-ones that can be defended in substantive or institutional terms. 
In each of Moglen and Pierce's illustrations, it is possible to restate what they call a fiction in a way that identifies a principle, and one that, once identified as such, merits evaluation. If, for example, the principle of deference to agency interpretations is justified on the ground that Congress intends to give law-interpreting power to the agencies, it is-just as Moglen and Pierce sug" Moglen and Pierce, 57 U Chi L Rev at 1205-06 (cited in note 2). 27 Id at 1208, 1209. 28 Id at 1209. gest-based on a fiction. And if this is all that can be said for the principle of deference, it is wrong precisely because its foundation is fictional. If the notion of deference to agency interpretations is acceptable, in the absence of legislative instructions, it is for reasons that call up the comparative advantages of the agency-the capacity to respond to changed circumstances, administrative accountability and expertise, and other reasons nicely discussed by Moglen and Pierce themselves2. 9 To make these arguments persuasively, there is no need to refer to fictions. 
Or consider the notion that interpreters should assume that legislators are reasonable people acting reasonably. If this assumption is justified on the ground that it accurately captures the legislative process in every case, then its core is fiction. Surely it cannot be justified in that way at all. But if this premise is defended, in principle, as a means of improving the legal system by assuming and thus helping to produce reasonableness and sense rather than chaos and nonsense, then it seems sound.30 And in that event, the assumption of reasonableness is not rooted in fictions at all. 
So too, if we continue to rely at all on legislative intent and legislative history, this reliance cannot be because there is in all cases a unitary collective "intent" or because the legislators know and consult the legislative history. As Moglen and Pierce suggest, these ideas are fictions. Fictions, I repeat, cannot justify interpretive practices. If reliance on intent and history is to be continued, it is because in the face of textual ambiguity, courts should attempt, as part of their interpretive activity, to use whatever evidence is available on the (highly relevant) question of how the words were understood at the time of enactment and, more particularly, on what some or many of the people who enacted the text thought that it meant. It is altogether unnecessary to advert to fictions in order to make this claim. 
All this suggests a broader point. Legal fictions are usually founded on some substantive ground; the problem with the fiction is that it buries that ground. The way to handle fictions is to uncover them as such and to translate them into principles so that they can be evaluated. When evaluated, and treated as the normatively-laden devices that they are, some of these principles will be accepted and others will be rejected. A legal system that yields to the inevitability of "fictions" will be disabled from carrying out this indispensable task. 
11 Id at 1212-14. 3" See Sunstein, 103 Harv L Rev at 435 (cited in note 4). 
I conclude by reiterating that some or even many of my proposed principles might ultimately be found unacceptable and that the proposed framework may err in the direction of undue complexity or undue simplicity. But whether this is so depends on the reasons offered for and against the relevant principles and on whether an alternative system can produce a better mix of good outcomes, predictability, and low decision costs. I hope that it is to those concerns, and not to the matter of fictions, that future descriptive and normative work on statutory construction will be devoted. 
INTRODUCTION 
To many contemporary observers, the ratification of the American Constitution marked the end of classical politics and the start of a distinctive modern approach.' On that approach, government takes people as they are. Above all, it is respectful of divergent conceptions of the good life. Recognizing that self-interest is often the basis of political behavior, it creates institutional arrangements and substantive rights that will discipline likely abuses of political power, increase the prospects for compromise, and create spheres of private autonomy into which government may not enter. Agnostic about the good, a modern polity creates the basic rules by which people can order their private affairs. Its ambitions are otherwise quite modest. 
This approach is often contrasted with another set of understandings, sometimes denominated "republican." For republicans, the polity is supposed to benefit from and to inculcate civic virtue in its people. The character of both the individual and the collectivity, and the enjoyment of the good life, properly conceived, are self-conscious concerns of the system. From the standpoint of modern observers, such systems threaten totalism, or the imposition of a "comprehensive view'" 2 on the population. On the republican account, however, collective engagement with individual character and the good life are crucial parts of politics. 
in public affairs. The classical republicans placed little reliance on the * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. Some of the arguments in this essay are also set out in Sunstein, Preferences and Politics, 20 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 3 (Winter 1991) and in C. Sunstein, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION: RECONCEIVING THE REGULATORY STATE (Harvard Univers I am grateful to George Loewenstein, Jane Mansbridge, and Frederick Schauer for helpful comments. 
1.See G. WOOD, THE CREATION OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC (1972); T. PANGLE, THE SPIRIT OF MODERN REPUBLICANISM (1988); Diamond, Ethics and Politics" The American Way, in THE MORAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE AMERICAN REPUBLIC (R. Horowitz ed. 1979). 
As the discussion below should make clear, I do not by any means intend to endorse all of the details of this account. There is reason to question both the picture of "classical republicanism" and the claims about the nature of the shift in America. But these issues raise questions beyond the scope of the present discussion. 
protection of "rights" against the government. Indeed, these very categories would seem a bit puzzling to the classical tradition. 
The division between classical republicans and the American framers should not be drawn too sharply. The framers of the Constitution drew a considerable amount from classical republicanism, especially insofar as they placed a high premium on political deliberation, political virtue, political debate, and citizenship. Madison and Hamilton in particular emphasized the need for deliberation among the differently situated. The basic institutions of representation, checks and balances, and federalism are best understood against this background. Even the individual rights safeguarded by the Constitution-the right to a jury trial and the rights of assembly and petition, for example-owe a large amount to the republican tradition. The framers were hardly interestgroup pluralists, welfare economists, or believers in a prepolitical sphere of private rights. They were republicans, albeit of a novel stripe; they were liberals as well. 3 
The conventional division between the American founders and their classical predecessors is therefore far too crude. But there is certainly something to the traditional view. Respect for private preferences, rather than collective deliberation about character, public values, or the good life, seems to be a distinguishing feature of American constitutionalism. It is here, perhaps especially in recent years, that the classical legacy seems most remote and least accessible to modern democratic theory and contemporary constitutional practice. 
In this essay I want to explore the question whether a contemporary democracy might not do better to concern itself directly with some of the concerns of republicanism. It is one thing to affirm competing conceptions of the good; it is quite another to suggest that private preferences should always be off-limits to politics. My goal is to see how a democratic republic, recognizing the value and even the inevitability of the American abandonment of classical republicanism, might nonetheless attempt to take advantage of those aspects of republicanism that have the strongest claim to contemporary support. A large part of my concern here is the phenomenon of endogenous preferences, a phenomenon that casts doubt on the idea that private desires and beliefs ought to be pro3. Indeed, participants in the liberal tradition, in its classical forms, emphasized the need for deliberation in government and placed a high value on political virtue. Many liberals do not take private preferences for granted, whatever their sources and consequences, and whatever the reasons that might be offered in their support. See Sunstein, Beyond the Republican Revival, 97 YALE L.J. 1539 (1988). 
REPUBLICANISM AND PREFERENCEPROBLEM tected in all contexts. 4 
The argument is divided in three parts. In Part I, I invoke some fairly conventional ideas about welfare and autonomy in order to draw into doubt the claim that government should base social choices on private preferences. In Part II, I set out three categories of cases in which private preferences, as expressed in consumption choices, should be overcome. The first, directly traceable to republican commitments, includes collective desires, including considered social judgments and widely held aspirations; the second, also with republican roots, involves preferences that have adapted to unjust background conditions or undue limitations in available opportunities; the third, building on classical ideas of myopia or akrasia, includes intrapersonal collective active problems that, over a lifetime, decrease personal welfare. A democratic republic, I argue, should override private preferences in all of these cases. In Part III, I draw on the republican tradition to deal with two current controversial issues: government efforts to promote access to the media and proportional representation. temporary politics, law, and economics, the usual answer is affirmative. Modern economics, for example, is dominated by a conception of welfare based on the satisfaction of existing preferences; in politics and law, something called "paternalism" is disfavored in both the public and private realms. 5 But the idea that government ought to take preferences as accident that writers in politics and economics sometimes draw on literature. See, e.g., J. ELSTER, supra. 
In politics, see J. ELSTER, supra note 4. See, on the legal issues, Sunstein, Legal Interference with Private Preferences, 53 U. CH. L. REV. 1129 (1986). 
It is notable that the great expositors of liberalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries are emphatic in their rejection of the view that existing preferences should be taken as given, for purposes of ethics or politics. See J. MILL, CONSIDERATIONS ON REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT (1861); J. MILL, THE SuBJEcToN OF WOMEN (1869); J. RAwLs, A THEORY OF JUSTICE (1971). Mill's rejection of that view is especially emphatic in his essay on Bentham, when he criticizes Bentham for the view that "[t]o say either that man should, or that he should not, take pleasure in one thing, displeasure in another, appeared to him as much an act of despotism in the moralist as in the political ruler." J. MILL, MILL ON BENTHAM AND COLERIDGE 68 (F.R. Leavis ed. 1950). By contrast, Mill emphasized the need to explore the influences "on the regulation of... affections and HeinOnline -- 66 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 183 1990 they are is a quite modem one. To say this is hardly to say that the idea is without foundations. Partly a function of the perceived (though greatly overstated) difficulty of making interpersonal comparisons of utility, it is also a product of the epistemological difficulties in assessing preferences in terms of their true connection with individual welfare, and, perhaps most of all, the genuine political dangers of allowing government to engage in such inquiries. 
Notwithstanding these considerations, an initial objection to the view that government should take preferences as they are might point out that whether people have a preference for a commodity, a right, or anything else is in part a function of whether the government has allocated it to them in the first instance. The decision to grant a right to one person frequently makes that person value that right more than he would if the right had been allocated to someone else. The initial allocation serves to reflect, to legitimate, and to reinforce social understandings about presumptive rights of ownership, and that allocation has a causal connection to individual perceptions about the good or right in question. 
For example, a decision to give employees a right to organize, or women a right not to be subject to sexual harassment, will have an impact on social attitudes toward labor organization and sexual harassment. The allocation therefore has an effect on social attitudes toward the relevant rights and on their valuation by both current owners and would-be purchasers. And when preferences are a function of legal rules, the rules cannot, without circularity, be justified by reference to the preferences. 6 Because of the preference-shaping effects of the rules of allocation, it is hard to see how a government might even attempt to take preferences "as given" in any global sense. 
To some degree this concern might be put to one side. Surely there is a difference between a government that concerns itself self-consciously and on an ongoing basis with private preferences and a government that sets up the basic rules of property, contract, and tort and then lets things turn out however they may. And if this distinction can be sustained, disagreements about the relationship between politics and preferences apdesires," and rejected "the deficiencies ofa system of ethics which does not pretend to aid individuals in the formation of their own character." Id. at 70-71. Of course there is a difference between what a system of ethics and what a system of politics should say about that question, as Mill clearly indicated. 
discussed in Thaler, Toward a Positive Theory of ConsumerChoice, 1 J. ECON. BEHAV. & ORG. 39 (1980); see also Knetsch & Sinden, Willingess to Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence ofan UnexpectedDisparityin Measures of Value, 99 Q.J. ECON. 507 (1984); cf Nussbaum, Shame, Separateness; and Political Unity, supra note 4. pear to turn on competing notions of autonomy on the one hand and welfare on the other. Those who treat existing preferences as sovereign argue that this approach is most likely to promote both individual freedom, rightly conceived, and individual or social welfare. 
It will be useful to begin with welfare. Even if one accepted a purely welfarist view, one might think that the process of promoting welfare should take place, not by satisfying current preferences, but by promoting those preferences and satisfying them to such an extent as is consonant with the best or highest conception of human happiness. This view is connected with older (and some current) forms of utilitarianism; it also has roots in Aristotle.7 Here one does not take existing preferences as given, and one does not put all preferences on the same plane. A criterion of welfare, at least in some sense, remains the ultimate one, but on this view, the system is not focused solely on preference satisfaction. Of course a liberal republic, respectful as it should be of the need to limit government and of divergent conceptions of the good, ought generally to refrain from seeing private preferences as an object of collective concern. But the promotion of utility, rightly understood, does not always call for satisfaction of existing preferences. 
A central point here, highly congenial to the republican tradition, is that preferences are shifting and endogenous rather than exogenousendogenous to, or a function of, current information, consumption patterns, legal rules, and social pressures most generally. Because preferences are shifting and endogenous, and because the satisfaction of existing preferences might lead to unhappy or deprived lives, a political system that treats all preferences as fixed will lose important opportunities for welfare gains. At least if the relevant cases can be confidently identified in advance, and if collective action can be justified by reference to particular good reasons, the argument for democratic interference will be quite powerful. Respect for preferences that have resulted from unjust background conditions and that will lead to human misery appears hardly the proper course for a liberal republic. 
For example, legal rules prohibiting or discouraging addictive behavior may have significant advantages in terms of welfare. Regulation of heroin or cigarettes-at least if the regulation can be made effectivemight well increase aggregate social welfare, by decreasing harmful behavior, removing the secondary effects of those harms, and producing GOOD AND THE RIGHT (198 1). For an Aristotelian account, see Sen, Well-Being Agency, andFreedom, 82 J. PHIL. 169 (1985). more healthful and satisfying lives. Or government regulation of the environment or broadcasting-encouraging or requiring, for example, protection of pristine areas, nonentertainment broadcasting, or high-quality programs--may generate (or, better, prevent obstacles to generation of) new preferences, providing increased satisfaction and in the end producing considerable welfare gains. The same may well be true of antidiscrimination measures, which affect the desires and attitudes of discriminators and victims alike. A system that takes private preferences for granted will sacrifice large opportunities for social improvement on welfarist criteria. This point was a crucial one in the early stages of utilitarian thought; it has been lost more recently with the shift from older forms of welfarism to the idea of "revealed preferences." 
Moreover, the satisfaction of private preferences, whatever their content and origins, does not respond to a persuasive conception of liberty or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of available opportunities, with all relevant information, or, most generally, without illegitimate constraints on the process of preference formation. When these conditions are not met, decisions might be described as unfree or nonautonomous. If preferences are a product of available information, of existing consumption patterns, of social pressures, and of governmental rules, it seems odd to suggest that individual freedom lies exclusively or by definition in preference satisfaction. It seems even odder to suggest that all preferences should be treated the same, independently of their origins and consequences, or of the reasons offered in their support. 
Consider, for example, a decision to purchase dangerous foods, consumer products, or cigarettes by someone unaware of the serious health risks; an employer's decision not to deal with blacks because of the background of public and private segregation, or racial hostility in his community; a person who disparages or has no interest in art and literature because the culture in which he has been reared consists mostly of television; a decision of a woman to adopt a traditional gender role because of the social stigma of refusing to do so; a decision not to purchase cars equipped with seatbelts or not to wear motorcycle helmets because of the social pressures imposed by one's peer group; a lack of interest in environmental diversity resulting from personal experiences that are limited to industrialized urban areas; a decision not to employ blacks at a restaurant because of fear of violence from whites. 
These examples are different from one another. The source of the problem varies in each. In all of them, however, the interest in liberty or autonomy does not call for governmental inaction, even if that were an intelligible category. Indeed, in many of these cases regulation removes a kind of coercion. 
One goal of a democratic republic, in short, is to ensure autonomy not only in the satisfaction of preferences, but also and more fundamentally in the processes of preference formation. Mill himself was emphatic on this point, going so far as to suggest that government itself should be evaluated by its effects on the character of the citizenry." The view that freedom requires an opportunity to choose among alternatives is supplemented by the view that people should not face unjustifiable constraints on the free development of their preferences and beliefs. It is not altogether clear what such a view would require-a point to which we will return. At the very least, however, it would see a failure of autonomy, and a reason for collective response, in beliefs and preferences based on the absence of information or on insufficient opportunities. 
Government action might also be justified on grounds of autonomy when the public seeks to implement, through democratic processes culminating in law, widely held social aspirations or collective desires. Individual consumption choices often diverge from collective considered judgments: people may seek, through law, to implement a democratic decision about what courses to pursue. If so, it is ordinarily no violation of autonomy to allow those considered judgments to be vindicated by governmental action. Consider a law calling for support of the arts or of high-quality broadcasting, sought by a majority of the population at large and making available opportunities not provided through market ordering. Ideas of this sort can be connected to the original constitutional belief, built on republican foundations, in deliberative democracy. Collective aspirations or considered judgments, produced by a process of deliberation in which competing perspectives are brought to bear, reflect a conception of political freedom having deep roots in the American constitutional tradition. 
This different conception of autonomy places an emphasis on the freedom of collectivities or communities-a freedom embodied in decisions, reached by the citizenry, about what courses to pursue. This view is closely associated with classical republicanism, but it has resonances in Madisonian thought as well. In this view, political autonomy can be found in collective self-determination, as citizens decide, not what they "want," but instead who they are-what their values are and what those values require. What they "want" must be supported by reasons. An important form of freedom consists in precisely these processes of selfdetermination. 
Of course there are serious risks of overreaching here, and there must be some constraints-usually denominated "rights"--on this process. Checks laid down in advance are an indispensable part of constitutional government. Those checks will include, at a minimum, basic guarantees of political liberty and personal security. Such guarantees may not be compromised by processes of collective self-determination, but citizens in any polity would be likely to make some space for processes of this sort. 
In this section I attempt to particularize the claims made above by cataloging cases for democratic rejection of private preferences. In all of these cases, I claim that participants in a liberal republic ought to be concerned with whether its citizens are experiencing satisfying lives and that the salutary liberal commitment to divergent conceptions of the good ought not always to be taken to disable government from expressing that concern through law. The cases fall in three basic categories: collective desires, excessive limitations in opportunties, and intrapersonal collective action problems. 
Citizens in a democratic polity might act to embody not the preferences that they hold as private consumers, but instead what might be described as collective desires, including aspirations, "preferences about preferences," or considered judgments. Measures of this sort are a product of deliberative processes on the part of citizens and representatives. In those processes, at least sometimes people do not simply ask what they "want." Such measures cannot be understood as an attempt to aggregate or trade-off private preferences. 

Frequently, political choices cannot easily be understood as a process of aggregating prepolitical desires. Some people may, for example, want nonentertainment broadcasting on television, even though their own consumption patterns favor situation comedies; they may seek stringent laws protecting the environment or endangered species even though they do not use the public parks or derive benefits from protection of species; they may approve of laws calling for social security and welfare even though they do not save or give to the poor; they may support antidiscrimination laws even though their own behavior is hardly race- or gender-neutral. The choices people make as political participants are different from those they make as consumers. Democracy thus calls for an intrusion on markets. 
The widespread disjunction between political and consumption choices presents something of a puzzle. Indeed, it sometimes leads to the view that market ordering is undemocratic and that choices made through the political process are a preferable basis for social ordering. 
A generalization of this sort would be far too broad in light of the multiple breakdowns of the political process and the advantages of market ordering in many arenas. Respect for private markets is an important way of respecting divergent conceptions of the good and is thus properly associated with individual liberty. Respect for markets is also an engine of economic productivity, an important individual and collective goal. But it would be a mistake to suggest, as some do, that markets always reflect individual choice more reliably than politics, or that democratic choices differ from consumption outcomes only because of confusion, as voters fail to realize that they must ultimately bear the costs of the programs they favor. 
Undoubtedly consumer behavior is sometimes a better or more realistic reflection of actual preferences than is political behavior. But in light of the fact that preferences depend on context, the very notion of a "better reflection" of a unitary "actual" preference is a confusing one; there is no such thing as an "actual" (in the sense of acontextual) preference in these settings. Moreover, the difference might be explained by the fact that political behavior reflects a variety of influences that are distinctive to the context of politics. 
These influences include four closely related phenomena. First, citizens may seek to implement individual and collective aspirations in political behavior but not in private consumption. As citizens, people may seek the aid of the law to bring about a social state that they consider to be in some sense higher than what emerges from market ordering. Second, people may, in their capacity as political actors, attempt to satisfy altruistic or other-regarding desires, which diverge from the self-interested preferences characteristic of markets. 9 Third, political decisions might vindicate what might be called meta-preferences or second-order preferences. People have wishes about their wishes, and sometimes they try to vindicate those second-order wishes, or considered judgments about what is best, through law. Fourth, people may precommit themselves, in democratic processes, to a course of action they consider to be in the general interest; the story of Ulysses and the Sirens is the model here. The adoption of a Constitution is itself an example of a precommitment strategy. 
To point to these possibilities is not at all to deny that market or private behavior frequently reflects meta-preferences, altruism, or aspirations. There are countless counterexamples to any such claim. Divergences between market and political behavior, however, will sometimes be attributable to phenomena of this sort. 
Consider, as a possible example of all these phenomena, the fact that people seem to want regulation designed to secure high quality broadcasting even though their consumption patterns favor situation comedies-a fact that helps justify certain controversial regulatory decisions by the Federal Communications Commission requiring nonentertainment broadcasting and presentations on issues of public importance. Consider as well measures designed to protect endangered species and natural preserves in the face of individual behavior that reflects little solicitude for them. 
How are the differences between choices expressed in markets and those expressed in politics to be explained? There are a number of possibilities. 
First, the collective character of politics, permitting a response to collective action problems, is critical here. People may not want to satisfy their meta-preferences, or to be altruistic, unless there is assurance that others will be bound to do so as well. More simply, people may prefer not to contribute to a collective benefit if donations are made individually, with no guarantee that others will participate; but their most favored system, obtainable only or best through democratic forms, might be one in which they contribute if (but only if) there is assurance that others will do so. Perhaps people feel ashamed if others are contributing and they are not; perhaps they feel victimized if they are contributing and others are not. 
In any case, the satisfaction of aspirations, altruistic goals, or metapreferences will sometimes have the characteristics of the provision of public goods or the solution of prisoners' dilemmas. Here, however, the public good is an unconventional one. The need for government is not to satisfy private choices but instead to ensure the expression or satisfaction of desires that, precisely because of the political setting, have a distinctive character. In a democratic society, government controls are an appropriate response. 
Second, the collective character of politics might overcome the problem, discussed below, of preferences and beliefs that have adapted to an unjust status quo or to limits in available opportunities. Without the possibility of collective action, the status quo may seem intractable, and private behavior will adapt accordingly. If, however, people can act in concert, preferences might take on a quite different form. Social movements involving the environment, labor, and race and sex discrimination are examples of this phenomenon. Possible democratic responses include recycling programs, energy conservation programs, and contributions to the arts, to the poor, and to environmental protection. The collective action problem thus interacts with aspirations, altruistic desires, secondorder preferences, and precommitment strategies. All of these are more likely to be enacted into law in the face of collective action. 
Third, social and cultural norms might incline people to express aspirational or altruistic goals more often in political behavior than in markets. Such norms may press people, in their capacity as citizens, in the direction of a concern for others or for the public interest. 
Fourth, the deliberative aspects of politics, bringing additional information and perspectives to bear, may affect preferences as expressed through governmental processes. A principal function of a democratic republic is to ensure that through representative processes, new or submerged voices, or novel depictions of where interests lie and what they in fact are, can be heard and understood. It should hardly be surprising if preferences, values, and perceptions of both individual and collective interests are changed as a result of that process. 
Fifth, and finally, consumption decisions are a product of the criterion of private willingness to pay, which creates distortions of its own. Willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay, and it is an extremely crude proxy for utility. Political behavior removes this distortion (which is not to say that it does not introduce distortions of its own). 
These general considerations suggest that citizens in a republic might attempt to embody in law a considered judgment on their part that the choices reflected in consumption patterns ought to be overcome. A related but more narrow justification is that statutes safeguard noncommodity values-like environmental diversity-that an unregulated market, even a well-functioning one, might protect inadequately. 10 Social ordering through markets may have long-term, world transforming effects that reflect collective myopia, an emphasis on short-term considerations at the expense of the future. Possible responses include promotion of high quality programming in broadcasting, of the arts, and of diversity through protection of the environment and of endangered species. In all these respects, political choices are not made by consulting given or private desires, but instead reflect a deliberative process designed to shape and reflect values. 
Arguments from collective desires are irresistible if the measure at issue is adopted unanimously. But more serious difficulties are produced if (as is usual) the law imposes on a minority what it regards as a burden rather than a benefit. Suppose, for example, that a majority wants to require high-quality television and to ban violent and dehumanizing shows, but that a significant minority wants to see the latter. If we put the first amendment questions aside for now, it might still be thought that those who perceive a need to bind themselves, or to express an aspiration, should not be permitted to do so if the consequence is to deprive others of an opportunity to satisfy their preferences. 
The foreclosure of the preferences of the minority is unfortunate, but in general it is hard to see what argument there is for an across-theboard rule against collective action of this sort. If the majority is prohibited from vindicating its second-order or altruistic preferences through legislation, its own desires will be frustrated. The choice is between the preferences of the majority and those of the minority. On the other hand, the foreclosure of the minority probably should be permitted only when less restrictive alternatives, including private arrangements, are unavailable to serve the same end. 
The argument for democratic outcomes embodying collective desires is much weaker in three categories of cases. First, if the particular choice foreclosed has some special character, it is appropriately considered a right, and the majority has no authority to intervene. Consider political expression or participation; here the equal rights of members of the minority must be respected even if a general aspiration, held by the majority, argues for selective exclusions. So too, other rights fundamen10. See Stewart, Regulation in a Liberal State: The Role of Non-Commodity Values, 92 YALE L.J. 1537 (1983). tal to self-actualization or self-realization---consider intimate sexual activity--ought generally to be off-limits to government. 
Second, some collective desires might be objectionable or distorted. A social preference against racial intermarriage could not plausibly be justified as reflecting an aspiration or a precommitment strategy. To explain why, it is of course necessary to offer an independent argument, challenging that preference and sounding in justice. But the example suggests that the mere fact of a collective aspiration is insufficient for approval of foreclosure of private choice. The aspiration itself must not be objectionable on moral grounds. 
Third, some collective desires might reflect a special weakness on the part of the majority; consider a curfew law, or perhaps prohibition. In such circumstances, a legal remedy might remove desirableincentives for private self-control, have unintended side-effects resulting from "bottling up" desires, or prove unnecessary in light of the existence of alternative remedies. When any of these three concerns arise, the case for protection of collective desires is weakened. In many contexts, however, these concerns are absent, and democratic controls initiated on these grounds are justified. 
If the arguments presented in this section are persuasive, they suggest reasons to be skeptical of some normative work in the tradition of public choice theory. According to at least some of this work, much of the business of politics should be seen as "rent-seeking," understood as the expenditure of funds on the wasteful redistribution of resources through politics rather than the production of resources through markets. The notion of "rent-seeking" rejects nearly all of the basic workings of politics. It treats citizenship itself as an evil. Efforts to enact public aspirations, to counteract discrimination, to protect the environment-all these are seen as the diversion of productive energies into a wasteful place. 
This view represents a peculiar reversal of the liberal republican tradition, which has seen political behavior not as an evil, but as an important arena for education, for deliberation and discussion about the nation's direction, for the development of the faculties, and for the cultivation of feelings of altruism. On all of these scores, the liberal republican tradition remains extremely vibrant in the United States, and it continues to describe a wide range of individual and collective behavior. It would of course be foolish to deny that much political conduct is an effort to use governmental power to serve selfish ends and that the concept of "rentseeking" can often help in understanding the governmental process. But to collapse all political behavior into the category of "rent-seeking" is to devalue grotesquely the activities of citizenship. 
Citizens in a democracy might override existing preferences in order to foster and promote diverse experiences, with a view toward providing broad opportunities for the formation of preferences and beliefs, and for distance on and critical scrutiny of current desires. This rationale supports private ordering and freedom of contract as well. But it calls for collective safeguards when those forces push toward homogeneity and uniformity, as they often do in industrialized nations. Here the argument for governmental controls finds a perhaps ironic origin in Mill. Such controls are necessary to cultivate divergent conceptions of the good and to ensure a degree of reflection on those conceptions. 
One might describe a system that took this goal seriously as embodying a mild form of liberal perfectionism. Such a system would see the inculcation of critical and disparate attitudes toward prevailing conceptions of the good as part of the framework of a liberal republic. Liberal education is of course the principal locus of this concern. The principles embodied in liberal education need not be confined to the school system. 
Democratic measures with respect to the arts and broadcastingsubsidizing public broadcasting, ensuring a range of disparate programming, or calling for high-quality programming provided only a little or not at all by the marketplace--can be understood in these terms. Indeed, the need to provide diverse opportunities for preference formation suggests reasons to be quite skeptical of unrestricted markets in communication and broadcasting. There is a firm theoretical justification for the much-criticized, and now largely abandoned "fairness doctrine," which required broadcasters to cover controversial issues and to ensure competing views. In light of the inevitable effects of programming on character, beliefs, and even conduct, it is hardly clear that governmental "inaction" is always appropriate in a constitutional democracy; indeed the contrary seems true. (I take up this issue in more detail below.) 
Moreover, market behavior is sometimes based on an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance by adjusting to undue limitations in current practices and opportunities. When this is so, respect for preferences seems unjustified on grounds of autonomy and perhaps welfare as well. In these circumstances, preferences are nonautonomous insofar as they are reflexively adaptive"1 to unjust background conditions; collective responses to such preferences might yield welfare gains as well. The point has large implications. For example, workers appear to underestimate the risks of hazardous activity partly in order to reduce the dissonance that would be produced by an understanding of the real dangers of the workplace.1 2 Democratic controls might produce gains in terms of both welfare and autonomy. 
Similar ideas help account for antidiscrimination principles. Most generally, the beliefs of both beneficiaries and victims of existing injustice are affected by dissonance-reducing strategies.1 3 The phenomenon of blaming the victim has distinct cognitive and motivational foundations. A central point here is that the strategy of blaming the victim, or assuming that an injury or an inequality was deserved or inevitable, tends to permit nonvictims or members of advantaged groups to reduce dissonance by assuming that the world is just-a pervasive, insistent, and sometimes irrationally held belief.' 4 The reduction of cognitive dissonance is a powerful motivational force, and it operates as a significant obstacle to the recognition of social injustice or irrationality. 
Victims also participate in dissonance-reducing strategies, including the lowering of self-esteem to accommodate both the fact of victimization and the belief that the world is essentially just. Sometimes it appears easier to assume that one's suffering is warranted than to believe it has been imposed cruelly or by mere chance. Consider here the astonishing fact that after a draft lottery, those with both favorable and unfavorable results decided that the outcomes of the purely random process were deserved.' 5 The phenomenon of blaming the victim also reflects the "hindsight effect," through which people unjustifiably perceive events as more predictable than they in fact were, and therefore suggest that victims or disadvantaged groups should have been able to prevent the negative outcome. All this makes reliance on existing or revealed preferences highly problematic in certain contexts. 
There is suggestive evidence in the psychological literature to this effect. Some work here reveals that people who engage in cruel behavior change their attitudes toward the objects of their cruelty and thus devalue them; observers tend to do the same.1 6 Such evidence bears on antidiscrimination law in general. Aspects of American labor and race discrimination law can be understood as a response to the basic problem of distorted beliefs and preferences. 7 There are implications here for sex discrimination as well. The movement for the elimination of sex discrimination is informed by an understanding that many women-as well as many men-have adapted to an unjust status quo. 
Sometimes, moreover, preferences are only imperfectly adapted. At some level there is a perception of an injury, but a fear of social sanctions or a belief that the cause is intractable prevents people from seeking redress. Here the collective character of politics, permitting the organization of numerous people, can be exceedingly helpful. 
Standing by itself, the fact that preferences are shifting and endogenous is hardly a sufficient reason for democratic controls. All preferences are to some degree dependent on existing law and current opportunities, and that fact cannot be a reason for government action without creating a license for tyranny. The argument for democratic controls in the face of endogenous preferences must rely on a belief that welfare or autonomy will thereby be promoted. Usually, of course, governmental interference should be avoided. Too often, however, the salutary belief in respect for divergent conceptions of the good is transformed into an unwillingness to protect people from unjust background conditions or a sheer lack of options. 
The actual content of democratic controls will be controversial, and it probably should begin and usually end with efforts to provide information and to increase opportunities. Thus, for example, governmentally required disclosure of risks in the workplace is a highly plausible strat15. Rubin & Peplau, Belief in a Just World and Reaction to Another's Lot: A Study of Participants in the NationalDraft Lottery, 29 J. Soc. IssuEs, 73, 84-85 (1973). 

COLUM. L. REv. 728 (1986). egy. In a few cases, however, these milder strategies may be inadequate, and coercion is necessary. 
The category of democratic responses to endogenous preferences of this sort overlaps with that of measures that attempt to protect collective aspirations. Frequently aspirations might form the basis for laws that attempt to influence processes of preference formation. 
There is also a case for democratic controls on existing preferences when such preferences are a function of past acts of consumption and when such acts alter desires or beliefs in such a way as to cause long-term harm. Here the purpose of collective controls is to affect the development of certain preferences. Preferences are endogenous not to existing legal rules or to limited opportunities but to past consumption decisions, and in the cases at hand, the effect of those decisions on current preferences is pernicious. For government to act in this context, it is important that it be confident of its conclusions. An absence of information on the part of the private actors is usually a necessary condition for collective controls. 
Regulation of addictive substances, of myopia, and of habits are familiar examples. In the case of an addiction, the problem is that the costs of nonconsumption increase dramatically over time, as the benefits of consumption remain constant or fall sharply. The result is that the aggregate costs, over time or over a life, of consumption exceed the aggregate benefits, even though the initial consumption choice provides benefits that exceed costs. Individual behavior that is rational for each individual consumption choice ultimately leads people into severely inferior social states. In such cases, people, if fully informed, would in all likelihood not want to become involved with the good in the first place. Government action is a possible response. 
Menachem Yaari offers the example of a group of traders attempting to induce alcoholism in an Indian tribe.18 At the outset alcoholic beverages are not extremely valuable to consumers. The consumers are willing to buy only for a low price, which the traders willingly offer. But as a result of past consumption, the value of the beverages to the consumers steadily increases, to the point where they are willing to pay enormous sums to obtain them. Thus the traders are able: to manoeuvre the Indian into a position where rationality conflicts AND SOCIAL ETHICS: ISSUES IN SOCIAL CHOICE 59 (H. Gottinger & W. Leinfellner eds. 1978). with Pareto efficiency, Le., into a position where to be efficient is to be irrational and to be irrational is to be efficient .... The disadvantage, for an economic unit, of having endogenously changing tastes is that, even with perfect information and perfect foresight, the unit may find itself forced to follow an action which, by the unit's own standards, is Pareto-dominated. 19 
Because of the effect of consumption, over time, on preferences, someone who is addicted to heroin is much worse off even though the original decision to consume was not irrational if one looks only at immediate costs and benefits. Statutes that regulate addictive substances respond to a social belief that the relevant preferences should not be formed in the first place. 
We might describe this situation as involving an intrapersonal collective action problem,20 in which the costs and benefits, within a particular person, of engaging in the relevant activity change dramatically over time. Related phenomena were of course an important part of classical philosophy, particularly in the treatment of the problems of myopia and akrasia. A central point is that consumption patterns induce a significant change in preferences, and in a way that makes people worse off in the long-run. 21 An addiction is the most obvious case, but it is part of a far broader category. Consider, for example, myopic behavior, defined as a refusal-because the short-term costs exceed the short-term benefits-to engage in activity having long-term benefits that dwarf long-term costs. Another kind of intrapersonal collective action problem is produced by habits, in which people engage in behavior because of the subjectively high short-term costs of changing their behavior notwithstanding the fact that the long-term benefits exceed the short-term benefits. Akrasia, or weakness of the will, has a related structure, and some laws respond to its individual or collective forms. 
For the most part, problems of this sort are best addressed at the individual level or through private associations, which minimize coercion; but social regulation is a possible response. Statutes that subsidize the arts or public broadcasting, or that discourage the formation of some habits and encourage the formation of others, are illustrations. So too with legal requirements that manufacturers install seat belts or that people buckle them. The subjective costs of buckling decrease over time. 
Schelling, Egonomics, or the Art of Self-Management, 68 AM. ECON. REv. 290 (1978). 
music usually increases appreciation. But the pattern under discussion is a rare one; it is that pattern, producing miserable lives, to which a democracy might respond. To be sure, in practice the response might make things worse rather than better. Once people are in the habit of buckling, the costs become minimal. The fact that the costs shrink rapidly after the habit of buckling has formed counts in favor of regulation, certainly on welfare grounds, and perhaps on autonomy grounds as well. There is a similar argument for compulsory recycling programs and for democratic restrictions on smoking cigarettes. 22 
The problem with collective controls in this context is that they are unlikely to be fine-tuned; they often will sweep up so many people and circumstances as to create serious risks of abuse. In some settings, however, citizens will be able to say with confidence that the effect of consumption on preferences will lead to severe welfare or autonomy losses. In such cases democratic controls are justified. 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 
There is a growing consensus that the government should not concern itself with the airwaves and that total reliance on private markets and consumer preferences is the appropriate strategy for government. In this view, broadcasting should be treated like soap, or cereal, or any other commodity. Indeed, there is a growing consensus that this result is ordained by the first amendment. If the claims made here are persuasive, however, the consensus is misguided. 
The consequence of market-based strategies in broadcasting is a system in which most viewers see shows that deal rarely with serious problems; are frequently sensationalistic, prurient, dehumanizing, or banal; reflect and perpetuate a bland, watered-down version of the most conventional views about politics and morality; are influenced excessively by the concerns of advertisers; and often are riddled with violence, sexism, and racism. It simply defies belief to suggest that such shows do not affect the beliefs and even the character of the citizenry. Is it so clear that a constitutional democracy ought to consider itself disabled from responding to this situation? Is it so clear that a first amendment enacted in order to ensure democratic self-determination bars a democratic corrective here? 
In my view, the considerations marshaled thus far suggest that citizens in a constitutional democracy ought to be conceded the power, and ought to exercise the power, to engage in a wide range of controls. These include the power to regulate advertising on television, certainly for children, but for others as well; to require broadcasters to pay attention to public affairs, as in, for example, an hour of compulsory programming per night; to ban gratuitous or prurient violence on television, especially when it is sexualized; to require, as a condition for licensing, a subsidy to public television; and to impose a broad fairness doctrine, in the form not only of an obligation of attention to important issues but also a chance to speak for divergent sides. There would be a wide range of collective and external benefits from such controls, which would thus carry forward a strand of the liberal tradition that calls for government action in such cases. 2 3 
At least in principle, rights of private access to the media for differing positions ought to be thought congenial to the free speech guarantee. Surely this is so if that guarantee is understood as a protection of a deliberative process centered on public values rather than of a mere "marketplace." The first amendment should not be seen as an obstacle to such efforts. If anything, the existing system might be thought to raise serious constitutional questions. A system in which access to the media, with inevitable consequences for the shaping of preferences and beliefs, is made dependent on private willingness to pay raises genuine problems for free expression. 24 
B. 
In recent years, there has been a revival of interest in systems of proportional or group representation. Blacks, women, the handicapped, and other disadvantaged groups often have had little success in the ordinary electoral process. There is a solid constitutional pedigree for group representation, notwithstanding the constant and emphatic rejections by the Supreme Court of constitutionally-based arguments for representation of members of racial minority groups. Despite the rigidity of the "one person, one vote" formula, with its majoritarian and individualistic overtones, group representation always has been an important feature of American constitutionalism. 25 
Moreover, the basic constitutional institutions of federalism, bicam23. See, e.g., J. MILL, PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY (1871). 
395 U.S. 367 (1969), but the point has dropped out of the current debate. 
communities with distinct interests; representation of the states as such seemed only natural. It would not be impossible to argue that racial and ethnic groups (among others) are the contemporary analogue to groups that were defined in geographical terms during the founding period. eralism, and checks and balances, share some of the appeal of proportional representation, and owe their origins in part to notions of group representation. These institutions proliferate the points of access to government, increasing the ability of diverse groups to influence policy, multiplying perspectives in government, and improving deliberative capacities. In this respect, they ensure something in the way of group representation, at least when compared with unitary systems. Of course both the separation of powers and bicameralism grow in part out of efforts to promote representation of diverse groups: bicameralism allowed representation of the wealthy and the masses; the notion of separation derived from notions of mixed government, which was designed to ensure a measure of representation of groups defined in social and economic terms. 
Proportional representation might be designed to ensure representation in the legislature of all groups able to attain more than a minimal share of the vote. In another form, the system might be designed to ensure that members of disadvantaged groups are given the power to exert influence on political outcomes. 
There are serious problems with both of these efforts, and I do not mean to evaluate them in detail here. I do suggest that efforts to ensure proportional representation become much more plausible if they are justified on grounds that do not take preferences as given and if they emphasize the preference-shaping effects of discussion and disagreement in politics.2 6 The argument here is that deliberative processes will be improved, not undermined, if mechanisms are instituted to ensure that multiple groups have access to the process. Group representation, precisely by having this effect, would ensure that diverse views are expressed on an ongoing basis in the representative process, where they might otherwise be excluded. In this respect, group representation would be a kind of second-best solution for the real-world failures of Madisonian deliberation. And the purpose of access is not primarily to allow each group to have its "piece of the action"-though that is not entirely irrelevant-but instead to ensure that the process of deliberation is not distorted by the mistaken appearance of a common set of interests on the part of all concerned. In this incarnation, proportional representation is designed to increase the likelihood that political outcomes will incorporate some understanding of the perspectives of all those affected. That process should REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT, supra note 5. See also Young, Polityand Group Difference:A Critiqueof the Ideal of UniversalCitizenship, 99 ETHics 250 (1989). facilitate the healthy expression of collective values or aspirations and the scrutiny of preferences adaptive to unjust background conditions or limited opportunities. 
For this reason, proportional representation may be the functional analogue of the institutions of checks and balances and federalism, recognizing the creative functions of disagreement and multiple perspectives for the governmental process. In this sense there is continuity between recent proposals for proportional representation and some of the attractive features of the original constitutional regime. Indeed, Hamilton himself emphasized that in a system of checks and balances, the "jarring of parties... [will] promote deliberation. ' 27 If this is so, proportional representation is most understandable in a democracy that does not take preferences as given. 
Much of the appeal of the republican tradition lies in its emphasis on a conception of political life that does not treat private preferences as the foundation of social choice. Those who partake of the republican tradition-for these purposes, a capacious category including writers from Aristotle to Rawls-insist that political institutions have inevitable consequences for preferences and beliefs. A large task of constitutional design, and for the development of legal rules in general, is to ensure that those consequences are favorable rather than unfavorable. 
To say this is not at all to suggest that a republican polity ought to impose on its citizens a unitary conception of the good. A general respect for diversity in individual choice is indispensable in modern systems. Such respect does not, however, entail protection for existing preferences, regardless of their origins or consequences, or of the reasons that might be offered in their behalf. 
I have suggested that the classical tradition continues to provide guidance for those interested in the evaluation of preferences and beliefs and in the connections between these and existing institutional arrangements. Above all, perhaps, the classical tradition suggests reasons not to tolerate a system without property rights or containing systemic poverty. A system without property, or with property, has stultifying effects on the free development of personality and simultaneously poses a threat to the independence and security of its people, which are prerequisites for republican citizenship. But the classical tradition also suggests the need to respect collective aspirations, to respond to preferences and beliefs formed by unjust background institutions, and to overcome the sorts of intrapersonal collective action problems manifested in addiction, myopic behavior, and akrasia. 
To warrant respect, such a system should be liberal as well as republican. Indeed, it should see its liberalism as operating in close alliance with its republicanism. To say that preferences ought not always be the basis of social choice is hardly to say that collectivities generally should override individual choices. It is, however, to say that government cannot avoid the task of allocating rights and entitlements in the first instance, that existing institutions and allocations will inevitably affect preferences and beliefs, and that a political system ought to attempt to ensure that preferences will be formed and expressed under conditions that promote rather than undermine liberty and welfare, and that reflect the diverse social goods that lie underneath both of these, properly conceived. It is on this issue, perhaps above all, that the republican tradition has much to offer contemporary legal and political thought. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Professor Pangle's essay revolves around a fairly straightforward narrative. The period of classical republicanism placed a high premium on virtue and responsibility; its conception of freedom presupposed rule, not license: its rulers were to be chosen on the basis of wisdom and character; it had no real place for rights. The early liberals, symbolized by Machiavelli, largely abandoned these commitments. Seeing selfishness as the usual motivating force of human behavior, they inaugurated a new emphasis on rights, and they disparaged virtue. The American founding, influenced above all by the early liberals, reflected at most a diluted belief in the republican commitments. The framers' main goal was the protection of rights. For them, self-interest was the ordinary motivating source of human behavior. American-style republicanism was egalitarian, libertarian, and democratic; it saw as its chief goal the protection and fostering of individual rights. As time has gone on, the American departure from republicanism has become all the more conspicuous, and also troubling. Its consequences have been "the shrinking of the spirit, the shriveling of the heart, the banalization of existence," manifesting itself in an extraordinarily wide array of social problems. 
There is undoubtedly a great deal that is true in Pangle's account, and we should all be grateful that a scholar of Pangle's learning and commitment has chosen to devote himself to exploration of the role of republican thought in the American constitutional tradition. In this Comment, I want to venture a few cautionary words about Pangle's narrative. My basic concern is that he may have drawn the distinction between liberalism and republicanism a bit too sharply, in a way that is perhaps untrue to the amplitude of America's liberal republicanism. 
As Pangle emphasizes, there is not one "republicanism" but many; and it is no simple task to describe those features of republicanism that unite, say, Aristotle, Jefferson, Madison, and Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 
But the American founders were insistent on their republicanism, and they did not at all understand the term to be an antonym to those of their 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. commitments that we would now describe as liberal.I For the founders, republicanism connoted a form of democratic self-determination; a large degree of deliberation in government; political equality; and a belief that political outcomes should reflect a capacity to think about the public good.2 The framers emphatically rejected the notion that self-interest is the inevitable motivating force behind human behavior. They did not believe that reason was always the slave of the passions. They sought to create a deliberative democracy that was realistic about human motivation but that sought simultaneously to encourage and provide a place for virtue. 
At least if stated at a certain level of generality, then, the republican commitments of American constitutionalism have a degree of continuity with classical thought, on which the framers drew a great deal. It is in any case profitable to explore the ways in which the thought of the founding period shared characteristics with classical thought that have been abandoned in such prominent modem approaches as interest-group pluralism and contemporary neo-Lockeanism. A large part of the value of the modem revival of the republican tradition has been, not to displace liberalism, but to show that the American tradition is inadequately understood by those who see the framers as neopluralists or as believers above all in a prepolitical sphere of private rights. 
Moreover, the writing and ratification of the American Constitution was not first and foremost a matter of protecting rights. We might recall here that the federalists did not want a bill of rights, and that the motivating force behind the Constitution was that the Articles of Confederation were ill-adapted to the process of republican self-government. In arguing for the Constitution, those who favored it did not exclusively stress "rights"-which is not to say that these were unimportant. Instead they wanted to provide a government that could promote economic prosperity and domestic security, and avoid the extraordinarily difficult conflicts that had characterized life under the Articles. 
In any case, the American founders thought that their belief in rights marched hand-in-hand with their republicanism; and any form of republicanism that is worthy of contemporary support will have to place a high premium on rights. Like republicanism, the term "rights" embodies a widely disparate array of concerns. It includes the vast panoply of claims that individual citizens, or groups, might make against the state: 

REv. 13 (1990). 
1539 (1988). 
REPUBLICANISMS RIGHTS A COMMENT ON PANGLE freedom from discrimination; protections of property and contract; prevention of redistribution; rights of interstate mobility; political rights, including free speech and political participation; rights of criminal procedure; welfare rights; and so on. Many of these rights fit naturally with republicanism and are in no serious conflict with it. Rights of freedom of speech, political association, and assembly are quite logical counterparts of the republican commitments. The right to a jury trial, with its firm encouragement of citizenship, belongs in the same category. So too with the right of private property, furnishing a basic guarantee of independence and security, a check against arbitrary government, and a shield against the corruption of political activity through the sometimes distorting effects of interest. 
Pangle is no doubt correct to emphasize the modernity of the notion of rights as we use that term. But I wonder if a republicanism of rights is in fact "problematic" or in the end even daring. No doubt, some conceptions of rights would warrant this characterization. It would be hard to combine republicanism with a rights-based system that had no place for deliberation in politics, that disparaged citizenship, or that was skeptical that different "preferences" might be distinguishable in terms of their consequences for the individual, for intermediate organizations, or for the state. A system of rights is critical, but (and here I fully agree with Pangle) it must not serve as a substitute for other values that rights simply do not promote. Nonetheless, so long as we define the category of rights in an appropriate way, a republicanism of rights is likely to be a fortunate alliance rather than an oxymoron or a crazy-quilt. Indeed, the American system has functioned best when it has adhered simultaneously to its republicanism and to its commitment to rights. 
One final note. Pangle's wide-ranging concluding section seems to me to collapse ideas and problems that should be distinguished. There are of course profound differences among egalitarianism, libertarianism, and a commitment to popular sovereignty. Indeed the three are conflicting creeds. Libertarianism cannot always coexist with popular sovereignty, as the New Deal and Great Society periods (among many others) demonstrated. America's commitment to libertarianism (as the libertarians themselves stress) has been at best intermittent. Egalitarianism has never been a crucial principle of American constitutionalism, and a belief in egalitarianism, understood as equal distribution of resources, would be entirely incompatible with beliefs in popular sovereignty and libertarianism. When Pangle suggests that American republicanism, or liberal principles about the social contract, are founded on egalitarianism, libertarianism, and popular sovereignty, I find myself wishing that he would say more about exactly what he thinks is entailed by these apparently quite different ideas. 
There is much to be said, it seems to me, in favor of Pangle's views about the social problems with which he concludes. He points to a wide range of problems, including decreasing voting, dwindling interest in serious literature, fascination with brutal and sentimental entertainment, and drug use. On all these he is saying something true and important. 
But I wonder whether he might not be tackling too much too quickly. I wonder to what extent a "dissolution of relations between the sexes," an "erosion of the supports in tradition, religion, and reason for shared ties of reverence and meaning," and "a disconnectedness between generations" have actually occurred, and whether these belong at all in the same category. In any case I wonder about the precise relationships between these phenomena on the one hand and republicanism, liberalism, and rights on the other. Surely these relationships are not simple or linear ones. It would be most interesting for those concerned about these relationships to deal with them in more detail in the future. 
One of the characteristic functions of modern government is to administer declarations of attachment. Many of these declarations are compulsory, and they span a wide range. In order to receive some social benefit-a license, citizenship, education, employment, a right to cohabit-one must declare one's allegiance to a person or entity. Declarations of attachment are often backed by the force of law. Membership in private organizations, including fraternities, religious groups, and clubs, may also be conditioned on compliance with requirements of this sort. 
Compulsory oaths have been a prominent source of controversy in the latter half of the twentieth century. Consider, for example, recent debates over the pledge of allegiance, loyalty oaths, the marriage vow, and oaths of citizenship for new Americans. Civil libertarians have criticized compulsory declarations in some or all of these settings on the ground that they impose requirements of uniformity and obedience that are inconsistent with important principles of pluralism and individual freedom. Defenders of compulsory declarations respond that oaths serve important unifying, educative, and even celebratory functions, inculcating in participants a sense of the solemnity and importance of such central institutions as citizenship and marriage. In this view, otherwise plausible principles of freedom and pluralism should not be permitted to override the legitimate functions performed by compulsory oaths. Indeed, freedom and pluralism may ultimately depend on the social cohesion brought about by institutions that perform precisely those functions. 
My goal in this essay is to explore the diverse social functions of compulsory declarations of attachment. The treatment will be tentative and speculative; it will also be largely descriptive rather than normative. I want to provide some preliminary answers to the following questions: What social tasks do compulsory declarations carry out? To what problems and needs, and to whose problems and needs, are they an attempted response? 
* This essay is a revised version of a presentation at the conference on "Language, Law, and Compulsion," sponsored by the Yale Journal of Law & the Humanities. I am grateful to Lisa Ruddick for helpful comments and to Marc J. Porosoff and D. Gordon Smith for valuable research assistance. 
In answering these questions, I make three basic claims. The first and perhaps not entirely surprising claim is that compulsory oaths are often designed to produce social unity by denying or delegitimating the existence of heterogeneity. Here the purpose of oaths is to negate or even to erase dissensus and difference. Compulsory oaths often arise when the legitimacy of certain forms of dissensus is producing significant social stress, and it is under such conditions that compulsory oaths become especially controversial. 
At the same time, compulsory declarations of attachment represent an attempt to constitute a tradition, one that extends across both time and geography. For some people, it is important that the tradition can be characterized as unitary, substantive, and praiseworthy. For others, of course, the tradition will be pluralistic or highly contestable; and it is for this reason that they will find compulsory oaths objectionable. 
Ironically, however, the very existence of compulsory oaths, and the insistence on their public declaration, reveal that the fact to which they attest (unity, "indivisible," "under God," or "with liberty and justice for all") is a matter of sharp contention, or even an untruth. The fact that it is necessary to attest to the relevant claim demonstrates that there is social dissensus about it. When the facts can be taken for granted, they are invisible, and there is no need to ensure that people declare their commitment to them. In this respect, the terms in compulsory oaths belong in a large category of words and phrases that are said precisely because they are quite plausibly false, or, to put it more cautiously, because they have been drawn into social question both normatively and descriptively.' 
My second proposition is that compulsory oaths of a different sort operate to disturb rather than to create social unity, by asserting and legitimating the existence of heterogeneity. Here the oath represents an explicit recognition of the overlooked or even suppressed fact of dissensus, or of a deviant tradition or set of connections. In cases like this, the alliance recognized and constituted by the compulsory oath runs counter to and perhaps threatens the more general tradition. 
My third proposition is that compulsory oaths, and the deep feelings that they tend to call up, are a response to three different but related problems of narrative continuity across space and time. These problems implicate closely related issues involving both human mortality and the existence and meaning of social traditions: continuity within a community of living people, continuity with the past and future, and continuity across a lifetime. All of these kinds of continuity are fragile. An important function of compulsory declarations is to help establish them. 
are false, or because their truth is in question. Conventions sometimes described as "social skills"-statements of affection, connection, comfort, or lack of offense-provide many examples. 
I 
A 
I begin with a simple proposition, intended as a rough and perhaps uncontroversial statement about the problem. Compulsory declarations of attachment-most conspicuously in the context of a declaration of attachment to a state or country-are characteristically a response to the problem of social heterogeneity. It is in the face of heterogeneity that such declarations frequently arise, and declarations tend to become especially important when social heterogeneity is causing social stress.2 In particular, the stress tends to be produced by the presence of a group (Communists, Southern rebels during and after the Civil War, racial or religious minorities, heretics of various sorts) whose existence, self-understanding, and substantive claims threaten the stability, meaning, value, and existence of a unified or unitary community or tradition. Declarations become most controversial as a normative matter in the face of social heterogeneity.' 
From these points it does not merely follow that compulsory declarations serve to create categories of insiders and outsiders, or the excluded and the included. That is true and important, but the point is somewhat broader. Compulsory declarations, and the cultural symbols that they reinforce, are often used to prevent, eliminate, or delegitimate social heterogeneity, which is itself causing serious difficulties. These difficulties tend to be emphasized by groups whose position and (perhaps even more important) self-conception are threatened by recent social movements. 
It follows from this that it is necessary to establish the substantive points in compulsory oaths only when those points have already been proved in some sense false. No pledge of allegiance is necessary in a fully unified country; no loyalty oath is required when loyalty is not in question; marriage vows are unnecessary when fidelity (among the many other things associated with such vows) is a matter of course. The insistence on the public declaration reveals that its contrary is visible, thinkable, or a live option. The statement contained in the oath cannot be taken for granted or assumed to be part of the natural order. It is necessary to work actively on its behalf. 
In this respect, compulsory declarations of attachment have many of the features of manners, conventions about politeness, and rituals generally. These are often adhered to most steadfastly among strangers, or people Reconstruction (1954); H. Hyman, To Try Men's Souls: Loyalty Tests in American History (1960); J. Tyler, Oaths: Their Origin, Nature, and History (1835); D. Gardner, The California Oath Controversy (1967). 
"Getting there by pretending one is there already" is not always a sensible strategy for social reform, see J. Elster, Sour Grapes (1983), and attempts to achieve unity by asserting that it already exists may well backfire. who are in fact distant or estranged. The conventions substitute for the reality. They purport simply to state a fact (of, for example, connection, intimacy, or warm feeling), but instead become necessary only when the stated fact is uncertain or even false. Compulsory declarations of attachment are in this sense also like "traditional values," about which it is necessary to speak only when they have already been seriously jeopardized. Here there is a close connection between compulsory declarations, efforts to restore tradition, and the recent movement to have English declared as the official language of the United States. In this sense, compulsory declarations and their various analogues serve a constitutive function. 
The history of compulsory declarations offers many illustrations. Loyalty oaths, for example, have become an issue almost always in the face of perceived or real social dissensus. Both the Civil War and the perceived Communist threat in the 1940s and 1950s provided fertile ground for loyalty oaths. The loyalty oath is a conspicuous effort to overcome, erase, and delegitimate heterogeneity and dissent.4 
The pledge of allegiance has a similar history. The pledge came into the public schools in the 1890s, and it was conspicuously an outgrowth of some of the stresses of the Civil War. It was important, for example, to use the word "indivisible" only because the question whether or not the country was divisible had recently been drawn into doubt and could no longer be taken for granted. Even more strikingly, the words "under God" were inserted into the pledge of allegiance in 1954 as a response (in part) to the recognition of social dissensus on precisely that point-dissensus that was to culminate in Supreme Court cases eliminating prayer from the public school classroom.5 In the early 1950s, there had been increasing social recognition and legitimation of doubt about the existence of God. This phenomenon-together with the Cold War and McCarthyism-helped spur the "under God" amendment to the pledge. The history shows, in short, that the words "under God" and "indivisible" were both attempted erasures of forms of social heterogeneity. 
Most recently, political discussion of Willie Horton, a black man who raped a white woman during a furlough from prison, and the pledge of allegiance-the two dominant symbols in the 1988 presidential campaign-can be understood in similar terms. The fact that the Bush campaign used a single phrase to unite these symbols-"pledges and furloughs"-reveals that it was no accident that the two emerged at the same time. Both of these symbols were a straightforward and direct response to some of the stresses caused by the 1960s. The outbreak of nationalism and patriotism in the early 1980s, and the controversy over flag-burning in the late 1980s, were similar phenomena. Those stresses grew out of the legitimation and prominence of heterogeneous groups-raising issues of race, gender roles, sexual orientation, and so forth-that questioned the existence of a unitary or defensible American tradition. Both the Horton furlough and the Democratic ambivalence about compulsory flag salutes could serve to unify voters against people who seemed to symbolize sympathy or identification with the outsiders of the 1960s. The otherwise inexplicable and indeed startling use of the pledge of allegiance as a major issue in a national presidential campaign can only be understood against this background. Here the compulsory oath serves to assert the existence of social homogeneity, organized around a well-defined and unitary tradition that is worthy of respect or even reverence. 
My basic point thus far-that compulsory declarations of attachment are an attempt to provide a statement of unity when there is in fact heterogeneity, and become necessary only when the statement is in an important sense false-is confirmed not only by practice, but also by the oddity of the phraseology in some of the oaths themselves. Consider the pledge of allegiance. The words "with liberty and justice for all" are a prominent part of the pledge; it is not clear whether the words are meant to refer to an aspiration or to an actual fact about the status quo. In the structure of the sentence, the words sound like a statement about reality, as if the country is already one in which the goal of liberty and justice for all is realized. In pledging allegiance, then, one is not just pledging attachment, but also declaring one's belief in a particular, substantive, controversial conception about the nature of the thing to which one is becoming attached-a conception that is shared, or to be made to be shared, by all citizens. The reality-constituting aspect of the pledge is smuggled in through a mere prepositional phrase at the conclusion; what appears on the surface to be a simple statement of attachment thus serves to impose a particular view about the status quo. 
I should emphasize that an attempted act of social unification always entails a kind of delegitimation or even erasure of certain kinds of independence. Marriage is a particular example, and the process occurs differently for men and women. In most of its historical manifestations, the act of marriage merges the wife with the husband but not quite vice versa (she says "obey," he does not; the man and woman are traditionally pronounced "man and wife"; she loses her name and her property, he does not; other aspects of the ceremony and its aftermath make the same point). In religious oaths, unification under a divine order entails a kind of obliteration of the separate self. Something quite similar is at work in oaths of attachment to a nation. All this accounts for the deep, sometimes primal feelings called up by the ceremonies,that accompany oaths of attachment. 
B 
I have not yet explored the question why it is necessary to have people say the words that are contained in oaths of attachment. One of the most distinctive features of a compulsory declaration of attachment is that someone is being asked to say something-a perhaps jarring phenomenon in a liberal republic that prizes voluntarism. There are two possible accounts here. On one view, loyalty oaths are in fact closely connected with the voluntaristic aspects of the liberal tradition. Declarations of attachment can be seen as part of an effort to link political obligation with the active consent of the governed.6 But Nietzsche offers a competing and bleaker perspective on this development, seeing oaths as a form of compulsion amounting to an exercise in social control. On Nietzsche's account, compulsory oaths amount to a kind of physical inscription on the body of the citizen.' 
However this may be, oaths are frequently parts of public ceremonies in which people are required to make the relevant commitments with or before a large audience. The act of saying something in public operates in practice as a kind of precommitment device. One who has made a public declaration is probably unlikely to violate it, even in private moments.' In this respect, an oath operates as a peculiarly public statement of commitment, one that exerts a powerful hold on participants. This outcome may be partly a product of notions of honor and partly a function of the cognitive dissonance produced by saying something (especially in public) and then doing something else. A violation of a public oath seems a distinctive kind of betrayal. But the explanation probably goes deeper. The religious connotations of seemingly secular oaths play a role in giving compliance a kind of moral urgency. There remains a connection of the sacred and the divine with public declarations, and a sense of sacrilege in their violation, even in their most secular forms.9 
C 
The two flag salute decisions of the Supreme Court-Gobitis° and Barnette" -represent the classic encounters between the legal system and oaths of attachment." Both cases presented the question whether a state could compel Jehovah's Witnesses to say the pledge of allegiance notwithstanding their religious objections. In both cases, then, a subgroup of society sought to exempt itself from an attempt to inculcate a form of national unity. In Gobitis, Justice Frankfurter wrote the opinion for the Court, explaining that a compulsory daily salute to the American flag did not violate the Constitution. Justice Frankfurter defended the compulsory flag salute as a means of "promot[ing] national cohesion. We are dealing," he continued, with an interest inferior to none in the hierarchy of legal values. National unity is the basis of national security. . . .The ultimate foundation of a free society is the binding tie of cohesive sentiment. Such a sentiment is fostered by all those agencies of the mind and spirit which may serve to gather up the traditions of a people, transmit them from generation to generation, and thereby create that continuity of a treasured common life which constitutes a civilization. We live by symbols. The flag is the symbol of our national unity, transcending all internal differences, however large, within the framework of the Constitution. 3 
According to Justice Frankfurter, the Court should not disparage government efforts to "[i]nculcat[e] those almost unconscious feelings, which bind men together in comprehending loyalty.""' 
In this opinion, one finds an unambiguous depiction of the compulsory declaration of attachment as a response to the problem of heterogeneity. Indeed, Gobitis might well be taken as the only Supreme Court opinion powerfully resonant of Rousseau: intermediate organizations, even religious ones, are seen as threats to national unity. Here, too, one can see how an oath or pledge is valued as a means of creating a unitary tradition, extending across both time and space. 
But in spite of these straightforward features, Justice Frankfurter's opinion has a distinctly tortured quality. The term "unconscious feelings" fits at best awkwardly with his more rationalistic reference to the citizens' "comprehending loyalty." The word "comprehending" is quite jarring in the context of Justice Frankfurter's tribute to the anti-rationalistic, spiritual character of patriotism. It was probably necessary for him to use the word "comprehending" because of the otherwise extremely unpalatable and potentially totalitarian connotations of the passage-written in 1940, when countries with whom the United States was about to enter hostilities had called up national feelings through self-conscious methods of inculcating patriotic fervor. Notable, too, is Justice Frankfurter's uncharacteristic emphasis on "feelings" throughout this opinion, as well as the opinion's heavily Burkean flavor. 

In Barnette, written just three years after Gobitis, the Supreme Court changed its mind, offering a powerful argument on behalf of individual conscience even against national efforts to promote cohesion and unity. The Court's language appeared to be a self-conscious response to the spectacle provided by American adversaries in World War II: "Those who begin coercive elimination of dissent soon find themselves exterminating dissenters. Compulsory unification of opinion achieves only the unanimity of the graveyard. It seems trite but necessary to say that the First Amendment to our Constitution was designed to avoid these ends by avoiding these beginnings," 
Justice Frankfurter's dissenting opinion amounts to a self-conscious endorsement of the virtues of ensuring national attachments that transcend ties to intermediate organizations, including religious groups. In an extraordinary personal statement, Frankfurter wrote, 
One who belongs to the most vilified and persecuted minority in history is not likely to be insensible to the freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution. . . . But as judges we are neither Jew nor Gentile, neither Catholic nor agnostic. We owe equal attachment to the Constitution and are equally bound by our judicial obligations whether we derive our citizenship from the earliest or the latest immigrants to these shores.' 
What is most notable here is that in this formulation, social equality is depicted as a result of disinterest, defined as the absence of ties to groups situated between the individual and the nation. (Consider the reference to the diverse times of arrival in this country, a notorious source of discrimination against Jews and others.) In Barnette, Justice Frankfurter-an assimilated Jew, the only dissenter in the case, the author of Gobitis, the only Jew on the Court and indeed only the second in its history-voted to uphold the compulsory flag salute statute precisely because of the simultaneous risks to equality and cohesion that, in his view, are posed by heterogeneity. On this account, assimilation into the nation as a whole, and the weakening of other forms of membership, are guarantors of equality and powerful protection against social exclusion. Here it is the Justice for whom social unity is not quite a fact, and hardly part of the natural order, who insists that the oath is permissible. 
II 
Thus far I have suggested that compulsory declarations of attachment can be understood as a response to the problem of social heterogeneity through an attempted delegitimation or erasure of difference and dissent. But sometimes compulsory declarations are a product of something altogether different: the desire to bring about (or explicitly to recognize) differentiation by creating a subcommunity, one that stands in opposition to the dominant group. In such cases, compulsory declarations establish or acknowledge heterogeneity in the face of what seems to be stifling social cohesion. Here the goal is not to erase social difference, but to make it visible. 
The clearest examples here involve the creation and setting off of subgroups (for example, fraternal orders, labor unions, racial or women's groups, 17 and religious organizations) so as to establish unified, substantively oriented entities that were formerly nonexistent, delegitimated, or erased by their submergence within a loosely unified, apparently homogeneous culture. Sometimes these groups impose a requirement of an oath of allegiance. The taking of the oath is designed as a foundational event, one that signals the creation or emergence of an independent new entity. In this respect it resembles other ceremonies serving broadly analogous functions, including those involving both birth and death. 
In cases of this sort, the oath becomes necessary or useful not when and because it is a lie, but when and because it is an overlooked and suppressed truth. The oath serves as a mechanism both to legitimate and to constitute difference and heterogeneity. The compulsory declaration demarcates separation rather than unification. 8 
This point suggests that the declaration of attachment raises asymmetrical considerations in different settings. Sometimes a compulsory declaration is an effort to suppress differences on the part of the socially marginalized or despised (Communists, immigrants, atheists, members of dissident religious organizations, Southern rebels, and so forth); sometimes it is an effort to recognize or legitimate differences on their part. Indeed, an oath might be required in an effort to recognize or reestablish an old tradition whose existence and meaning are in jeopardy. Alternatively, it might represent an effort to recognize and create a new tradition that is a self-conscious deviation from the past. 
In some cases, then, oaths serve to conceal the fact of heterogeneity, and by virtue of their necessity reveal that social unity is fragile or a lie; but in other cases they disclose the previously invisible but true fact of heterogeneity, one that had been suppressed by the existence of social silence. In these latter cases the oath brings out into the open a set of alliances and enmities that had previously been overlooked. In the former cases, the have been able to find no examples of oath-making among such groups after an admittedly casual survey. The fact-if it is a fact-that oaths characterize male but not female groups may have interesting implications for oaths in general; I cannot discuss them in this space. 
means a setting off of the nation from other entities and people. oath often has a defensive, preventative character; in the latter, the celebratory, joyous, even explosive functions of the oath and its various surrogates are especially conspicuous. 
III 
As an effort to create a kind of unity across heterogeneous groups in society, compulsory declarations are connected to familiar notions of citizenship and membership. Hegel, for example, wrote that in a pluralistic nation, it is necessary to have a king.1" In Hegel's conception, the king is entirely or almost entirely nonsubstantive. He is a symbol of unity that cuts across separateness and differentiation; and he symbolizes unity itself, not anything in particular. In this respect, the king serves some of the same functions as the flag. (One can in this regard distinguish between oaths that have substantive functions and those that do not.) 
In these circumstances, the compulsory declaration connects past, present, and future, and also unites people separated in geographical terms. There is both a "vertical" component in the attempt at linkage, extending over time, and a "horizontal" component, extending across space. (Acts of altruism-encompassing both duty and fellow-feeling2-are often produced or fueled by perceptions of linkage of this sort.) Through the effort to unite past, present, and future, the compulsory declaration is closely connected with the problem of human mortality. The individual who declares attachment obtains an alliance with a community extending far into the future-all the more so with oaths that have theological connotations. 
The most striking example of the temporal extension of oaths is that of the Israeli soldiers who, upon entering the Army, must walk to the top of Mount Masada-where Jews had committed suicide so as to avoid being slaughtered by the Romans-and give an oath of allegiance. In this respect, oaths connect the viewer, and speaker with those who have come before and those who will come after. Here one can see the relationship between oath-taking and membership in a community that extends over time. Moreover, at least some oaths make explicit references to both birth and death. 
But the work of unification in the face of heterogeneity is not just interpersonal; it is intrapersonal as well. Symbols and rituals of this sort have the emotional force they do, not only because they connect each person with others now living, and not only because they provide continuity with people long dead, but also because they help to provide some continuity over a lifetime. The problem of intrapersonal heterogeneity arises as a result of the large number of possibly different "selves" extending across a span of years. Oaths of attachment and similar ceremonies sometimes help provide a kind of anchor. In this sense as well, the problem of human mortality is very much in the foreground here. The controversies introduced by compulsory oaths of attachment might be seen as countless local examples of disputes over Burkean understandings of continuity, membership, and community. 
CONCLUSION 
Oaths of attachment are most naturally understood as a response to the problems of membership and citizenship in the context of social heterogeneity. Sometimes the purpose of oaths is to delegitimate heterogeneity by asserting unity. When this is so, the very existence of the oath tends, ironically, to confirm the existence of the problem. Sometimes the purpose of oaths is to acknowledge, ratify, or create heterogeneity by asserting that the claim of unity is false. Here the oath is an assertion of a previously unrecognized truth. 
In any case, the existence of a unitary and worthy tradition, connecting previous as well as existing members of a community, is the issue to which oaths of attachments are an attempted response. The conventional modern antipathy to oaths of attachment-invoking liberal beliefs in individual immunity from communal ties-tends to be too cavalier about the various functions that the oaths perform. 
Compulsory oaths of attachment have a bad name among many of us, and for quite good reasons; but it would not be easy to live in a world without them, or at least without surrogates doing some of the social work that they do. 
CASS R. SUNSTEIN* 
Many of the most vexing questions in constitutional law result from the rise of the modem regulatory state, which has allowed government to affect constitutional rights, not through criminal sanctions, but instead through spending, licensing, and employment.1 It may well be in these areas that constitutional doctrine is least well developed. It is here that constitutional law promises to receive its most serious tests in the next generation. 
Under current law, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine serves to mediate the boundary between constitutional rights and government prerogatives in the areas of spending, licensing, and employment.2 The doctrine operates as a shorthand response to the view that those who voluntarily par* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay is a revised version of a speech in the Boston University School of Law Distinguished Lecturer Series, delivered at Boston University on December 1, 1989. I am most grateful to my hosts at Boston University for their hospitality and help during that occasion. 
I would like to give special thanks to Richard Epstein, Michael McConnell, and Kathleen Sullivan for their conversation (and writings) on this subject. I am also grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Mary Becker, Frank Easterbrook, Larry Kramer, Frederick Schauer, Joseph Singer, and David Strauss for helpful comments. 
I Many years ago, Justice Jackson made the basic point: [T]he task of translating the majestic generalities of the Bill of Rights . . . into concrete restraints on officials dealing with the problems of the twentieth century, is one to disturb self-confidence. These principles grew in soil which also produced a philosophy that the individual['s] ... liberty was attainable through mere absence of governmental restraints .... We must transplant these rights to a soil in which the laissez-faire concept or principle of non-interference has withered at least as to economic affairs, and social advancements are increasingly sought through closer integration of society and through expanded and strengthened governmental controls. 
West Virginia State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 639-40 (1943). 
2 In brief, the doctrine holds that although government may choose not to provide certain benefits altogether, it may not condition the conferral of a benefit, once provided, ticipate in government programs have "waived" their constitutional objections, and also to the claim that the government's power not to create a regulatory program necessarily includes the power to impose on that program whatever conditions it chooses. The various puzzles produced by the doctrine have created considerable doctrinal confusion and provoked a wide range of commentary.' It is notable that for all their differences, participants in the debate, both on and off the bench, treat the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as the appropriate device for approaching disputed questions. The differences can be found not on that point, but only in the description of the scope and nature of the doctrine.' 
This Article comes in two parts. In Part I, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned. The doctrine, I suggest, is an anachronism; it cannot do th work expected of it. During the transition from the common law system to the modern regulatory state,' the unconstitutional conditions doctrine represented an awkward and never fully explicated effort to protect constitutional rights in a dramatically different institutional environment. The peculiar legacy of this transition and its outmoded foundations continue to pervade current approaches to the problem of unconstitutional conditions. The idea that the system of common law and criminal prohibition provides the basic, even natural state of affairs, and that on a beneficiary's waiver of a constitutional right. See, e.g., L. TRIBE, AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW § 10-8, at 681 & n.29 (2d ed. 1988). 
a See, e.g., L. TRIBE, supra note 2, § 10-8, at 681-85, § 10-9, at 685-87 (discussing the subsidy-penalty distinction); Epstein, Foreword: UnconstitutionalConditions,State Power and the Limits of Consent, 102 HARV. L. REV. 4 (1988) (arguing that the doctrine serves as a second-best means of prohibiting illegitimate redistributions of wealth); Kreimer, 
REV. 1293, 1359 (1984) (proposing three baselines from which to assess the validity of allocational sanctions); Sullivan, UnconstitutionalConditions, 102 HARV. L. REV. 1413, 1419 (1989) (arguing that the doctrine serves an important function by "identify[ing] a characteristic technique by which government appears not to, but in fact does burden... liberties"); Van Alstyne, The Demise of the Right-PrivilegeDistinction in Constitutional Law, 81 HARV. L. REV. 1439, 1448 (1968) (noting that "government-connected activity ... may make otherwise unreasonable conditions quite reasonable"). 
I The analysis in Sullivan, supra note 3, is closest to that suggested here, particularly in her rejection of the subsidy-penalty distinction. Id. at 1433-38. My claim is that arguments of the sort that she offers, properly understood, would lead in the direction of abandonment of the doctrine altogether. 
5 I use the term "regulatory state" because it is the usual one, but the term should not be taken to suggest that the common law system that preceded it was not "regulatory" or "governmental" in largely the same sense. Indeed, the idea that the common law was a regulatory system, and not merely facilitative of private desires, played a role in the creation of the modern state. See Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REV. 421, 437 (1987) (noting that many New Deal reformers regarded the common law itself as a regulatory scheme). regulatory and spending programs are occasional and somewhat jarring additions, affects all sides of the debate. 
Indeed, the very idea of a unitary unconstitutional conditions doctrine is a product of the view that the common law is the ordinary course and that governmental "intervention"-the regulatory state-is exceptional.6 Despite its pervasiveness,7 this view is misconceived. It is inconsistent with both the realities of contemporary government and the principles that gave rise to it. Instead of a general unconstitutional conditions doctrine asking whether there has been "coercion" or "penalty," what is necessary is a highly particular, constitutionally-centered model of reasons: an approach that asks whether, under the provision at issue, the government has constitutionally sufficient justifications for affecting constitutionally protected interests. 
In the second part of this Article, I explore the constitutional issues raised in several areas of selective funding. My goal is to show the sort of analysis that would be used in a legal system that has abandoned the unconstitutional conditions doctrine. I conclude that government may constitutionally fund public but not private schools; that government has broad discretion to be selective in funding art and other projects involving speech; and, perhaps most controversially, that government is under a constitutional duty to fund abortion in cases of rape and incest, at least if it is funding childbirth in such cases. Whether or not these conclusions are correct, the relevant outcomes should depend on reasons entirely independent of a general unconstitutional conditions doctrine. It is on that broader point, rather than the particular conclusions, that I will be insisting here. 
CURRENT DOCTRINE AND ITS LIMITS 
To make the analysis as concrete as possible, I will focus throughout on three cases involving selective funding. In the first, government decides to fund public schools but not private schools, and it does so even though there is a constitutional right to send one's children to private schools.8 In the second case, government funds some artistic projects but not others, excluding, for example, projects containing sex or nudity, criticizing the government, or proclaiming the virtues of Nazism or Communism. In the third, government funds childbirth but not abortion in cases in which pregnancy results from rape or incest. In this section, I explore what sort of directions the current understandings of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine might provide in these cases. 
6 For an elaboration of this point, see Sunstein, Lochner's Legacy, 87 COLUM. L. REV. 873 (1987). 
7 Id. at 875. 8 Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510 (1925). 
The Rise of the RegulatoryState and the UnconstitutionalConditions Doctrine 
I have said that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an artifact of the collision of the regulatory-welfare state with the preexisting common law framework. To understand that claim, it will be useful briefly to review the collision. Most of the story will be familiar. 
In the early days of the regulatory state, legislation that is now generally taken as constitutionally uncontroversial-for example, minimum wage and maximum hour legislation-was subject to attack under the due process clause, usually as a form of an impermissible "taking" from one person for the benefit of another.9 On this account, the distribution of wealth and entitlements pursuant to the common law and market ordering was treated as a part of nature, or at least as the baseline from which to assess whether government had violated its obligation of neutrality. It was on this premise that the idea of impermissible redistribution was made plausible.' ° The Lochner decision, invalidating maximum hour laws, has come to be the symbol of this approach to constitutional law. 
Before and during the New Deal period, this framework came under assault. The common law system began to be seen not as a natural or impartial order, but as a set of collective choices. Because market outcomes were at least in large part a function of the law itself, employers were no longer seen to have an antecedent entitlement to market wages and market hours." Thus Franklin Roosevelt contended, "We must lay hold of the fact that the laws of economics are not made by nature. They are made by human beings."' 2 The rise of the regulatory state represented a general understand' See Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45 (1905) (overturning state legislation setting maximum hours for bakers); Adkins v. Childrens Hosp., 261 U.S. 525, 557-58 (1923) (striking down a minimum wage statute as "a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person"). 
10 Of course not all redistribution was out of bounds; welfare statutes were permitted. But redistribution through regulation was quite frequently invalidated. Note, however, that such efforts do in fact have perverse effects in many cases. For a catalogue, see 
"1 See West Coast Hotel v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 399 (1937) (rejecting Lochner's freedom of contract premise and stating that "[t]he community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers"). 
12 F.D. Roosevelt, Annual Message to Congress (Jan. 3, 1936), in 5 THE PUnLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT, THE PEOPLE APPROVE 13 (1938). This was also a prominent theme in the legal realist movement. See, e.g., Hale, 
(1923) (arguing that the distribution of income "depends on the relative power of coercion which the different members of the community can exert against one another"). A large failure of the realists was that they thought that this insight did more work than in fact it does. To say that existing distributions are a product of law or a "social construct" is not to supply an argument against them. Some such argument, sounding in ing that the common law and private markets were regulatory systems and that those systems sometimes produced both inefficiency and injustice. 
At its inception, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine was a product of Lochner-like, pre-New Deal understandings. Its overriding purpose was to protect common law rights in the face of threats to those rights created by the rise of the regulatory state.13 The doctrine arose when it became clear that regulatory and spending activities might produce an impermissible "redistribution" of the Lochner variety, 4 and that doctrines could be designed to control these novel intrusions into what had previously been regarded as a private sphere. The Court might, for example, invalidate a statute conditioning the receipt of funds on compliance with minimum wage laws. From its inception, then, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine grew out of a system that sought to protect common law interests and market ordering from the novel threats created by the regulatory state. Each of the three principal positions about the scope and nature of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine continue to reflect the roots of the doctrine in the uneasy encounter of constitutional courts with the regulatory state. 
Holmesianism 
The first position, traceable to Justice Holmes 15 but with several modem incarnations,' 6 suggests that courts should never, or almost never, invalidate arguably unconstitutional conditions. On this view, the supposedly greater power not to create the program includes the supposedly lesser power to impose the condition. The Holmesian view begins by acknowledging that an efficiency or distributive justice, is necessary to support displacement of freedom of contract or indeed of any system. 
11 See Epstein, supra note 3, at 10 (stating that the doctrine, with roots in the nineteenth century, is "no new judicial concoction in the post-New Deal welfare state"); Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1416 (noting that "the Lochner Court first fashioned the doctrine"). 
14 See infra text accompanying notes 21-31 for a discussion of how this theme survives in current doctrine. 
15 See, e.g., Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926) (Holmes, J., dissenting) (arguing that if Congress may create an office at will, it may also condition termination from that office); Western Union Tel. Co. v. Kansas, 216 U.S. 1, 53 (1910) (Holmes, J., dissenting) ("Even in the law the whole generally includes its parts. If the State may prohibit, it may prohibit with the privilege of avoiding the prohibition in a certain way."); McAuliffe v. Mayor of New Bedford, 155 Mass. 216, 220, 29 N.E. 517, 518 (1892) ("There are few employments for hire in which the servant does not agree to suspend his constitutional right of free speech ... by the terms of his contract."). 
16 See, e.g., Easterbrook, InsiderTrading,Secret Agents, EvidentiaryPrivileges,andthe Productionof Information, 1981 Sup. CT. REV. 309, 344-52 (discussing with approval the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as applied to Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507 (1980), in which the Court enforced the CIA's contractual right to censor books by its former agents); Lyng v. International Union, 485 U.S. 360 (1988) (upholding legislation denying distribution of food stamps to striking workers). important lesson of the Lochner period was that constitutional courts should not treat the existing distribution of entitlements pursuant to the common law as sacrosanct. Justice Holmes treated the rejection of the Lochner framework-the basic ordering principle for the unconstitutional conditions doctrine-as entailing the abandonment of the doctrine as well. 
On this view, the only logical replacement for the doctrine is untrammeled governmental discretion in the areas of employment, licensing, and funding. That is: when a citizen participates in a program to which there is no antecedent entitlement, the Constitution imposes no constraints on the government's decision to impose conditions. It would follow that, for example, the government might award grants to artists as it chooses. Indeed, under the Holmesian view, all three of the cases with which I started become simple ones. The government wins. 
This position represents a distinctive reaction to the rise of the regulatory state. It takes the New Deal repudiation of common law baselines as a reason to abandon baselines, and to this (significant) extent constitutionalism, altogether. But for familiar reasons, the rise of the regulatory state need not compel the complete elimination of constraints on governmental activities that pressure what would otherwise qualify as constitutional rights.' The Constitution constrains not simply criminal law, but all governmental conduct. If government could, for example, limit spending programs to those who speak favorably of the party in power, there would be a serious distortion of deliberative processes--one that creates precisely the same dangers, in terms of both purposes and effects, against which the first amendment was originally supposed to guard. Governmental conditions on the receipt of licenses or funds may have powerful distorting effects on (for example) freedom of expression'" or racial equality.' 9 All this suggests that in its broadest forms, the Holmesian position is unacceptable. It eliminates constitutional protections from spending, licensing, and employment decisions, without providing a plausible explanation for so doing. 
More fundamentally, and perhaps surprisingly, the Holmesian position is a legacy of precisely the pre-New Deal understandings that it purports to repudiate. On the Holmesian View, coercive governmental entry into the 17 There has been broad agreement on the importance of inquiring into the burdens that governmental activities place on rights. See, e.g., Epstein, supra note 3, at 7-8; Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1500; Van Alstyne, supra note 3, at 1442. See also infra text accompanying notes 46-53. 
18 See, e.g., FCC v. League of Woman Voters, 468 U.S. 364 (1984) (holding that a federal regulation conditioning the award of grants upon public broadcasters' willingness to refrain from editorializing violates the first amendment). 
19 See, e.g., Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 (1886) (striking down a municipal ordinance prohibiting the construction of wooden laundries without a license, where the effect of the condition was to discriminate against Chinese applicants). On the inadequacy of "the greater includes the lesser" position, see infra note 48 and text accompanying notes 47-54. realm of private autonomy may raise constitutional objections; spending and benefit programs do not. This view thus implements constitutional principles by reference to the discredited distinction between a pre-political sphere of common law autonomy and a post-political sphere of governmental action. 20 After the New Deal, however, governmental benefit and spending programs cannot plausibly be viewed as a regulatory system superimposed upon a set of spontaneous or natural arrangements-a central lesson of the demise of Lochner. If this is so, the sharp line that the Holmesian position draws between the common law and the regulatory sphere depends on assumptions and values that are inconsistent with those of modem government. 

Anti-redistribution 
The second position was prominent in the early twentieth century; though it has echoes in many places," it has perhaps only one full-fledged defender today.2' Here the connection between the unconstitutional conditions doctrine and its earliest pre-New Deal manifestations is perhaps clearest. 
This view conceives the basic goal of the doctrine as preservation and protection of Lochner-like rights, such as contractual liberty and private property, under new circumstances. As elaborated at length by Richard Epstein,2" the unconstitutional conditions doctrine operates as a second-best surrogate for outright prohibition, on constitutional grounds, of spending and taxing programs.24 Sometimes, for example, the doctrine applies for the same reason that the underlying program is unconstitutional as "redistribution";' sometimes it applies because even if courts were to uphold such a redistributive program, they can minimize the redistributive consequences through control of the "indirect" constraints imposed by the conditions. In its early twentieth-century incarnation, and in Epstein's own version, this idea grows out of the same framework that accounted for Lochner v. New York and various other decisions invalidating modern legislation.2 6 20 See Sunstein, Lochner's Legacy, supra note 6, at 882. 
21 For a recent example, see Nollan v. California Coastal Comm'n, 438 U.S. 825 (1987) (holding the Commission's conditioning the right to develop private beachfront property on landowner's providing public easement to be an invalid taking of property). 22 See Epstein, supra note 3, for the basic statement and defense. 23 Id. 
24 Epstein writes that the doctrine functions to " 'take back' some of the power which had been conferred upon government officials in the first instance." Id. at 28. 
25 For example, Epstein argues that "government regulation and taxation are means to effect implicit transfers of wealth between individuals." Id. at 103. As one commentator has noted, for Epstein "as a matter of principle, the whole social security and welfare safety net is unconstitutional." Grey, The Malthusian Constitution, 41 U. MIAMI L. REV. 21, 23 (1986). 
26 See, e.g., Adkins, 261 U.S. at 557-58 (minimum wage statute is a "compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person"). Of course Epstein would accord constitutional protection, under the unconstitutional conditions 
This understanding of the doctrine would suggest-to take one examplethat a government that funds public schools must also fund private schools. On this account, some version of a voucher system, in which the government would also finance students who chose to attend religious schools, would be constitutionally compelled.' If government funds only public schools, it works an impermissible redistribution from one group of taxpayers to another; and it is redistribution against which the doctrine must guard. 
It should not be difficult to see why this approach is unacceptable. First, no constitutional provision forbids "redistribution., 28 After the demise of the Lochner period,' the Constitution has been interpreted to authorize a wide range of transfers from some groups to others, largely on the understanding that existing distributions of wealth and property are not sacrosanct. When a "redistribution" is unconstitutional, it is not because of any general constitutional disability, but because particular constitutional provisions rule particular government acts, some of them of course "redistributive," off-limits. For example, a welfare program limited to members of the Republican party is impermissible because of the specific constraints of the first amendment. An unconstitutional conditions doctrine rooted in an antiredistributive norm is simply too general a framework for approaching a constitutional system that offers quite concrete prohibitions. doctrine, to rights of free speech and free exercise as well as to rights of property ownership and contractual freedom. In all cases, however, the basic reason for protection is his fear of governmental "redistribution"-an impermissible goal that, in Epstein's framework, cuts across a wide range of constitutional protections. Because Epstein would grant protection to modern rights of this sort, his approach is not limited to Lochner-like rights of property and contract; but the reasons for the protection of other rights stem precisely from the Lochner framework. That framework accounts for some other oddities in his analysis as well, such as the suggestion that taxpayers with religious objections have a constitutional right to prevent their funds from being used for abortion. Epstein, supra note 3, at 97. 
27 See L. TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1275. 
28 The takings clause is of course anti-redistributive, but it has never been and should not be taken as a wholesale assault on all governmental action with redistributive consequences. For a contrary view, see R. EPSTEIN, TAKINGS: PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN (1985) (arguing that the concept of private property is inconsistent with a welfare state and that the takings clause itself prohibits public transfers and welfare programs). 
The notion of "redistribution" itself depends on a theory of antecedent entitlements. If existing distributions are themselves without prepolitical status, and if they are questionable from the standpoint of justice, efforts to change them will not appear to be "redistribution" at all. See T. POGGE, REALIZING RAWLS (1989) (arguing that institutional orders themselves establish inequities that result from collective actions in creating and perpetuating these orders). 
29Notably, there was no general barrier to redistribution in the founding period. See Grey, supra note 25, at 41-42 (arguing that the "duty of public support for the destitute" is a consistent theme in Western thought and that the framers left this "familiar system" undisturbed). 
More fundamentally, the second position, rooted as it is in Lochner, depends on conceptions of the purpose of the state and the correlative judicial role30 that have been roundly repudiated in the twentieth century, and for good reasons."1 It is here that one can find a surprising but firm alliance between Holmesianism, minimally intrusive on governmental power, and the anti-redistributive position, maximally intrusive on such power. For all their differences, both positions draw a sharp distinction between the realm of common law autonomy and the realm of public law. Both positions understand the unconstitutional conditions doctrine by reference to precisely that distinction. But barring a return to Lochner, redistributive and paternalistic programs are no longer constitutionally out-of-bounds. An unconstitutional conditions doctrine built on pre-New Deal foundations is poorly adapted to the regulatory state. 
Subsidy vs. Penalty 
The third position, represented by the current constitutional mainstream,32 sees the unconstitutional conditions doctrine as an effort to preserve legal requirements of governmental neutrality under different social and economic conditions. It is in this requirement of government neutrality that one finds the staples of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine: the government may not do indirectly what it may not do directly; government may not "penalize" the exercise of constitutional rights; and government may not coerce people into relinquishing constitutional rights through regulation, spending, and licensing, any more than it may do so through criminal sanctions. 
These are the conventional arguments in the cases.' In some respects, 30 For Epstein, that role is to preserve economic liberties and private property. Epstein, supra note 3, at 103. 
31 J. RAwLs, A THEORY OF JUSTICE (1971) and B. ACKERMAN, SOCIAL JUSTICE IN THE LIBERAL STATE (1980) provide philosophical treatments within the liberal tradition. For an analysis along similar lines with particular focus on the appropriate scope of regulation, see C. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION (1990). 
32 Every Supreme Court justice has set forth a position of this sort within the last two decades. For a careful elaboration of the basic principles here, see Kreimer, supra note 3. 
3 See, e.g., Arkansas Writers' Project v. Ragland, 481 U.S. 221, 229 (1987) (holding invalid a tax benefitting "fledgling" publisher because it burdens the first amendment rights of other publishers); FCC v. League of Women Voters, 468 U.S. 364 (1983) (invalidating a section of the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 which banned noncommercial television stations who receive grants from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting from "editorializing"); Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297 (1980) (holding that due process does not require states to pay for medically necessary abortions for indigents); Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398 (1963) (holding that conditioning receipt of unemployment benefits on recipient's willingness to work on the Sabbath contrary to religious beliefs violates the first amendment); Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969) (holding that conditioning receipt of welfare benefits on durational residency requirements violates the equal protection clause). they are highly salutary, especially insofar as they recognize the possibility that non-criminal sanctions often affect constitutional rights in ways that government is unable to justify. Above all, these ideas operate as a corrective both to approaches that see common law rights as the general baseline against which an unconstitutional conditions doctrine must operate, and those who, following Holmes, suggest that courts should not limit the intrusions on constitutional rights that occur through spending and employment decisions. 
In many respects, however, this third approach is vulnerable, not least because in finding the regulatory state a strange and intermittent intruder, it has far more in common with Lochner-likeideas than appears at first glance. The approach thus poses several problems. The first is that generating the appropriate baselines from which to distinguish subsidies from penalties is exceptionally difficult. 4 Harris v. McRae,' in which the Supreme Court upheld a government decision to fund childbirth but not to fund medically necessary abortions, illustrates the problem. There the Court said that Congress' decision not to fund abortions through the Medicaid program was permissible because it amounted to a mere refusal to subsidize. The Court acknowledged that a "penalty" would be unconstitutional because it would impermissibly burden a woman's constitutionally protected right to an abortion. For example, a decision to withdraw welfare benefits from everyone who has had an abortion would, the Court noted, raise "a substantial constitutional question."' 
But how does one decide whether the refusal to pay for medically necessary abortions is a "subsidy" or a "penalty" in the face of government funding of childbirth and almost all other medically necessary expenditures? Perhaps government action should be deemed a penalty rather than a subsidy when the government prevents someone from obtaining something to which she would "otherwise" be entitled. This formulation, however, makes the distinction between "subsidy" and "penalty," like the very category of ''coercion," rely on a baseline defining the ordinary or desirable state of affairs." The courts must rely on some status quo to decide what people would "otherwise" receive. In a post-Medicaid world, is not a poor woman seeking an abortion "otherwise" entitled to payment for medically necessary expenditures, including abortions? The Harrisdissenters made precisely this 34 See Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1416-17. 35 448 U.S. 297 (1980). 36 Id. at 317 n.19. 
11 See, e.g., Kreimer, supra note 3, at 1358-59 ("Our problem ... lies in the challenge to specify an appropriate normal course of events from which to judge deviations."); Nozick, Coercion, in PHILOSOPHY, SCIENCE, AND METHOD 440, 447 (S.Morgenbesser, P. Suppes & M. White eds. 1969) (suggesting that "threats" involve a departure from a baseline of the "normal course of events," that detriment the recipient); Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1439-40 (arguing that outcomes change depending on how baselines are defined). argument.3a The majority replied that there had never been a general entitlement to funding of all medically necessary treatments. 9 The dissenters might have answered that the existence of a Medicaid program altered the baseline to one containing such a general entitlement. But the majority might have responded: Why? 
All this suggests that the development of the relevant baseline is enormously difficult. In Harris, the Court appeared quite reflexively to use a common law baseline that assumed government funding to be exceptional rather than ordinary,' but the common law may simply no longer be appropriate in these cases. Once the common law touchstone is abandoned, however, it is not at all clear what standard is to replace it. If the subsidypenalty line is crucial, development of proper baselines is the key issue; but it is also an issue on which the unconstitutional conditions doctrine and the subsidy-penalty distinction, standing by themselves, have absolutely nothing to say.41 
The problem goes deeper. Sometimes, as I argue below, the government can legitimately "penalize" the exercise of constitutional rights through selective funding.' Some constitutional provisions do indeed permit regulation through funding but not through criminalization. It is hardly self-evident, in any case, that all penalties must be unconstitutional. 
This point leads to the broader conclusion that the development of a baseline to distinguish between penalties and subsidies is neither necessary nor sufficient.4' The Constitution offers no general protection against the imposition of penalties on the exercise of rights. Instead, the question the Constitution ordinarily makes it necessary to ask is whether government has intruded on a right in a way that is constitutionally troublesome and, if so, whether government can justify its intrusion under the appropriate standard of review. The view that there is a unitary category of intrusions called "unconstitutional conditions" is the product of a belief that in a certain set of cases, another question-"subsidy/penalty"--displaces the ordinary inquiry altogether. But it is not at all clear why this displacement should occur. 
Even more fundamentally, the very notion that one should approach these cases with a distinction between penalties and subsidies has much in com38 Harris,448 U.S. at 330-32 (Brennan, J., dissenting); see also Kreimer, supra note 3, at 1375-76 (noting that "[a]s a matter of history," abortions were funded prior to Harris). 39 Harris,448 U.S. at 317-18. 
40 Thus the Harris majority writes that "[t]he Hyde Amendment leaves an indigent woman with at least the same range of choice in deciding whether to obtain a medically necessary abortion as she would have had if Congress had chosen to subsidize no health care costs at all." Id. at 316. 
41 See Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1420. 
41 The clearest example is government's decision not to fund private schools. See infra text accompanying notes 54-59. 
43 See Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1450. mon with the two positions that appear to be its adversaries. As with the Holmesian and anti-redistributive approaches, the subsidy-penalty distinction appears to depend on the notion that the regulatory state is an artificial supplement to an otherwise well-defined status quo. The distinction simply cannot be administered without some such notion." Moreover, the distinction cannot be sustained in light of the omnipresence of government spending and funding. A set of doctrines that assumes that spending programs are an artificial supplement to a system of common law ordering-in short, an inquiry into subsidy or penalty-is inconsistent with the values and operation of modem government. 
All three of the prominant approaches to the subject are too general to be helpful in dealing with cases involving particular prohibitions on government activity. Moreover, they are anachronisms. And they are anachronisms in precisely the same sense: they treat common law ordering as the usual state of affairs and see governmental funding as a questionable interference with an otherwise stable status quo. To be sure, such interference might well raise serious constitutional problems. But nothing in the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is likely to be helpful in resolving those problems. 
B. PlausibleFunctions of CurrentDoctrine,and Why They Can Be 
Served in Other Ways 
The discussion thus far suggests that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine has taken the shape that it has and produced the debates that it has only in reaction to a set of particular, quite distinctive historical conditions. In short, the doctrine filled a particular gap in post-New Deal constitutional theory by offering a means of placing limits on novel governmental activities. We might make this point by imagining a different society in which collective constraints were, from time immemorial, carried out through licensing, funding, and employment decisions. In such a society, the criminal law would be absent, and constitutional safeguards would be applied to the familiar kinds of sanctions. Suppose that after many generations, the society created a new set of sanctions--call them criminal fines and confinementas a supplement to its basic regulatory system. 
Such a society might at that point find it necessary to create a set of doctrines to control this novel kind of intrusion, one that sometimes adversely 44 Although this is usually so, it is not necessarily so as a logical matter. At least in theory, one could define the status quo not by reference to current practice or to history, but instead by reference to some baseline justified as a matter of principle. But there would be enormous difficulties in establishing the foundations for any such justification. Cf Kreimer, supra note 3, at 1359-74 (developing a baseline analysis grounded in considerations of history, equality, and prediction); Simons, Offers, Threats, and UnconstitutionalConditions, 26 SAN DIEGO L. REv. 289 (1989) (arguing that the proper baseline for measuring threats and offers is what the government would have provided if it could not impose conditions). affected constitutional rights. Once the society matured, however, the category of criminalization would no longer be administered as a unitary doctrine. It would instead take its place alongside the more familiar constitutional safeguards that inquire into the nature of the burden on the relevant rights and the available government justifications for imposing that burden. 
For modern observers, then, the question has to do with what genuine, nonobfuscating work the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is necessary to perform. I suggest here that it is possible to identify three such functions. But because the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is not necessary to discharge these tasks, and because the tasks can be carried out through other, more particular, approaches, I argue that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine should be abandoned.45 
The first function the unconstitutional conditions doctrine performs is to identify a technique by which government affects or burdens constitutional rights.6 The doctrine serves to alert courts to the fact that a government spending decision-for example, a decision to condition the receipt of welfare benefits on a waiver of first or fourth amendment rights-often affects constitutional rights in ways that call for persuasive justification or perhaps invalidation. 
The doctrine thus reminds courts that it would be quite wrong to disregard the effects that spending decisions may have on constitutional rights, even if there is an apparent or real individual waiver. But the fact that spending decisions do affect constitutional rights should hardly be thought surprising or unusual. A reminder of the possibility that constitutionally troublesome burdens can be imposed through spending, licensing, or regulation is necessary only to those who hold an outmoded view of what modern government does. 
Responding to Persistent Arguments 
The second function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to provide a shorthand and sometimes persuasive response to two familiar arguments. The first is that if government has no duty to create a program at all, it may create the program with certain conditions. The greater power, in short, necessarily includes the lesser. The second argument invokes the language of voluntariness. If, for example, a person has freely chosen to forego 45 It would follow that the approaches in Kreimer, supra note 3, and L. TRIBE, supra note 2, are misguided, and for the same reason. It remains true, however, that there will be some commonalities in judicial treatment of constitutional attacks on funding and licensing decisions, once those attacks are seen as raising not unconstitutional conditions questions, but instead, for example, first, fifth, and fourteenth amendment questions. 46 Emphasized in Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1419. rights of free speech in order to work for the government, it might be thought that the courts have no reason to intervene. 
Unpacking what is right and what is wrong in these two arguments requires substantial work.47 The unconstitutional conditions doctrine serves as a brief response to these arguments in their crudest forms. It responds to the implausible idea that the government's power not to create the program necessarily includes the power to impose whatever condition it chooses, and to the equally implausible idea that there can never be a constitutional obstacle to an arguably or actually voluntary individual choice. But the implausibility of these arguments, in their broadest forms, should be self-evident under modern conditions. The short response is that it is often irrelevant that the government need not fund at all or that the recipient accepted the condition. The Constitution limits the reasons for which government may act and the effects of its actions. A welfare program limited to Democrats is unconstitutional because of the first amendment; points about voluntary participation and the "greater power" are simply a diversion.4 Courts do not need an unconstitutional conditions doctrine in order to make the necessary response. Whether the greater power includes the lesser, and whether there is a legal obstacle to an apparently free choice, depend on a reading of the constitutional provision at issue, not on shorthand phrases. 
Government Justifications 
The third function of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is to reveal something true, important, and perhaps surprising about the character of some substantive rights and the nature of government justifications. In short, the doctrine reveals that some constitutional rights are not rights to government neutrality at all. In some contexts, government has available to it certain justifications that allow it to be selective in decisions with respect to funding, licensing, or employment. 
47 See Epstein, supra note 3, at 60-64; Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1420. 
48 To say this is not to deny the need to develop quite concrete responses, which will vary with context. For example, a citizen might voluntarily agree to waive her right to free speech in return for welfare benefits, and be better off as a result. The constitutional question, however, is not whether she is better off in the abstract, but instead whether she is better off, or equally well off, with respect to the right in question. The fact that an offer to purchase the right to free speech in return for welfare benefits might make the recipient better off under Paretian criteria hardly disposes of the constitutional question-at least not if the right is to government neutrality. 
To take another example: Waivers of constitutional rights may be individually rational but have large adverse structural or systemic consequences. That is, governmental purchase of the right to vote, or the right to free speech, undermines the first amendment's broad protection not only of individual autonomy, but also of certain forms of government. See Sunstein, Government Control of Information, 74 CALIF. L. REV. 889, 915 (1986). 
The point is a bit obscure in the abstract, but it emerges quite naturally from the cases. Consider, for example, a statute through which the government provides medical benefits only to those who agree to speak for a Democratic presidential candidate, and to speak against the Republican candidate. Such a statute would be unconstitutional. The right to free expression is a right to government neutrality as among competing ideas. It does not matter whether government violates the neutrality requirement by imposing criminal prohibitions or by providing cash payments. 
By contrast, imagine-a case in which the government pays for secondary education, but only for those who send their children to the public schools. The Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution to include a right to send one's children to private schools;4 9 but that right operates only against criminal sanctions, and not against the incentive effects to which parents are subject when government funds public but not private education. This understanding of the relevant right is controversial, but it is perfectly intelligible. In some cases, the government has legitimate and distinctive interests that permit it to engage in conduct on the spending side that would be impermissible on the criminal side. In the spending context, the government may be able to invoke justifications that are tightly connected to, and become legitimate because of, the very fact that it is engaging in those activities. In the public school setting, for example, government can plausibly justify its selectivity by the need to ensure that public funds are not spent on religious activities. 
There are other examples as well. In Snepp v. United States,5x the Supreme Court upheld the use of secrecy agreements to regulate speech by employees of the Central Intelligence Agency. The best argument for this result is that in its capacity as manager of an intelligence agency, the government has legitimate interests, not related to censorship in the ordinary sense, that justify restrictions on the speech of those who have access to sensitive information. Similarly, a possible argument, taken up below, for the outcome in Harriswould be that the government can properly consider taxpayers' religious and moral objections to the practice of abortion in deciding what sorts of medically necessary operations it will fund. 2 
Lyng v. International Union5 3 offers a final example. In Lyng, the Supreme Court upheld an amendment to the Food Stamp Act prohibiting strikers from receiving food stamp benefits. A plausible argument for this outcome would rely on the proposition that even if the government cannot 49 Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510 (1925). 
10In Pierce, the sanction involved a state statute making it a misdemeanor for parents not to send their children to public schools. See also Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972) (holding that the state may not enforce a criminal statute against Amish families refusing to send children to public school beyond the eighth grade). 
51 444 U.S. 507 (1980). 52 See infra text accompanying notes 69-77. 
M 485 U.S. 360 (1988). forbid strikes through criminal punishment, it may allocate scarce resources to those who are genuinely in need. The government, on this view, may legitimately conclude that strikers are not in need in the same sense as are most unemployed people. 
To say all this is not to supply a decisive argument in favor of Snepp, Harris,or Lyng. It is, however, to suggest that whether the issue is one of funding, licensing, or employment, the government may have distinctive and unusual justifications to support what are by hypothesis constitutionally troubling burdens on protected rights. It is on this point that current doctrine contains a core and unavoidable insight: Funding, regulating, and licensing decisions are indeed sometimes different from criminal punishment. 
But is an unconstitutional conditions doctrine necessary to accomplish this task? It would be far more straightforward to ask whether the government has available to it distinctive justifications because of the context in which the relevant burden is imposed. Nothing in the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is helpful in answering that question, or even in suggesting the need to ask it. The doctrine should be abandoned. 
II. BEYOND THE UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE Thus far my discussion has been quite general. I have argued in favor of a shift from an emphasis on whether there has been "coercion" or "penalty" to an inquiry into the nature of the interest affected by government and the reasons offered by government for its intrusion. The inquiry into both interests and reasons is not unconstrained. The Constitution identifies a restricted category of protected rights and limits the category of justifications that government may offer. 
In this Part, I attempt to give more particular content to these general suggestions. The discussion will be tentative and exploratory, attempting to structure inquiries rather than to offer final answers. One might of course accept my general claims about the anachronistic and unhelpful character of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine, and about the need to shift from coercion to reasons, without at the same time accepting my particular conclusions. 
There will be two cross-cutting themes. The first and most important is the need for attention to the constitutional provision at issue. In all of the cases, the question is whether the measure at issue interferes with a constitutional right, properly characterized, and, if so, whether the government has sufficient justification for its interference. These questions cannot be answered in the abstract. Different conclusions will be appropriate under different provisions. A major problem with the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is that it diverts attention from this fact, and indeed from the particular provision in question. 
The second theme concerns the relevance for constitutional purposes of moral or conscientious objections to spending decisions by segments of the taxpaying public. In general, such objections often provide a legitimate reason for funding decisions. What is the status of those objections in funding that involves constitutionally troublesome areas? Perhaps surprisingly, I argue that for the most part, moral objections ought not to play a significant role. 
Public Schools, Private Schools 
We have seen that under current law, government is constitutionally obliged to permit people to send their children to private schools; but it is under no obligation to fund private schools even if it pays for public schools. Neutrality as between public and private schools is not a constitutional imperative.' Financial pressures that induce people to send their children to public school raise no constitutional problem. 
The fact that the Constitution permits nonneutrality here is something of a puzzle. But for two reasons, the conventional wisdom is probably correct. First, the right to send one's children to private schools-rooted in the free exercise clauseS---is an unusual one in light of the functions of the establishment clause. By prohibiting the government from establishing religion, the first amendment imposes a special disability on religion. In that sense, the Constitution is not neutral as between religion and nonreligion. Under the establishment clause, an exaction from the taxpayers for the support of religious organizations is a distinctive harm, one that is peculiarly likely to lead to religious divisions and factional strife. 
If this is so, it follows that governmental neutrality as between public and private schools is not a constitutional imperative. Many taxpayers would have severe objections to the public funding of religious schools. Indeed, those objections are an inextricable part of the rationale behind the establishment clause. An interpretation of the right to educate one's children that would compel governmental neutrality would be inconsistent with the logic of the religious guarantees themselves. Governmental neutrality would probably not violate the establishment clause, but it would raise problems sufficient to provide a justification for selective funding. 56 
The second reason for this general conclusion is that any government has strong and legitimate reasons to favor public over private education, in order, for example, to foster the development of an integrated national or state polity, to promote citizenship, 7 and to break down barriers of race, 4 See L.TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1275 & n.138. 5 Pierce, 268 U.S. at 510. 
o A possible response to this argument is that private schools are not necessarily religious schools, and that as a result, a decision not to fund private schools cannot be supported by the desire to prevent taxpayer funding of religion. But it is probably sufficient for these purposes that the vast majority of private schools are religious. It would of course follow that there would be no constitutional problem if the government decided to fund only secular schools, whether public or private. 
51 Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 401 ("That the state may do much, go very far, religion, and class.' These reasons are of course insufficient to permit an outright governmental prohibition of private schools. But they are significant enough to permit the government to fund public but not private schools, and through that route to encourage attendance at public schools. 9 
Government is thus constitutionally authorized to be neutral toward private and public schools, but it is under no obligation to do so. A system in which government may fund public schools but not private schools, and allows its citizenry to opt out of the public school system at its own expense, seems to be the best reconciliation of the competing interests-understood through the lens of the constitutional structure generally and the first amendment in particular. In this context, then, governmental selectivity is permitted, not because of the absence of "penalty," but because of the presence of legitimate justifications. 
Governmentally Funded Speech and Art 
The question of governmentally funded speech and art has become especially controversial in recent years, because of troublesome selectivity in funding decisions in the first instance and because of several highly visible efforts to withdraw federal or state money from publicly disapproved projects."° The general issue is likely to become even more heated in the future. Government is quite frequently implicated in the funding and promotion of the arts, and there are both legitimate and illegitimate reasons for refusing to fund or withdrawing funds from certain programs. Some of these cases are exceptionally difficult, and my conclusions should be regarded as especially tentative. 
It will be useful to begin by illustrating some permissible funding decisions. The central point here is that government has limited resources with indeed, in order to improve the quality of its citizens, physically, mentally and morally is clear .... ). 
58 These ideas have a long legacy; they are ultimately traceable to Thomas Jefferson, among others. See Notes on Virginia in THE PORTABLE THOMAS JEFFERSON 196-97 (M. Peterson ed. 1975). 
In fact, however, the history of the actual practice suggests that the public schools were generic protestant institutions created because of antipathy to Catholics, most of whom were immigrants. All this raises some doubts about the conclusion ventured in the text. If the public schools are an effort to create an orthodoxy rather than to break down factionalism, the legitimacy of the underlying justification is drawn into question. There is, moreover, a conceptual difficulty in distinguishing between the two. 
59 Considerations of the sort suggested in this paragraph explain the basis of my uneasiness with Professor McConnell's approach to this problem. See McConnell, 
SAN DIEGO L. REV. 255, 275 (1989) (arguing that the government's decision not to fund parochial schools constitutes a "flagrant burden" on constitutional rights). 
60 These include depictions of Mayor Harold Washington dressed in a bra and panties, Jesus Christ in urine, the American flag on the floor to be stepped on, art involving AIDS, and sexually explicit art, including depictions of homosexuality. which to fund the arts and its allocations are necessarily selective. In this area, generality on the part of government is inconceivable. From this point at least three conclusions seem straightforward. 
First, it is surely permissible for government to refuse to fund speech that can be banned through the criminal law. A refusal to fund obscenity, libelous speech, or incitement to crime is therefore unobjectionable. 1 
Second, funding decisions that are based on qualitative or aesthetic grounds should be entirely legitimate, at least presumptively and in most cases. The government might properly decide to fund projects that it considers to be of high caliber. Indeed, such judgments are inescapable for those who allocate limited resources. 
Third, decisions to fund projects on the basis of subject matter should generally be uncontroversial. For example, there should be no basis for complaint if the government chooses to fund projects related to American history, Chaucer, World War II, the civil rights movement, Egypt, or the film industry. To say that government may be in the business of funding art is almost by itself to say that government may select subjects or topics that it considers worthy of approval. Here too the existence of limited funds makes any alternative approach implausible. 
Taken together, these conclusions should be sufficient to authorize the bulk of current practice with respect to funding of the arts. In all of these cases, government has legitimate reasons for selectivity. If government may properly make decisions by reference to subject matter or to aesthetic quality, existing policies will generally be upheld. 
Under what circumstances, then, might serious first amendment objections arise? The most obvious involve straightforward discrimination on the basis of viewpoint. Suppose, for example, that government decides to fund projects by Democrats but not Republicans, or only by those who have voted in favor of the current President. The case is an easy one for invalidation. The prohibition on discrimination based on point of view lies at the heart of the first amendment.62 In this case, both the purpose and the effects of governmental action are objectionable. Moreover, no distinctive, fundingrelated justification is available to authorize the government's action. Here the problem lies in the absence not of "coercion," but of legitimate reasons for selectivity. 
The only possible justification for viewpoint discrimination in this setting would be the taxpayers' unwillingness to subsidize art by people they find disagreeable. But a decision to admit this justification would allow funding 6 Of course there must be procedural guarantees to ensure that the speech at issue actually falls in the unprotected class. 
62 See Stone, Content Regulation and the FirstAmendment, 25 WM. & MARY L. REV. 189, 192-93 (1983) (a "central first amendment concern" is the free communication of individual points of view). See also Police Dep't v. Mosley, 408 U.S. 92, 95 (1972) ("[A]bove all else, the First Amendment means that government has no power to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its content."). decisions to skew artistic creation in accordance with prevailing political convictions, especially those of governmental actors. At least in a world in which the government engages in a wide range of funding, that skewing effect could not plausibly be tolerated. Even more fundamentally, the core of the first amendment is offended by governmental efforts to skew expression. 
Slightly harder but also reasonably clear are cases in which government decides to fund only projects that contain a particular, approved viewpoint. Imagine, for example, a law stating that the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) will fund only those projects that deal favorably with the current performance of the American government, or only projects involving the Vietnam War that portray the government in a favorable light. An across-the-board ban on the funding of projects critical of government or embodying governmentally-disapproved views would at least usually be impermissible. Here too the government cannot justify selectivity in constitutionally acceptable terms.63 
If these claims are broadly correct, it is possible to develop some tentative conclusions. The clearest constitutional violation consists of discrimination on the basis of point of view." Most other decisions will be permissible, for they will involve subject matter or aesthetics. The hardest cases arise when the relevant discrimination seems to involve judgments about subject matter or aesthetics but is in fact an effort to control a particular point of view. 
The problem is that the line between these two categories is an elusive one-not only in the uninteresting sense that there will be hard intermediate cases, but in the far more troubling sense that the distinction is difficult to draw even as a conceptual matter. Judgments about aesthetics or quality 63 It follows that the action of the Chicago City Council in removing the offensive painting of Harold Washington was unconstitutional because it was based on official disapproval of a private decision to ridicule the former Mayor. 
I say "at least usually" because even here there may be counterexamples. Suppose, for example, that government says that funded portrayals of the Civil War cannot say that slavery was a good thing, or that such portrayals will count against funding. Or suppose that funding of a show about the American Revolution is limited to people who do not portray the founders as murderers and thugs. Here even viewpoint discrimination may be acceptable as part of qualitative judgments. See infra text accompanying notes 66-67. 
64 There are lurking questions here about the government's own speech. Since government seems to have plenary authority over what it will say, it is by no means clear that government may not have similar authority over people whom it pays. Part of the difference may lie in the fact that when government is speaking, the people know who the speaker is; the same cannot be said when the government is paying a private person to say what it wants. Part of the problem also lies in the fear of government cooptation of the private sphere, a fear that retains authority even in a post-New Deal era-although it introduces some of the difficulties criticized in Part I of this essay. It would in any case be intolerable to say that grant recipients are government employees and thus without constitutional protection against viewpoint discrimination; such a conclusion would lead to unacceptable skewing of artistic decisions. always depend, at root, on the standpoint of the decisionmaker.1 This is most obvious for people who think that art celebrating Nazism, Communism, or white supremacy, at least ordinarily, cannot qualify as good art. But the point extends quite generally. Distinctions between representational and nonrepresentational art, or embroidery and painting, involve issues that are at bottom political. The idea that yellow marks smeared on a page, a sentimental drawing of a cat, or American flags marked with swastikas do not qualify for funding is necessarily rooted in views, broadly speaking political in nature, about the appropriate character and aims of the arts. 
The available approaches to these difficulties are few-indeed, there are only three realistic options, and none of them is entirely appealing. The first posits a constitutional principle forbidding even aesthetic or subject-matter judgments on the ground that they too are rooted in moral or political judgments and, in that sense, in point of view. But this principle would be intolerable, for it would forbid selective funding of any sort and so also bar government funding entirely. Such a solution would hardly be desirable in a system in which public funding is an important individual and collective good, especially because public funding removes some of the distortions created by private funding of the artistic process. 
The second route would be to permit even the most conspicuously partisan funding decisions on the ground that sensible lines cannot be drawn between impermissibly partisan and permissibly neutral decisions. This approach would also be intolerable, because it would authorize egregious governmental interference with expression for the state's own self-interested or otherwise objectionable purposes. 
The third and probably the only sensible solution is to apply the constitutional prohibition only in straightforward cases of viewpoint discrimination," and to permit aesthetic or qualitative judgments as long as they are not conspicuously based on partisan aims. Of course this approach must be accompanied by a recognition that it rests on some conceptually uncertain ground. 
Under this framework, there are two final hard cases. The first involves a restriction that does not on its face discriminate on the basis of viewpoint, but that amounts to an attempt to impose conventional morality on artistic processes. The second involves hate literature or art that offends a significant portion of the community because it is degrading. 
For an example of the first problem, suppose that government says that it will refuse to fund projects containing profanity or sexually explicit scenes. The concern here is that in such cases, government will distort artistic processes by imposing financial pressures that incline people toward offi61 And that standpoint is rarely without political content. For an especially. good discussion of this issue, see W. BOOTH, THE COMPANY OF FRIENDS (1989). 
" Whether it is straightforward is, unfortunately, itself in part a function of point of view. See Sunstein, Pornography and the First Amendment, 1986 DUKE L.J. 589 (discussing justifications for anti-pornography legislation). cially sanctioned views about what is fitting in art. In a system containing some public funding, this problem cannot be altogether avoided. But it can be minimized rather than increased. The appropriate strategy here is probably to view with some suspicion across-the-board measures that deny funding to art that offends conventional morality-a conclusion that will of course produce formidable line-drawing problems. The more narrow and selective the exclusionary term, the more it will be properly characterized as viewpoint-based: a ban on depictions of homosexuality is in this sense even more troublesome than a ban on depictions of sexuality in general. 
The argument for constitutionality in these cases is strengthened, however, if the regulation has a limited spatial and temporal reach. Cases involving general regulations-those imposing a nationwide statutory ban on, for example, profanity in funded projects-should, if borderline, be resolved unfavorably to the government. A decision by the NEA to forbid the funding of all art with nudity would be far more objectionable than a decision not to allow nudity in one or two governmentally-funded projects. The latter would have some of the familiar characteristics of time, place, and manner restrictions. Indeed, some viewpoint-based restrictions will be permissible if they are narrow in terms of space and time. A local exhibit on the civil rights movement could surely exclude art celebrating slavery or advocating its reinstatement. 
The second category, involving hate literature or art, is also troublesome. What if the government decides, for example, not to fund Nazi art, proslavery art, art of the Ku Klux Klan, art glorifying rape and sexual violence, or Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, on the ground that the relevant causes are filled with hatred, are harmful and abhorrent, or are perceived as harmful and abhorrent by a large segment of the community? The basic problem here, noted above, is that conventional morality is not the proper arbiter of governmental funding decisions that bear on expression. A system in which conventional morality played that role would be inconsistent with the core of the first amendment guarantee, which is designed precisely to protect views that do not accord with conventional morality. What is required, in these cases, is a principle of sufficient generality to encompass any legitimate concerns about the use of taxpayer money without at the same time impermissibly dictating a particular point of view. 
It is not easy to devise any such principle. Surely government should not be permitted to decline to fund any project to which a significant number of taxpayers have a conscientious objection. Such a proposition would enshrine conventional morality as the basis for funding decisions. Perhaps, however, government should be permitted to decline to fund projects that fuel hatred of disadvantaged social groups, at least if the category of regulated speech can be narrowly defined. To be sure, such an approach would embody a form of viewpoint discrimination. There is, however, at least a plausible argument for such an exception in this context. Speech of the sort at issue is not merely offensive, but also helps produce a distinctive set of harms, including a perpetuation of second-class citizenship for certain groups. Gov 
UNCONSTITUTIONAL CONDITIONS DOCTRINE ernment might have sufficient reason to refuse to fund such speech even if it may not criminalize it. 
It follows from these considerations that government has broad power to allocate funds to artistic projects, even if it does so on a highly selective basis. The only clear prohibition is on allocations based on a straightforwardly partisan basis, as in the case of discrimination against a particular point of view; and even here there are exceptions. A similar prohibition might be triggered when a subject-matter restriction also embodies a form of viewpoint discrimination, as in the exclusion of art containing profanity; and here much will depend on the particular context. Hard cases will of course remain. But such an approach would resolve the vast majority of cases, and at least suggest an orientation for the rest. 
C. FundingAbortions In Cases of Rape or Incest 
The Supreme Court has held that the existence of a right to an abortion does not imply a correlative right to public funding of abortion, even if the government is also funding childbirth. 7 In this respect, the right to have an abortion stands on the same footing as the right to send one's children to public schools. In neither case is neutrality required. 
I want to explore here the question whether the government might be obliged to fund abortions in cases of rape or incest, at least when government is funding childbirth in such cases. I do not speak to the question whether these considerations suggest that funding for abortions is required even in cases not involving rape or incest. That broader question raises distinctive and more difficult problems. 
Under current law, government is almost certainly" under no obligation to pay for abortion in cases of rape or incest. No matter what produced the pregnancy, taxpayers are not required to foot the bill for abortions. In the relevant cases, the Court has not been clear about its rationale. It has insisted that government need not remain neutral as between abortion and childbirth; the legitimate interest in protecting fetal life is the reason that neutrality is not compelled.6 9 In this quite particular respect, the abortion right is similar to that in Pierce v. Society of Sisters: the government has an interest in nonneutrality that does not have sufficient force to justify criminalization, but that does allow selectivity in funding. 
In the setting of private schools, we have seen that this line of argument is correct, largely because of the authority of the establishment clause, which is best taken as a self-conscious protection against the use of taxpayer funds to 67 Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 316-17 (1980) (stating that a woman's right to choose an abortion does not carry with it a constitutional entitlement to the financial resources necessary to exercise that right). 
8 The Supreme Court has not, however, decided the precise issue, which has never been presented to it. 
69 Harris,448 U.S. at 324-26. pay for religious schools.7 ° But this rationale seems unavailable in the abortion context. There would be no tension with the establishment clause if those having religious or other objections to abortion were forced to pay for that procedure. Indeed, taxpayers are quite generally forced to pay for things-for example, national defense, welfare, certain forms of art-to which they have powerful moral objections. If government is to be relieved of its obligation to be neutral as between abortion and childbirth in cases of rape and incest, the argument must take a somewhat different form. 
Perhaps one could generalize from the establishment clause, or from the structure of liberal democracy generally, a principle allowing substantial segments of the public not to pay for practices that it considers to be abhorrent for reasons of conscience.7 1 In most democratic countries, governments are permitted and indeed encouraged to take account of conscientious objections. This permission may not be an enforceable entitlement, but it does provide a generally legitimate reason for selective funding. Of course, this permission could not be invoked to allow government to violate obligations of neutrality that seem a straightforward inference from the relevant rightsuch as the first amendment right to neutrality among points of view, or the equal protection right to neutrality between blacks and whites. But perhaps some rights are best conceived as nonneutrality rights in the sense that they allow selectivity in funding decisions if taxpayers have an objection of conscience. And since many taxpayers consider abortion to be murder of defenseless human beings, perhaps they can refuse to pay for it, even in cases of rape and incest. 
At least as a general rule, it seems not merely correct but obvious to say that funding decisions may and often do take into account the desires of the citizenry, including conscientious objections.72 It is unclear, however, what weight such objections should have in hard constitutional cases. If the relevant constitutional provision requires neutrality, consideration of conscientious objections is probably illegitimate and, in any case, insufficiently weighty to justify selective decisionmaking. A decision to fund Christian but not Jewish art, or paintings favorable to Republicans, would be plainly unconstitutional. In cases in which the right does not call for neutrality, conscientious objections are easily translatable into sufficient governmental justifications to survive review. 
To evaluate the arguments for and against neutrality in the abortion fund70 See supra text accompanying notes 54-59. 
71 See McConnell, The Selective Funding Problem: Abortions and Religious Schools (unpublished manuscript) [hereinafter McConnell manuscript]; McConnell, supra note 59, at 265-71. 
72 Some such desires are of course constitutionally unacceptable. See, e.g., Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432, 447-50 (1985) (holding that an ordinance requiring a special use permit for a proposed home for mentally retarded persons lacks a rational basis and deprives respondent of equal protection). But here the question to be decided is whether the objection to abortion is unacceptable in that sense. ing context, it is necessary to understand the nature of and basis for the right at issue. If the abortion right is seen as one of "privacy," there are good reasons to say that governmental neutrality is not required, and that government may fund childbirth but not abortion regardless of whether the pregnancy is consensual or coercive.7 3 Indeed, if the right is one to privacy, it is plausible to say that the conscientious objections of a significant segment of the population provide a sufficient justification for refusing to fund abortions.7 4 
There are, however, notorious difficulties in treating the abortion right as one of privacy, not least because the Constitution does not refer to "privacy" and because the abortion decision does not involve conventional privacy at all.75 Certainly, in the case of abortions involving rape or incest, the best argument on behalf of the relevant right is based on principles of equal protection rather than on due process.76 This argument stresses issues of sex discrimination and views a prohibition on abortion as an involuntary cooptation of women's bodies in the service of third parties.77 13 See McConnell manuscript, supra note 71. 74 Id. 
75 Perhaps the right is one to liberty or autonomy. Liberty is of course protected by the due process clause, and the notion that that clause has a substantive component, though textually and historically controversial, is well-engrained in American law. But if the argument that follows in the text is correct, that understanding inadequately captures the dynamics of the abortion question. 
76 There appears to be a mounting consensus to this effect with respect to abortion generally. See C. MAcKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED 93-102 (1987) (criticizing the doctrinal choice to pursue the abortion right under the law of privacy); L.TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1353 (stating that "the failure of both plaintiffs and courts to frame the abortion controversy in terms of sexual equality has profoundly affected the law in this area"); Ginsburg, Some Thoughts on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade, 63 N.C.L. REv. 375 (1985) (invoking sexual equality and suggesting that Roe may have been less vulnerable to attack had the Court limited its ruling to the specific statute at issue); Karst, Foreword:Equal Citizenship under the FourteenthAmendment, 91 HARV. L. REV. 1, 43 (1977) ("The equal protection clause has not only taken on substantive content of the type envisioned by its framers, but shows every sign of being able to bear the full meaning of the equal citizenship principle."); Law, Rethinking Sex and the Constitution, 132 U. PA. L. REV. 955, 987-1002 (1984) (noting that the "failure to develop a sex equality doctrine that is more responsive to biological difference has affected the Court's analysis in cases challenging explicit sex-based classifications"); Schauer, Easy Cases, 58 S. CAL. L. REV. 399, 431 n.83 (1985) (stating that if Roe had been decided as a sexdiscrimination case, "the decision would have become a legitimate interpretation . .. within the textual mandate of the equal protection clause"); Strauss, Discriminatory Intent and the Taming ofBrown, 56 U. CHI. L. REv. 935, 990-98 (1989) (examining Roe as a sex discrimination/equal protection case). 
17 An argument of this general sort is made in Regan, Rewriting Roe v. Wade, 77 MICH. L. REV. 1569 (1979) (suggesting, under equal protection principles, that requiring women to carry a fetus to term compels women to be Good Samaritans); Thompson, A Defense of Abortion, 1 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 47, 52 (1971) ("The question asked is what a 
The first point here is that restrictions on abortion uniquely burden women. A statute that is addressed at women by plain terms is of course a form of sex discrimination. A statute that involves a biological correlate of being female should be treated in the same way.7" The fact that what is to many another life-that of the fetus-is involved is of course extremely important. The practice of abortion plausibly involves the death of another human being, one who is especially defenseless; and conscientious objections that invoke fetal protection deserve a response. But that fact goes to the issue of justification, not to the question whether there is discrimination in the first instance. 
It is important to recall here that the biological capacity to bear children, frequently taken as the basis for women's "natural" role, in fact has the social consequence of involuntary childbearing only as a result of collective decisions, conspicuous among them the legal prohibition of abortion. The question at hand is whether government has the power through law to turn that capacity, limited to one gender, into a source of social disadvantage. The recognition of the Roe79 right sees the biological capacity as having no necessary social consequences, and treating the role of motherhood for women as chosen rather than given,8" to be selected by women rather than by the state. At the very least this seems to be the best argument in cases of rape or incest. In those cases, the question is whether the state's interest in protecting the fetus allows the state to compel women to bring the fetus to term. 
Is the state's justification sufficient? The argument to the contrary would be that in cases in which women are not responsible for their pregnancies, the state may not conscript women in order to protect another life, whether fetal or not. This is so partly because the notion that women should be coopted in this way is in fact a product of sex discrimination, in the form of third party may do, and what a mother may do, if mentioned at all, is reduced to an afterthought ...".).Issues of sexual inequality are not, however, sufficiently emphasized in those treatments. 
78 This argument is developed in Brief for National Coalition Against Domestic Violence, Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 109 S.Ct. 3040 (1989) (No. 88-605) [hereinafter Webster Briefi and I am grateful to my co-author, David Strauss, with whom most of the ideas in this and succeeding paragraphs were developed. 
An argument to the contrary might stress that statutes directed at biological correlates of sex are less likely to reflect prejudice and stereotyping. There is, after all, a real difference here, and the legislation might be responding sensibly to it. But it is doubtful whether an approach to sex discrimination should be based on an inquiry into whether there are real differences. See C. MACKINNON, supra note 76, at 40 ("Gender might not even code as difference ...were it not for its consequences for social power."). Even if it should be, pregnancy is a particular kind of real difference, one whose exclusive targeting is in fact likely to reflect prejudice or subordination. 
79 Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 
80 See Held, Birth and Death, in FEMINISM AND POLITICAL THEORY (C. Sunstein ed. 1990). impermissible stereotypes about the role of women in society. The history unambiguously supports the claim that restrictions on abortion are closely tied up with traditional and now-impermissible ideas about women's proper role."' 
Two additional factors support this line of argument. First, outside of the abortion context, the government never imposes similar obligations on its citizens, even when human life is uncontroversially at stake.82 In the abortion context, the striking inequality of imposing the burden of bodily cooptation on women alone suggests that the interest in protection of human lifeif invoked as the basis for selective impositions and when pregnancy is involuntary-is inadequate, or can be found adequate only as a result of impermissible sex role stereotypes. 
The second factor is that in the real world, the consequence of a restriction on abortion is not materially to save fetal lives, but instead to lead women to procure dangerous abortions with increased risks to women themselves. The abortion rate has not increased dramatically as a result of the decision in Roe. 3 Indeed, some estimates suggest that before Roe, 5,000 to 10,000 women died per year as a result of incompetently performed, illegal abortions, and that nearly as many abortions were performed before Roe as now." Even if these statistics are overstated, the principal effect of Roe was not to increase fetal deaths, but instead to produce a shift from dangerous to safe abortions.8" If this is so, restrictions on abortion do not materially advance the end of protecting fetal life. 
These arguments have the advantage of making it unnecessary to decide on the moral status of the fetus. Even if the fetus has all of the status of human life, involuntarily pregnant women cannot be conscripted in order to protect it. To put it bluntly: the question is not whether women may kill fetuses but instead whether the state may enlist women's bodies in the protection of third parties, however defenseless. In view of the inequality in the imposition of such burdens, the connection between restrictions on abortion and impermissible stereotypes, and the unlikelihood that such burdens will promote their own purposes, the answer seems to be negative. 
If arguments of this sort are accepted, might government fund childbirth 81 K. LUKER, ABORTION AND THE POLITICS OF MOTHERHOOD 162 (1984) (stating that for those seeking to restrict abortions, "abortion is wrong because by giving women control over their fertility ... it fosters and supports a world view that deemphasizes... the traditional roles of men and women"). The connection is an historical one, rather than a logical or necessary one. 
82 There are no compulsory kidney transplants, for example, even for fathers or mothers. See L. TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1354-55. Of course, no analogy to pregnancy will be precise. 
83 See sources cited infra note 85; See also Webster Brief, supra note 78, at 17-18. 4 Webster Brief, supra note 78, at 19. 
85 See J. BONAR, H. RODMAN, B. SARVIs, THE ABORTION QUESTION 191 (1987); G. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE (forthcoming 1991). but not abortion in cases of rape or incest? If Roe is treated as a case in which government is not permitted to turn biological capacities into social disadvantages, it is hard to see why the abortion right, at least limited to such cases, should not be a right to governmental neutrality. The reason is that the very deneutralizing that underlies Roe itself seems to forbid a distinction between funding and criminalization. A refusal to fund is merely another form of government cooptation. To be sure, the protection of potential life is a legitimate state interest, but if the interest is insufficient to outweigh the right in the criminal context, it is not clear why it suffices in the setting of funding. For cases of rape and incest, a selective funding decision has precisely the consequence of turning women into involuntary incubators. The relevant right is best characterized as akin to the first amendment right to neutrality with respect to point of view.86 If the right is to equal protection, the conscientious objections of the taxpayers should count no more here than in the first amendment context, or in the setting of race or sex discrimination in allocating funds for social security. 
At least this perspective will seem persuasive if funding decisions are not treated as an artificial supplement to a natural or spontaneous social orderthe central instinct behind Harrisv. McRae 8 7 -and if the ideas that gave rise to the regulatory state are taken seriously. Viewed through the lens of the New Deal period, the failure to fund is not inaction at all. It represents a conscious social choice, one that conscripts women in the cause of incubation, rather than simply letting "nature" take its course.' If poverty is seen not as part of nature, but instead as a predictable consequence of a system of collective choices, governmental decisions that turn poverty and biology into a basis for the creation of the status of involuntary incubators seem to run afoul of the equal protection clause. 
The unconstitutional conditions doctrine, nominally designed as an effort to adapt constitutional doctrines to the regulatory state, is rooted in intuitions that are deeply incompatible with the understandings that gave rise to modern government. The doctrine is therefore an anachronism. It is also too crude and too general to provide help in dealing with contested cases. There is no need to ask whether government has subsidized rather than penalized, or threatened rather than offered. We might substitute for those unhelpful and probably unanswerable questions a more direct and constitutionally-grounded inquiry into, first, the nature of the incursion on the rele81 Indeed, a refusal to fund abortion at all, in cases of rape and incest, might raise serious constitutional questions. 
87 448 U.S. 297 (1980). See L. TRIBE, CONSTITUTIONAL CHOICES (1986) (arguing that "those who would outlaw abortion (or who would refuse to fund it) would rely upon economic and physiological circumstances-the supposed dictates of the natural-to conscript women (at least poor women) as incubators"). 
88 See T. POGGE, supra note 28, at 11; L. TRIBE, supra note 2, at 1354. vant right, and second, the legitimacy and strength of the government's justifications for any such incursion. 9 On this view, there will not be one unconstitutional conditions problem, but a variable set of results depending on the nature of the particular constitutional prohibition at issue. 
This reformulation of the problem raised by licensing, employment, and spending programs departs from a model of coercion in favor of a model of reasons. But the reformulation does not by itself resolve concrete cases. In order to accomplish that task, it will be necessary to rely on views about what sorts of rights the Constitution protects, and about what sorts ofjustifications are legitimate and sufficiently weighty. But an unconstitutional conditions doctrine could never be helpful on those issues. The doctrine is neither necessary nor sufficient for their resolution. 
Moreover, the reformulation suggested here need not imply more or fewer occasions for judicial invalidation of legislation. Whether the reformulation leads to more or less invalidation depends on the substantive understandings that are brought to bear in the cases. It would be odd to take the existence of the regulatory state as a reason to apply rational basis review to all measures that burden what might otherwise be seen as constitutional rights. The regulatory state merely provides new and different occasions for constitutional scrutiny. To say that the unconstitutional conditions doctrine is an anachronism is emphatically not to say that all spending, licensing, employment, and regulatory measures will be subject to deferential or no judicial review. 
I have also argued that properly interpreted, the relevant provisions permit government to pay for public but not private schools; allow government to be highly selective in funding art and other expression, subject to a prohibition on viewpoint discrimination; but forbid government from refusing to pay the expenses of abortion in cases of rape and incest, at least if government pays for childbirth in such cases. Whether or not these conclusions are persuasive, the broader point remains. In a mature legal system, one that has adapted to the functions and goals of the modern regulatory state, we will not need, and therefore we will not have, an unconstitutional conditions doctrine. 
89 A characteristic feature of the unconstitutional conditions doctrine-the inquiry into the germaneness of the condition to the program, see generally Sullivan, supra note 3, at 1458-68-should be understood as a means of flushing out impermissible reasons, and of ensuring that legitimate reasons are in fact at work. This task can readily be performed under the reformation suggested here. 
