607 611 611 612 616 618 622 622 625 627 631 631 634 
For the last generation, work in administrative law has generally followed the path marked out by Kenneth Culp Davis' and Louis Jaffe. 2 Judicial review of administrative action has been the principal focus of * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School; Professor ofPolitical Science, University ofChicago. Some of the arguments in this Article also appear, in different form, in C. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION: RECONCEIVING THE REGULATORY STATE (1990). 
the subject, 3 and the control of administrative discretion is its principal goal.4 The central concern of this scholarship has been the development, through judge-made law, of procedural rules to discipline the exercise of power by bureaucrats. 
These topics are of course extremely important. One cannot obtain a complete understanding of the American administrative state without an appreciation of the actual and potential contributions of judicial review. For too long, however, those who study and teach the subject have been unduly preoccupied with the role of the courts and with the question of administrative procedure. More than a half-century after the New Deal, the legal culture continues to lack a solid understanding of the substantive purposes of regulatory programs, the pathologies to which these programs are subject, the forces that bring about those pathologies, and the consequences of regulation for the real world. 
The point is confirmed by the fact that many views on regulation tend to operate as articles of faith. Some have a general sense that regulation has failed; others have a general sense that markets are inadequate and that regulatory controls are usually the solution.5 But the particulars of regulatory performance over the last generation-the questions about underlying values and commitments, questions aimed at discerning what works and what does not-have yet to become a standard part of the repertoire of those who teach and practice administrative law. 
A study of these aspects of governance should be a principal goal of administrative law in the future. Such a study would generate facts and ideas of primary interest to legislators and administrators-the principal architects of administrative law. Of course, it would be surprising if an understanding of regulatory goals and performance did not ultimately affect the practice of judicial review. The effect on the judiciary should, however, be a secondary concern in light of the inevitably derivative and (1982) (constructing a framework for the analysis, evaluation, and development of regulatory programs); Rose-Ackerman, ProgressiveLaw and Economics-And the New Administrative Law, 98 YALE L.J. 341 (1988) (urging broader perspective based on political science and economics). Christopher Edley's recent book helpfully focuses on the question of improved regulation rather than control of discretion; but it too is perhaps unduly preoccupied with the judiciary. See C. EDLEY, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW: RETHINKING JUDICIAL CONTROL OF BUREAUCRACY (1990). 
T. Lowi, THE END OF LIBERALISM (2d ed. 1979). It is not at all clear, however, that administrative agencies perform better when their administrators are deprived of discretion; the absence of solid evidence to this effect makes the preoccupation with discretion particularly puzzling. 
on legal rules for their existence, and those rules are inevitably regulatory. I use these terms to conform to common usage. partial (which is not to say unimportant) role of the courts in administrative law.6 
I approach some of these questions by exploring the general problem of so-called "social" regulation, principally in the areas of health, safety, broadcasting, discrimination, and the environment.7 The purpose of the discussion is to shift the focus away from procedure and instead to obtain a preliminary sense of administrative substance-an area in which, I suggest, we should predict large eventual gains in the study of administrative law. I propose a shift not only from procedure to substance,8 but also from courts to legislators and administrators as the major audience of legal work on administration. I also set forth some general principles by which to operate regulatory systems to control pollution, occupational risk, discrimination, and insufficient quality and diversity in broadcasting. 9 
In the last decade, it has become fashionable to decry the regulatory system that has grown up in response to the consumer, labor, anti-discrimination, and environmental movements of the 1930s, 1960s, and 1970s. Under one quite prominent view, government regulation in these areas is often indefensible in principle-because it amounts to unjustified paternalism or public meddling in private affairs-and is, in any case, intolerable in practice because it predictably makes things worse rather than better. 10 
But this view is myopic. A number of solid arguments justify regulation, and those arguments are not paternalistic at all." Moreover, social regulation has not always failed: it has protected endangered species, theme. See, e.g., S. BREYER & R. STEWART, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND REGULATORY POLICY 910 (2d ed. 1985) ("We have selected a range of examples designed to introduce students to the substance of 'economic regulation'. .. because such examples often will illustrate the interaction of 'substance' and 'procedure' that lead a court or an agency to reach a particular result."); S. BREYER, supra note 3, at 341-68 (discussing regulatory substance); J. MASHAW & D. HARFST, THE STRUGGLE FOR AUTO SAFETY (1990) (analyzing history of auto regulation); G. ROBINSON, E. GELLHORN & H. BRUFF, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS 3-4 (3d ed. 1986) (calling for study of substantive regulatory law). 

(1985) (challenging post-New Deal regulation); Posner, The Social Costs of Monopoly and Regulation, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAL ECONOMY 279 (G. Stigler ed. 1988) (assessing the effects and aggregate social costs ofintervention and public regulation); Williams, Background Norms in the Regulatory State, 58 U. CHI. L. REV. 419, 427-30 (1991) (critically discussing favorable assessment of government intervention). 
PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 3 (1991). reduced discrimination, helped clean up the air and water, and saved many thousands of lives.1 2 To be sure, there have been failures, some of them extremely serious.1 3 But the failures come in identifiable patterns, and they can be avoided in the future. The lessons derived from the' failures should point regulators in new directions-not toward an exclusive reliance on private markets or toward enthusiasm for laissez-faire, but rather toward strategies that will incorporate an understanding of market forces, promote the democratic character of modern government, and increase international competitiveness while minimizing undesirable side-effects and reducing regulatory costs. 
This Article proceeds in four stages. Part II outlines some of the arguments in support of an aggressive regulatory state in the areas of health, safety, civil rights, broadcasting, and environmental protection. These arguments draw on some of the principles that are associated not only with the New Deal, but also with the liberal republicanism that has characterized American public law since its inception. 
Part III describes some of the successes and failures of social regulation, with special emphasis on the reasons for failure. My goals are both to debunk the myth of regulatory failure and to show that the programs that have performed poorly have done so along predictable lines, principally because of the incentives they have created and because of the ways in which they have compromised both democratic and economic goals. 
Part IV outlines new regulatory strategies by which we might increase decentralization, respect for private autonomy, cost-effectiveness, and flexibility in social regulation. Through this discussion, I seek above all to demonstrate that the goals of economic efficiency and of a wellfunctioning democracy can be entirely compatible, indeed mutually reinforcing, across a broad spectrum of regulatory programs. Disclosure and information-producing strategies-strongly favored on economic grounds-also promote the democratic goals of accountability and political self-determination. Economic incentives diminish the power of special interests and ensure that the democratic process focuses on the central question-how much regulation at what cost. Decentralization promotes democratic goals in both private and public spheres. These ideas can be profitably applied to the regulation of labor, the environment, and the broadcasting industry. 
Part V briefly describes how an understanding of regulatory aspiration and regulatory performance might affect judicial review. In this discussion, I set forth principles of statutory interpretation that may be used by courts to reinforce the virtues and minimize the vices of the regulatory state. 
Administrative law is peculiarly concerned with the distribution of social benefits and burdens in such important areas as social security, taxation, the environment, occupational safety and health, employment, nuclear power, energy, and national defense. Large substantive debates will inevitably lurk behind even apparently mundane doctrinal controversies. 
For this reason, any approach to administrative law ultimately rests on quite general substantive choices. Consider, for example, the claim for a presumption against judicial review of administrative inaction. 14 Often this claim is defended by reference to purely institutional concerns. 15 In fact, however, the presumption against judicial review of administrative action stems in large part from a substantive (and highly contested) view that courts should more seriously scrutinize "regulation" than "failure to regulate."' 1 This view implies that courts should be more hospitable to an agency's refusal to implement congressional programs than to its zealousness in the enforcement process. 
Because administrative law inevitably involves substantive choices, the following discussion will depend on some controversial claims about the foundations of American administrative law. I cannot defend these claims at any length. Instead, I propose to explain what they are, to provide a sense of their historical roots, and to show how they draw from a wide range of ideas that might seem contradictory at first glance. The two foundations with which I am concerned are, first, the liberal republicanism that has characterized American public law since the founding period, and, second, the New Deal reformation of the constitutional sys14. See, t.g.H,eckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821, 825-28, 837-38 (1985) (holding that a Food and Drug Administration's decision not to take requested enforcement action was not subject to judicial review). 
(reviewing C. EDLEY, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW: RETHINKING JUDICIAL CONTROL OF BUREAUCRACY (1990)) (arguing that the institutional features offederal courts compel judicial deference on issues of resource allocation). 
of the common law of property, contract, and tort. The failure of a federal regulatory agency to take action does not leave things to the play of free or voluntary forces, but instead gives rise to another (perhaps more just and efficient) regulatory system. This was a prominent theme in the New Deal era. tem, which played such a major role in the inauguration of the administrative state as we know it. 17 
several commitments that are designed to be "important in the world."' 8 Predictably, then, reformers in areas as diverse as labor, the environment, electoral representation, political restructuring, broadcasting, and antidiscrimination law have long invoked the commitments of liberal republicanism in making concrete suggestions for change. 
Among the principles of liberal republicanism, the most important is the belief in political deliberation. 19 In American public law, political outcomes should not merely reflect the aggregated self-interest of wellorganized groups, nor should they protect only antecedent or prepolitical private rights.20 Instead, political outcomes should be produced by an extended process of deliberation and discussion, in which new information and new perspectives are brought to bear. 
Sunstein, Beyond the Republican Revival, 97 YALE L.J. 1539, 1547-58 (1988). In this discussion, liberalism refers to an approach to politics that emphasizes individual freedom and democratic selfgovernment, rather than to the consensus among self-styled "liberals" from 1960 to the present. In the same vein, republicanism refers to a theory of politics that values collective self-determination, political equality, and deliberation, rather than to the views of self-styled "republicans" of the last generation. 
In the American context, liberalism and republicanism cannot be sharply distinguished. Efforts to oppose them transform each position into something that reasonable people would find hard to defend-making liberalism, for example, into a commitment to unbridled interest-group pluralism, and republicanism into a wholesale rejection of rights. 
legal liberalism....[lit has not come to us as part of a powerful critique of anything important in the world." Id. Insofar as republicanism is, broadly speaking, "at one" with the liberalism of Mill, Dewey, and Rawls, and insofar as "legal liberalism" (a most ambiguous idea) can be understood as part of that form of liberalism, he seems entirely correct in recognizing a connection between republicanism and legal liberalism. (Of course, adherents to liberal republicanism would quibble with the word "trapped.") Liberal republicanism does, however, straightforwardly attack three ideas: ( interest-group pluralism; ( American public law; and ( even preferences are neutral or just. See Sunstein, supra note 17, at 1547-58. To this extent, liberal republicanism is indeed a challenge to many things that are important "in the world." No. 10 (J. Madison). 
See, eg., J. PococK, THE MACHIAVELLIAN MOMENT 462-64 (1975). A liberal republican would emphasize that private property is a creation of legal rules, rather than a prepolitical right; but liberal republicanism certainly does not, for this reason, disparage the institution of private property. The traditional liberal strand values private property for its connection with liberty and prosperity. The traditional republican strand views private property as an indispensable guarantee of security and independence from the state. In this sense, private property is a precondition for citizenship, because it protects people from dependence on the will of the sovereign. 
Under this view, the political process should strive to coordinate and reasonably accommodate different values and preferences. But preferences are not taken as prepolitical or static. They are a subject of conversation and debate-as people decide, in politics, about appropriate approaches toward contemporary problems, such as environmental degradation, broadcasting policy, labor-management relations, and racial and sexual discrimination. 21 
Three additional commitments follow from this view of political deliberation. First, liberal republicanism prizes citizenship. It does not require that all decisions be made by town meeting, 22 but it does not view political participation as dispensable in a well-functioning democracy. 23 Liberal republicans seek to ensure that the political process benefits from widespread participation by the citizenry. 24 A system without such participation is, to that extent, a failure. 
Second, liberal republicanism is committed to universalism- agreement as a regulatory ideal for politics. Liberal republicans thus reject the view that political differences are merely matters of perspective, situation, or taste.25 On the contrary, they believe that right answers to political controversy can frequently be identified. Right answers appear as such through the ultimate criterion of agreement, reached by the citizens under appropriate conditions. 26 
The final commitment is to political equality, and here things are more complex. At a minimum, the commitment to political equality prohibits large disparities in the political influence of different social groups. 27 Actual or virtual disenfranchisement of citizens is therefore banned. A guarantee of political equality does not, however, translate into a guarantee of economic equality. Indeed, the political creed of eco21. See Manin, On Legitimacy andPoliticalDeliberation,15 POL. THEORY 338, 340-41 (1987) (discussing the universalist theory of justice that represents the interests ofall members of society by requiring unanimity only for the "larger principles" and not for each individual decision). 
21-22 (J. Madison) (R. Fairfield 2d ed. 1966). 
decisionmaking. See Ackerman, ConstitutionalPolitics/ConstitutionaLl aw, 99 YALE L.J. 453 (1989) (decisionmaking by citizens requires a serious and focused political movement that can convince a majority of fellow citizens of the merits of the proposal, while also giving the opposition the opportunity to launch its own campaign). 
(M. Meyers rev. ed. 1981). 
highly pragmatic concept of agreement constitutes the only criterion for truth. See Dewey, Propositions, WarrantedAssertability, and Truth, 38 J. PHIL. 265 (1941). 
nomic egalitarianism 28 is foreign to the liberal republicanism of American public law. The American tradition rejects egalitarianism because it conflicts with three principal goals of liberal republicanism: promoting liberty; providing incentives for productive work; and rewarding and recognizing individual achievement and excellence. Insofar as regulatory and welfare programs are founded upon egalitarian principles (and they rarely are), they are indeed inconsistent with the liberal republicanism that undergirds American public law. 
At the same time, three narrower conceptions of equality do play an important role in the American administrative state.29 These narrower conceptions, sometimes identified with egalitarianism, spring in fact from quite different foundations. 
The first is a belief in freedom from desperate conditions. 30 No one should be deprived of adequate food, shelter, police protection, or medical care. This principle allows for enormous variations in living standards; it can hardly be classified as egalitarian. It does, however, protect people from falling below a specified floor. 
The second conception is an opposition to caste systems. The American tradition has also traditionally disfavored such systems.31 Even so, some current arrangements (including the social and legal treatment of blacks, women, and the handicapped3 2) continue to retain caste28. I understand the term "egalitarianism" to connote an effort to ensure against large disparities in wealth and resources. 
constitutional provisions reflect ideas that are consistent with these principles (most notably the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and nineteenth amendments), none of these narrower conceptions of political equality can claim an unambiguous constitutional home. 
supra note 17, at 1553 n.75. Roosevelt also endorsed this principle in his Second Bill of Rights. He noted various "economic truths [that] have become accepted as self-evident.... Among these are: The right to a useful and remunerative job...; The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation; ... The right of every family to a decent home; The right to adequate medical care...; [and] The right to adequate protection from the economic fears ofold age, sickness, accident, and unemployment; .... " Roosevelt, Message to the Congresson the Stateof the Union, in 13 THE PUBLIC PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 41 (1969) (speech delivered Jan. 11, 1944). 
American tradition disfavors caste systems, it has not recognized and disapproved ofevery caste system as such. The two most prominent examples-the enslavement of black people and the disenfranchisement of women-reveal that general principles, even if widely held, can be selectively applied. 
and women worse offthan men. See STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 420, 445-62 (110th ed. 1990). In addition, persons who are handicapped continue to face obvious barriers in a world designed by and for the able-bodied. like features. 33 Modem administrative regimes seek to eliminate or to counteract these caste-like systems. 
Finally, liberal republicanism seeks to assure its citizens rough equality of opportunity. 34 Having rejected the egalitarian principle, liberal republicans nonetheless insist that the life prospects of a child born to one family in one part of the country ought not to be radically different from those of another child born to another family elsewhere. It is true that in a liberal society, different families will have different resources, backgrounds, and educations, and -these differences constrain our ability to guarantee equal opportunity. Nonetheless, government can do much to help. It can ensure that education is available to all. It can design regulatory systems that promote awareness and understanding of public issues. It can create training and other programs to give solid prospects to people born in average or below-average conditions. And it can minimize the risk that economic differences will translate into large disparities in the life chances of its citizens. Ideas of precisely this sort form the basis for a number of regulatory programs.3 5 
The commitments of liberal republicanism to deliberation, citizenship, universalism, and political equality draw from a wide range of starting points; this is no sectarian creed. The liberalism of Mill 36 and Rawls 37 is entirely compatible with the account I have offered. Taken seriously, 38 it calls for large-scale changes in existing arrangements. In addition, certain forms of utilitarianism place a high premium on political deliberation, prize political equality, and do not take existing prefer33. On caste and inequality, see Sunstein, Three Civil Rights Fallacies,79 CAL. L. REv. 751 (1991). 

programs. 
MILL, PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY, WITH SOME OF THEIR APPLICATIONS TO SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY (1880) [hereinafter J. MILL, POLITICAL ECONOMY]; J. MILL, THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN (2d ed. 1869). 
for a constitutional democracy, and required to satisfy principles ofjustice, including the difference principle). 
( solely to protect predefined private rights; or ( preservation of the status quo. See M. KELMAN, A GUIDE TO CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES (1987) (treating liberalism as committed to pre-political rights); C. MACKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED: DISCOURSES ON LIFE AND LAW (1987) (describing liberalism as rooted in an indefensible conception of neutrality). No important liberal ever subscribed to any of these ideas. See S. HOLMES, THE ANATOMY OF ANTILIBERALISM (forthcoming 1992) (discussing various mistakes of antiliberals). ences and distributions as the basis for social choice. 39 Thus understood, utilitarianism is fully compatible with the account suggested here. Liberal republicanism is also closely linked to certain forms of pragmatism. For example, John Dewey emphasized a conception of liberty founded on establishing the social preconditions necessary for political deliberation and free preference formation.40 Finally, the contemporary revival of Aristotelianism leads quite naturally to the four commitments that I have identified. This is so especially insofar as the Aristotelian revival derives from a perceived need to create social institutions that allow development of the capabilities of all citizens. 4 1 The fact that liberal republicanism can draw from such a variety of traditions surely adds to its general appeal.42 
administrative law cannot be obtained through a study of liberal republicanism alone. It is also necessary to explore the New Deal reformation of the constitutional framework. 43 For purposes of the present discussion, the central aspect of the New Deal reformation was its attack on the system of laissez-faire. 
For New Deal reformers, the very idea of laissez-faire was misconceived.4 4 It diverted attention from the fact that legal rules were already framework for utilitarianism that does not rest on existing preferences); J. RILEY, LIBERAL UTILITARIANISM: SOCIAL CHOICE THEORY AND J.S. MILL'S PHILOSOPHY (1988) (same). 
stimulates, promotes and consolidates native tendencies so as to produce a certain pattern of desires and purposes."); id. at 140 ("The assumption that desires are rigidly fixed is not one on its face consistent with the history of man's progress from savagery through barbarism to even the present defective state of civilization."); Dewey, Philosophiesof Freedom, in FREEDOM IN THE MODERN WORLD 236, 243 (H. Kallen ed. 1928) ("[Wle may say that a stone has its preferential selections set by a relatively fixed, a rigidly set, structure.... The reverse is true of human action. In so far as a variable life-history and intelligent insight and foresight enter into it, choice signifies a capacity for deliberately changing preferences."); Dewey, The FutureofLiberalism, in DEWEY AND His CRITICS 695, 697 (S.Morgenesser ed. 1977) ("Liberalism knows that social conditions may restrict, distort, and almost prevent the development of individuality. It therefore takes an active interest in the working of social institutions that have a bearing, positive or negative, upon the growth of individuals.... It is as much interested in the positive construction of favorable institutions, legal, political, and economic, as it is in the work of removing abuses and overt oppressions."). 
Democracy, in LIBERALISM AND THE GOOD 203 (N. Douglas, G. Mara & H. Richardson eds. 1990). 
(discussing capacity of the Rawlsian view of liberalism to draw from range of starting points), ConstitutionalismAfter the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REV. 421, 425-30, 508-10 (1987). 
made by nature. They are made by human beings." 1 PUBLIC PAPERS OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 657 (1938). in place, that they did not leave matters alone, and on the contrary that they created a system that sometimes produced both inefficiency and injustice. Far from laissez-faire, the market was constructed by the rules of contract, tort, and property law, and these operated as regulatory controls, benefiting some people while burdening others. The system that preceded the New Deal could not be characterized as "natural" or "prepolitical." It represented a series of social choices embodied in law. 
These propositions did not by themselves justify the rise of the regulatory state. Indeed, the assertion that a system is socially constructed is entirely neutral from the moral point of view-such an assertion does not support change. But the New Dealers also claimed that new regulatory regimes could both promote prosperity and help the disadvantaged.4 5 These claims largely undergirded the creation of the modem administrative state; they provide much of the focus of contemporary controversy in administrative law. 
In many respects, the ideas of the New Deal reformation are highly compatible with liberal republicanism. The major difference lies in the emphatic New Deal insistence that existing distributions of resources must not be taken as natural or just, but assessed on pragmatic grounds, exploring their consequences for economic prosperity and distributive justice.4 6 The modem regulatory system has grown out of this insistence, and the pragmatic assessment of regulatory programs was hardly meant to end in the 1930s. 47 
cartelization, prominent in the early New Deal, was notoriously unsuccessful on pragmatic grounds. See E. HAWLEY, THE NEW DEAL AND THE PROBLEM OF MONOPOLY (1966). 
pragmatism and willingness to experiment). 
pragmatic and liberal, not "postliberal" or "postmodem." The reforms that have followed, or will follow, have not and need not take postmodern form. Although I agree with much of Christopher Edley's contribution to this symposium, my uneasiness with some ofit stems from his enthusiasm for postmodernism in law. In this discussion, I restrict myself to some brief observations on this complex issue. For a more extended discussion, see M. NUSSBAUM, Sophistry About Conventions, in LOVE'S KNOWLEDGE 220 (1990). 
First, in order to be worth holding, any position on law and politics must be justified by reference to reasons. We should not restrict ourselves to a narrow or strictly Cartesian category of "reasons," but a view unsupported by reasons is unlikely to deserve serious consideration. The postmodern position, however, appears to reject the process of reason-giving altogether, referring instead to "play," "conventions," or "power." See, eg., J. DERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY 50 (G. Spivak trans. 1976) (play); S. FISH, DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY: CHANGE, RHETORIC, AND THE PRACTICE OF THEORY IN LITERARY AND LEGAL STUDIES (1989) (conventions); M. FouCAULT, POWER/KNOWLEDGE: SELECTED INTERVIEWS AND OTHER WRITINGS, 1972-1977 (C. Gordon ed. 1981) (power). In law and politics, this substitution ensures that postmodernists "can give no account of the normative foundations of [their] own rhetoric." J. HABERMAS, THE PHILOSOPHICAL DISCOURSE OF MODERNITY: TWELVE LECTURES 294 (F. Lawrence trans. 1986). 
(Some of) The Limits of Markets 
No industrialized democracy does or could operate without a substantial regulatory state. To be sure, private markets usually promote 
Second, a healthy recognition of the constructed or contingent character of most of the social world points in no particular direction. In its logic, it need hardly be allied with desirable social movements. In its logic, it points nowhere at all. 
Third, the fact that there is no wholly external point of view-no place, outside the world, from which to view the world-does not lead to the conclusion that we are left in an abyss or with the endless free play of conflicting perspectives. See M. NUSSBAUM, supra, at 225-27. Instead, the absence of a wholly external perspective means simply that participants in law and politics must discuss what they always have: the effects of different systems on the lives of human beings who are affected by law and politics. As long as metaphysics do not intrude, truth and objectivity are not dispensable concepts in this endeavor. 
Fourth, stability is not intrinsically bad, and fluidity is not intrinsically good. The value of change depends on the particular subject of change. To the extent that postmodernism prizes fluidity and transformation, independently of substance, it will often point in the wrong direction. See R. UNGER, FALSE NEcEssrr (1987) (praising "context smashing"). 
Fifth, the postmodern approach relies too heavily on abstract claims of contingency and constructedness, and focuses too little on developing specific substantive remedies for injustice and inefficiency in existing systems. See, eg., Schlag, Normativity and the Politicsof Form, 139 U. PA. L. REv. 801 (1991). For example, the relationship between postmodernism and contemporary racial inequality is quite obscure. How the former can help us understand or remedy the latter remains to be explained. 
Sixth, the postmodern approach tends, wrongly, to disparage instrumental rationality, which is critically important in bringing about effective change in the real world. Problems such as homelessness and discrimination require, for their solution, efforts grounded in instrumental reason. 
Seventh, postmodernism attempts to consolidate two positions that are actually quite incompatible. The first position, rooted in Heidegger and reflected in Derrida, attacks Western thought for positing a reality below "surface" appearances. See J. DERRIDA, supra. According to this view, below the surface appearances lie simply more surfaces. The second position, rooted in Marx and having clear echoes in Foucault, attempts to "unmask" thought and practices that conceal oppression, injustice, or the exercise of power. See M. FOUCAULT, DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH: THE BIRTH OF THE PRISON (A. Sheridan trans. 1977). The task of unmasking necessarily implies the unveiling of a deeper truth or reality. The rejection of any underlying "reality" (a profoundly antipolitical view) does not allow for the notions of exposure or unmasking. Together, these two positions produce a range of confusions. See Schlag, "Le Hors de Texte, C'est No:" The Politics of Form, I1 CARDOZO L. REv. 1631 (1990). 
Finally, the postmodern approach depends on a critique of metaphysical realism that has been put forth more persuasively, and with more careful attention to its implications, by Dewey, James, Putnam, and Wittgenstein, among others. See J. DEWEY, EXPERIENCE AND NATURE (1926); W. JAMES, PRAGMATISM: A NEw NAME FOR SOME OLD WAYS OF THINKING (1928); H. PUTNAM, REASON, TRUTH AND HISTORY (1981); L. WrrrGENSTEIN, PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS (1953). The most valuable claims here tend to come from pragmatism, and not from postmodernism. 
The most general way to connect these points is to suggest that the tasks of administrative law include many things: the correction of failures in the market for product safety; the creation of a stable system for the regulation of financial markets; the development of an energy policy that will encourage domestic production; the provision of medical care to the poor and the elderly; the regulation of unsafe conditions in the airline industry and the streets; the elimination of racial and sexual discrimination; the protection against international environmental problems such as the destruction of the ozone layer and global warming; the incorporation of disabled people into a society built for the able-bodied; the control of carcinogens in the workplace without high unemployment or financial individual freedom and economic welfare. Sometimes, however, private markets fail to provide either.4 8 When markets fail, democratic controls are the only viable option. Although the arguments for social regulation are quite straightforward, they have often been derided in the last decade, particularly by the Reagan and Thatcher Administrations, as well as welfare economists and others who invoke pre-New Deal principles of private right.49 It is therefore worthwhile to provide a brief outline of the reasons for social regulation. In outlining those reasons, I make no claim to special originality. My goal is simply to categorize some of the foundations for regulatory controls. 
Sometimes markets fail simply because consumers lack necessary information. For example, the market often fails to provide enough information about the risks posed by carcinogens in the workplace, in food, and in drugs. Economic markets often underproduce information, because information has some of the characteristics of a public good. 50 In such cases, regulation might remedy the problem. Through supplying information, the government also bolsters the democratic process and promotes public education. Government programs can simultaneously encourage freedom of choice and protect health and lives. 
Markets also fail when they do not take full account of the costs that private conduct imposes on other people. Pollution is an obvious example.51 Environmental damage imposes severe costs, and these costs fall on numerous people. But the persons injured (not just living adults, but children and members of future generations as well) lack the knowledge and organization to bring suit or otherwise seek redress. In these situations, a regulatory response, which forces those who produce harm to pay for it and ultimately to eliminate or to reduce it, is entirely justified.5 2 
Somewhat more subtly, government controls can sometimes facilitate an outcome that people want but cannot obtain in the marketplace. costs; and the regulation of toxic chemicals in the air and water. The role of such concepts as "paradox," "bricolage," "meaning on the fly," or "Neurath's boat" in addressing these problems remains something of a puzzle. See Edley, supra note 3, at 594 (quoting Michelman, Postmodern Constitutionalism (unpublished manuscript)). 
complexities, see C. SUNSTEIN, supra note *, at 55-57, 61-64. 
50-51 (1988). 
medicinal, agricultural, educational, and recreational benefits to human beings. 
causation that disregard some complex issues. The "victims" of pollution should sometimes be treated as causal actors, if they could have avoided the harm at low cost. See Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3 J. L. & ECON. 1 (1960) (discussing reciprocal nature of causation). For example, people may want a recycling program provided that everyone participates. They may not, however, be willing to recycle on their own unless they know that everyone will participate. A world in which everyone recycles can thus be obtained only with governmental help. A governmentally mandated recycling program can satisfy private wishes far better than the market, which is of course incapable of mandating universal recycling. In this way, government can solve collective action problems and prisoner's dilemmas.5 3 
This point helps support government controls, not only in the environmental arena, but in energy conservation, automobile safety, and other areas. In these settings, governmental coordination of private behavior structures and organizes private choices, and should not be seen as rejecting them. 
These arguments for regulation involve standard cases of market failure. Even those who are firmly committed to laissez-faire should accept them in principle.5 4 But even where efficiency arguments provide little or no support for regulation, democratic principles often support government action. Sometimes the strongest arguments for regulation sound in democracy rather than efficiency. For example, people often desire political outcomes that are different from and even inconsistent with their preferences as consumers.5 5 Some people favor stringent environmental laws even though they rarely venture outdoors; others support the protection of endangered species even though they do not personally benefit from the existence of those species; still others seek laws that forbid race and sex discrimination even though their own behavior is hardly race- or gender-neutral. As citizens, people frequently support government regulation that diverges from their behavior as consumers.5 6 modem states elect rules that solve coordination and collective action problems). 
POLITICAL ECONOMY, supra note 36, notwithstanding Mill's celebrated opposition to paternalism and his insistence that the only legitimate basis for government intervention is to prevent harm to others. See J. MILL, ON LIBERTY (1885) (characterizing intervention as generally counter to liberty interests). 
(discussing citizen preferences); Sen, RationalFools: A Critique of the BehavioralFoundationsof Economic Theory, in BEYOND SELF-INTEREST 25 (. Mansbridge ed. 1990) (arguing against economic models based on egotistic behavior). 
choice because voters, unlike consumers, do not fully realize that they must bear the costs of programs they support. This explanation has some plausibility, but it is far too crude and general. For one thing, it fails to recognize that people, in their capacity as citizens, may seek to implement their highest or most altruistic goals through government. Social and cultural norms often pressure people, as citizens, to be concerned about the welfare of others and to care about the public interest. A liberal republic should not disparage these concerns. See Elster, Sefishness and Altruism, in 
Similarly, political action can and sometimes should overcome existing private preferences and beliefs. Preferences, desires, and beliefs do not exist in a vacuum; they often adapt to existing legal rules and social practices. Without the possibility of government action, current practices sometimes seem intractable, and people resign themselves to them.57 People adapt their behavior and even their desires and beliefs to the status quo. In such cases, there is a serious obstacle to political freedom. Freedom consists not merely in satisfying one's desires, but also in ensuring that desires are not formed under unjust conditions, or under circumstances that impede their free development.5 8 This concept of freedom is highly congenial to American public law.59 
If people can act in concert through government, they can remove some of these obstacles. Social movements that involve the environment, labor, employment, poverty, anti-discrimination, and occupational health and safety are conspicuous examples. Through the process of collective action, government can counteract constraints on preference formation. 
Considerations of democracy therefore support regulatory programs even when the claims of economic efficiency do not. Regulation may also be justified as a means of increasing opportunities when markets fail to provide them in sufficient numbers. Government can protect the background conditions for private choice by ensuring sufficient diversity to prevent existing arrangements from constraining preference formation. 6° BEYOND SELF-INTEREST, supra note 55, at 44; Jencks, Varieties of Altruism, in BEYOND SELFINTEREST, supra note 55, at 53. The collective character of politics helps to explain this phenomenon. People may seek to achieve altruistic aspirations only if they are assured that other citizens will do so as well. 
(preferences underlying a choice may be shaped by unjust constraints); A. SEN, supra note 41 (same); Nussbaum, supra note 41, at 203 (discussing a social democracy that provides for "good human functioning," political mechanisms to support its citizens, and institutional arrangements that redefine the concept of private ownership). Much empirical data confirms the claim that preferences adapt to existing entitlements. See, eg., Kahneman, Knetch & Thaler, ExperimentalTests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. POL. ECON. 1325 (1990) (arguing that the minimum compensation necessary to entice an individual to give up an existing entitlement may greatly exceed the maximum price that the same individual would be willing to pay for the entitlement); Knetch, The Endowment Effect and Evidence of NonreversibleIndifference Curves, 79 AM. ECON. REV. 1277 (1989) (arguing that preferences are affected by the status quo). 
markets and to impede preference formation. Government controls are necessary to eliminate these caste-like characteristics. See Sunstein, Why Markets Don't Stop Discrimination, 8 Soc. PHIL. & POL. 22 (1991). 

L.J. 1537, 1560-66 (1983) (discussing need to provide conditions for free formation of preferences). In this discussion, I do not address the view that regulation sometimes redistributes resources to For example, some people may not value environmental diversity or endangered species simply because the market does not provide them in sufficiently visible places. A regulatory response is entirely appropriate. 
All of this suggests that notwithstanding the frequent objection that governmental regulation is "paternalistic" or insufficiently respectful of private choice,6 1 substantial regulatory controls are often fully justified. First: In cases of inadequate information, harms unaccounted for by the market, and governmental coordination of private behavior, regulation sometimes facilitates the satisfaction of private desires and does not reject individual choice. Second: Regulation can vindicate democracy by protecting collective aspirations and altruistic goals that override the outcomes of markets. This hardly constitutes an objectionable interference with freedom. Third: Government can properly play a role in increasing available opportunities and information, and in doing so it can improve market outcomes. This is so even in a system that prizes (as all systems should) private property, freedom of contract, and other voluntary arrangements. 
How effective has regulation proved in practice? In fact the record shows many successes. 62 Despite its popularity, the view that social regulation has generally failed is far too crude. In numerous areas-including environmental protection, automobile safety, civil rights, and the protection of endangered species-regulation has resulted in substantial improvements. 
A notable example is the effort to reduce air pollution. Since 1970, both the levels and emissions of all major pollutants in the United States-including sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and lead-have substantially decreased. 63 In addition, the vast majority of counties in the United States now comply with national air quality goals with respect to groups or individuals with (or without) a good claim to them. For a brief discussion of this view, see C. SUNSTEIN, supra note *, at 55-57, 61-64. 

STANDARDS, NATIONAL AIR POLLUTANT EMISSION ESTIMATES 2 (1990). Lead reductions have been especially dramatic. The ambient concentration of lead decreased no less than 94% between 1975 and 1981. See Table 1 infra. The effort to reduce transportation emissions has also been remarkably siccessful. Transportation emissions have been reduced from 122.6 million metric tons in 1975 to merely 3.5 million in 1986. CONSERVATION FOUNDATION, STATE OF THE ENVIRONMENT: A VIEW TOWARD THE NINETIES 152-53 (1987). Consider the following data: all major pollutants. 64 Although substantial room remains for improvement, air in the United States is much cleaner and healthier than it would have been without regulatory controls. 
Water pollution control has also achieved significant gains. The Great Lakes are much cleaner than they were in 1965, when hundreds of SOURCES: COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ANNUAL REPORT 1987-88, 351 (Table 3-4) (1989); COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, 20TH ANNUAL REPORT, 469 (Table 41) (1991). 
COMMENTS: Nitrogen dioxide contributes to acid deposition as well as causing adverse health effects. TSP is a measure of overall concentrations of particulate matter in the air. Lead causes a variety of adverse health effects. Nitrogent dioxide and TSP reductions have been relatively modest. SOURCES: COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ANNUAL REPORT 1987-88, 351 (Table 3-4) (1989); COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 20TH ANNUAL REPORT, 469 (Table 41) (1991). 
COMMENTS: Sulfur dioxide contributes to acid deposition and visibility impairment. All three of these pollutants cause additional adverse health effects. The data suggests that legislation has been fairly successful at reducing the ambient concentrations of each of these pollutants, although it is not clear that the reductions reached predicted levels. All three have declined steadily over the last eleven years, most notably sulfur dioxide. 
TWENTIETH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 8-9 (1990) (discussing environmental trend data and noting several pollutants that have been reduced to meet national health standards in most areas of the country). area. beaches had to be closed. 65 The reductions in levels of DDT, PCB, and dieldrin contaminants in Great Lake fish have been especially dramatic. 66 A number of harmful nutrients have been reduced by nearly fifty percent in national rivers. 67 Lead levels in our waters have also been significantly reduced. 68 As a result, many rivers are much cleaner on balance, including the Potomac, the Hudson, and parts of the Mississippi. 69 
Regulatory successes have not been limited to the environment. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has produced gains for blacks, including decreases in employment discrimination based on race. 70 Similar gains have been achieved in combatting sex discrimination. 7 1 
Several other regulatory programs impressively accomplished their goals. For example, the automobile safety regulations promulgated in the late 1960s and early 1970s 72 have prevented numerous injuries and saved lives. According to one estimate, automobile fatalities would have been about forty percent higher in 1983 if not for governmental controls.73 In addition, an estimated 34,000 lives were saved between 1966 and 1974 as a result of occupant safety standards. 74 The annual benefits of automobile regulation are extremely high-estimated at over $10 billion.75 Moreover, there is a favorable ratio of benefits to costs in this 76 supra note *, at 77. 
318 
To emphasize regulatory successes is not to deny that regulation has frequently failed. In some cases, regulatory controls have accomplished little or nothing. In others, regulation has imposed enormously high costs for speculative benefits. Moreover, regulation has sometimes aggravated the very problem that it was designed to solve. 77 Regulatory strategies often produce insufficient benefits, and sometimes they create affirmative harm. 
For example, between 1972 and 1985 the United States spent over $632 billion for pollution control.7 8 Some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at nearly one-half the cost.7 9 Some of OSHA's regulations impose enormous costs for uncertain gains.80 The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has promulgated only seven regulations to control toxic substances in the air,81 and numerous substances remain uncontrolled. By delaying the entry of beneficial drugs into the market, the Food and Drug Administration has dramatically increased risks to life and health in some settings.8 2 
Regardless of how the gains and losses from social regulation are valued, there can be little doubt that there is far too much government regulation in some areas, and far too little in others.83 Even more fundahave also saved lives cheaply. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) regulation of trihalomethanes saves a life at only $315,000. The Consumer Product Safety Commission's mandatory smoke detector rule costs between $0 and $85,000 for every life saved. See C. SUNsTEIN, supra note *, at app. B, for an outline and discussion. 
Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENvTL. L. 171, 177 (1988) (citing OFFICE OF POLICY PLANNING AND EVALUATION, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, THE COST OF CLEAN AIR AND WATER (1984)). 
POLICY 41-45 (1985) (six of eight studies that compared command-and-control allocation with lowcost allocation found that command-and-control pollution programs cost 78% more than necessary). 
expensive workplace regulations have produced no discernible improvements for workers. See W. VISCUSI, RISK BY CHOICE: REGULATING HEALTH AND SAFETY IN THE WORKPLACE 25-36 (1983). Moreover, the entire pattern of OSHA carcinogen regulation is questionable. Some regulations cost up to $40 million per life saved; at the same time, many carcinogenic hazards remain completely unregulated. See J. MENDELOFF, THE DILEMMA OF TOXIC SUBSTANCE REGULATION 21-24 (1988) (cost per cancer death prevented, with regard to vinyl chloride, is $40 million (in 1985 dollars)). 
Clean Air Act, 63 N.Y.U. L. REV. 612, 613-14 (1988). 
29-47 (1983) (discussing the slower rate of pharmaceutical innovation as a result of government regulation and citing several studies that support this claim). 
serious problems. These problems are especially severe insofar as we rely, as economists usually do, mentally, in many areas the question is not whether the level of government regulation is appropriate, but whether the government has chosen the suitable strategies to accomplish its goals. 84 
I have discussed cases in which regulation has been both inefficient and ineffective. From the standpoint of democracy, regulation has frequently failed as well. First, education about the nature and level of risks in the environment and in the workplace has not been a high priority for regulators. On this score, the public is poorly informed and thus extremely ill-served. Partly because of the absence of education and disclosure, public participation and real accountability on questions of regulation have not characterized the rise of modern bureaucracy. Instead, sensational but misleading anecdotes and interest-group pressures have played a far too prominent role. 
Second, the centralization of policy in national bureaucracies diminishes the prospects for local decisionmaking in the private or public sector. Local decisions inculcate a sense of responsibility in citizens and encourage participation far more effectively than centralization. The current system unnecessarily sacrifices the values of federalism. on some version of private "willingness to pay" as the basis for assessing costs and benefits. As I have noted, social regulation is often based on the values reflected in democratic aspirations rather than on private consumption choices. See supra notes 57-61 and accompanying text. In these cases, valuing costs and benefits by private willingness to pay can produce perverse results, because this process measures the worth of democratic aspirations by reference to the very consumption choices that democracy attempts to override. 
Moreover, the conversion of diverse social goods into a dollar value may poorly reflect citizens' considered judgments about regulatory outcomes. For example, economic "use value" may inappropriately value the interest in beaches, streams, and animals. Economic valuations of these resources may do violence to the way that these resources are, or should be, experienced. On the other hand, tradeoffs in regulation are inevitable, and resolving tradeoffs without reference to economic considerations is usually most difficult. 
Finally, willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay. In a world with an unequal distribution of income and wealth, it will be controversial to assert that government policy should be determined by how much people are able to pay for things such as environmental quality and occupational safety and health. For more discussion of these issues, see M. NUSSBAUM, LOVE'S KNOWLEDGE: ESSAYS ON PHILOSOPHY AND LITERATURE 56-66 (1990) (discussing diversity of social goods); C. TAYLOR, PHILOSOPHY AND THE HUMAN SCIENCES 230, 243 (1985) (same); Anderson, Values Risks, and Market Norms, 17 PHIL. & Pun. AFF. 54, 57-59 (1987) (democratic willingness to spend money to avoid certain risks is based on considered judgment that public responsibility is greater in some situations than in others). 
Notwithstanding these problems, cost-benefit analysis can be an exceptionally useful tool to compare the advantages and disadvantages of regulatory strategy. It can reveal when the gains of regulation are far greater than the losses, or when the reverse is true. And it is striking to see that a comparison of costs and benefits often shows that social regulation has been successful. See supra notes 62-76 and accompanying text. 
498 (1990) (discussing shift towards incentive-oriented policy instruments to achieve public policy goals). 
Finally, the current regulatory framework does not focus national attention on the central issues-the appropriate nature, extent, and level of risk reduction. Instead, Congress centers its efforts on obscure or incomprehensible questions. The combined effects of lack of publicity and education, nationalization, and failure to focus on the central issues of regulatory policy have severely compromised the democratic goals of American public law. 
The preceding examination of the regulatory state reveals a range of successes and failures. Prevention of the failures is a central challenge for those concerned about improving the system for the future. In meeting this challenge, the first step is to identify the sources of failure. 
A number of factors are relevant here: the government's inability to coordinate different programs that cover related aspects of the same problem; Congress's unwillingness to understand that regulatory programs involve complex tradeoffs among competing social goals; interest group "capture" of the regulatory process (an important but overstated phenomenon); and failure on the part of agencies to deal with regulatory obsolescence over time. But an especially pervasive and often overlooked problem is structural. It involves the creation of poor incentives, rather than the hiring of opportunistic or susceptible administrators. Above all, social regulation is pervaded by strategies that have unanticipated systemic consequences, that deal with the symptoms rather than the causes of social problems, that direct attention to the wrong places, and that are insufficiently sensitive to the pressures that they impose on regulators and the private sector. 
A large source of regulatory failure in the United States is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized "command-and-control" regulation. The resulting programs dictate national control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or even millions of companies and individuals in an exceptionally diverse nation. Command-and-control regulation is a dominant part of American government in such areas as environmental protection and occupational safety and health. 
In the environmental context, command-and-control approaches usually take the form of regulatory requirements of the "best available technology" (so-called BAT requirements).85 BAT strategies pervade do require innovation. See B. ACKERMAN & W. HASSLER, CLEAN COAL/DIRTY AIR: OR How THE CLEAN AIR ACT BECAME A MULTIBILLION-DOLLAR BAIL-OUT FOR HIGH-SULPHUR COAL PRODUCERS AND WHAT SHOULD BE DONE ABOUT IT (1981). Technology-forcing has often accomplished considerable good. The major drawback of technology-forcing is that government is federal law. Indeed, they are a defining characteristic of the regulation of the air, water, and workplace conditions.8 6 
One of the many problems with BAT strategies is that they systematically ignore the enormous differences among plants, industries, and geographical areas in the United States. In view of these differences, nationally uniform technological requirements are wildly inefficient. It does not seem sensible to impose identical technological requirements on diverse industries-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. 
The problems go deeper still. BAT requirements usually apply only to new entrants in the market. By requiring all new industries to adopt costly technology while allowing existing plants and industries to conform to more lenient standards, BAT strategies penalize new products. In this way, they discourage investment and perpetuate old, dirty technology. In the environmental arena, for example, BAT strategies discourage new pollution control technologies by requiring that industries adopt new technology for no financial gain. Under the BAT approach, a company that innovates in this area will simply have to invest more in pollution control. BAT requirements punish such companies for their development of new control technology, rather than rewarding them. In addition, BAT strategies are extremely expensive to enforce, imposing extraordinary monitoring burdens on agencies that employ them. 87 
Perhaps worse, by focusing on the technology at the end of the pipe, BAT strategies are aimed at superficial symptoms rather than underlying causes of pollution. For example, the EPA has forced coal-fired power plants to adopt costly "scrubbing" strategies to deal with sulfur dioxide emissions that cause acid rain.8 8 A far better approach would use financial incentives to encourage American consumers and industries to increase energy conservation and efficiency, and to shift to cleaner, renewable fuels. usually not in the best position to judge the amount of technological advance that is realistic or desirable. A good portion of these programs depends on government guesswork. 
"degree of emission limitation achievable through the application of the best system of emission reduction"); Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1316(a)( available demonstrated control technology"); Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, 29 U.S.C. § 655(b)(5) (1988) (standard should reflect "latest available scientific data in the field"). In my criticisms here, I draw on the helpful discussion in Ackerman & Stewart, Reforming EnvironmentalLaw: The DemocraticCasefor Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENVTL. L. 171 (1988). 
THE PRESIDENT TO THE CONGRESS ON OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH FOR FISCAL YEAR 1988 xiv (1990) ($151,702,000 out of total OSHA 1988 fiscal year budget of $235,474,000 allocated to federal and state enforcement). 
VCol. 1991:607] 
Most fundamentally, the BAT approach is severely deficient from the standpoint of a well-functioning political process. BAT strategies ensure that citizens and representatives will focus their attention on largely incidental and nearly impenetrable questions about currently available technologies, rather than on the appropriate levels of reduction.8 9 Technological debates are singularly ill-suited for democratic resolution. They also distract attention from the central issue of determining the appropriate degree and nature of regulatory protection. Moreover, the focus on "means" increases the power of well-organized private groups, by allowing them to use regulation to serve their own parochial ends. The promotion of ethanol (helpful to corn farmers although not necessarily to environmental protection) and scrubbers (helpful to the eastern coal industry although not necessarily to air quality) are prominent examples of interest group influence on BAT-focused systems. 
In these respects, BAT strategies are emblematic of a large problem in current regulation. Centralization at the national level diminishes opportunities for citizen participation; it also promotes struggles among well-organized factions. The focus on technological details and sensational incidents ensures that public education about risk levels and risk comparisons will be incomplete and episodic. These characteristics of contemporary administrative law fall far short of guaranteeing democratic control over decisions about how best to characterize and to achieve social goals. 
Another problem, reflected well in BAT strategies, is the creation of what we might call paradoxesof the regulatorystate.90 These paradoxes occur when programs turn out to be self-defeating, in the sense that they bring about results that are precisely opposite of those intended. As noted, regulation that requires the best available technology actually discourages technological development. By imposing expensive requirements on companies that develop better pollution control equipment, BAT strategies stifle actions that could lead to enormous gains in cleaning up the environment. 
Much American regulation (including BAT strategies) also embodies the paradox created by the idea that especially stringent controls should be imposed on new sources of pollution, and that existing industries should be regulated leniently or not at all. This is a strategy that existing industries favor, since it allows regulation to stifle new competition. The paradox arises because a decision to regulate only new health and safety risks will perpetuate old risks, and ultimately impair health 
institutions). and safety. New risk strategies increase the costs of new sources and products, encourage consumers to resort to older sources and practices, and perpetuate the use of old, especially dirty facilities (like power plants) and products (like automobiles). 91 Existing industries can be expected to favor these types of strategies, but the reasons for doing so bear no relation to rational regulatory outcomes. 
A final regulatory paradox, also embodied in BAT approaches, is that strict government controls, and legal requirements that forbid tradeoffs, produce underregulation as well as overregulation. Strict regulation-applied universally without regard to the diversity of the regulated class-will, of course, bring about overregulation of some of those who are subject to regulatory requirements. The substances that are regulated will be stringently controlled-in all likelihood too stringently, forcing people to incur exceptionally high costs for speculative gains. 92 
Ironically-and here is the paradox-stringent controls produce underregulation as well. The threat of draconian regulatory requirements gives industries powerful incentives to fight regulation wherever they can, and gives agencies a powerful incentive not to promulgate or enforce them. If Congress requires any regulation mandating multi-million dollar expenditures that will save but one life per year, the agency will predictably promulgate stringent, but few, regulations. 
It should therefore come as no surprise that despite (or, better, because of) the stringency of the relevant laws, the government has regulated only seven toxic air pollutants (out of hundreds), 93 fewer than a dozen toxic water pollutants (again, out of hundreds),94 and until relatively recently, only ten toxic substances in the workplace 95 (even though the private organization that performed some of OSHA's functions had for several years recommended lower exposure limits for hundreds of chemicals 96). 
The picture that emerges from this discussion is not a simple one. In some areas, government regulation has produced significant improve91. See R. CRANDALL, H. GRUENSPECHT, T. KEELER & L. LAVE, supra note 73, at 89. For instance, a good way to increase automobile pollution in the short run is to impose extremely costly pollution control requirements on new cars. Some existing motor vehicle regulations do precisely that. See, eg., 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 7521-7554 (West Supp. 1991) (establishing new motor vehicle emission and fuel standards). 

43943 (1990). 
ments. In others, regulation has been counterproductive, ineffectual, overly costly, or nonexistent. 
The failings of regulation need not be attributed to legislative ignorance or irrationality; some of the problems quite plausibly result from the self-interest of affected groups or of legislators themselves. For example, a decision to regulate new risks, while leaving old ones unaffected, may be a mechanism by which existing industries use regulation to prevent new competition. In addition, technology-based regulation provides a system whereby industry can slow down regulation; such strategies are vulnerable to plausible lawsuits proclaiming that existing technology is quite primitive. Moreover, legislators can claim credit for enacting stringent protections, while assuring industry that it will not in fact be regulated at all, because any resulting regulation would be too draconian to be enforceable. In these respects, regulatory failures can often be understood as a predictable legislative response to the various forces imposed on legislators. 
In any case, faulty structures have caused many of the failures: measures that do not take account of the incentive effects of government strategies, address only part of complex problems, focus on symptoms rather than causes, and publicize misleading anecdotes rather than educating the public and benefitting from its involvement in the regulatory process. 
This account of regulatory performance should help produce a set of entirely feasible reform strategies. Above all, new strategies would seek to ensure that regulation is efficient and effective, in the sense that the programs would promote their own purposes at reasonable costs. These reforms would also promote democratic goals, by ensuring accountability, visibility, and participation in the administrative process. There is no reason to believe that these strategies cannot be implemented through existing institutions. In fact, Congress and administrative agencies have already moved in precisely this direction. 97 Legislative incentives will sometimes push toward the status quo, but recent history shows that there is no reason to believe that this is an insuperable problem. 
At the most general level, an examination of regulatory performance demonstrates that regulators should pay attention to the incentive effects of regulatory statutes. Policymakers should be aware of the possibility of [V/ol. 1991:607 strategic or self-interested adaptation by administrative agencies or by members of the regulated classes. The failures of many existing strategies were perfectly predictable responses to the often-counterintuitive incentives created by those strategies. 98 
Regulators should encourage industry to address harms at their source. In general, regulators should adopt strategies that will reduce the introduction of dangerous substances, instead of merely controlling substances that have already been introduced. In this regard, strategies that leave the means of obtaining reduction to industry, rather than specifying them in detail, will prove most effective in eliminating social harms. Rather than imposing complex technological requirements on pollutants as they exit the tailpipe, it would be best to eliminate lead and other dangerous pollutants from gasoline before they enter the tank. Pollution prevention, rather than technological fixes, should guide environmental policy.9 9 
Moreover, Congress should provide industries with incentives that favor regulation, where this is desired, rather than giving them reason to oppose government controls. Existing law makes regulation extremely costly for industry and puts an enormous premium on countermeasures and delay. The best way to ensure that regulations will be issued is to create incentives for industry to favor them. This strategy allows the burden of inertia to work for the establishment of safety levels rather than against it. In the area of toxic substances, for example, regulators might (as California currently does 10) require industries to disclose the existence of risks to the public until a regulation has been issued that establishes that the risks are insignificant. Unfortunately, however, most existing law creates powerful incentives for inaction and delay.101 See Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAL ECONOMY, supra note 10, at 209 (on the interaction of party politics and industry regulation); Pashigian, EnvironmentalRegulation: Whose Self-InterestsAre Being Protected?, in CHICAGO STUDIES IN POLITICAL ECONOMY, supra note 10, at 498 (elevating the role of self-interest in explaining the regulation of stationary sources). The evidence does not, however, clearly support this view. See R. ARNOLD, THE LOGIC OF CONGRESSIONAL ACTION 225 (1990) (asserting that congressional action in energy regulation cannot be explained through standard interest group or ideological models; such action has resulted from complex interaction among citizen, expert, and politician attitudes and restructuring of legislative situations by coalition leaders). 
(1990). Pollution prevention is, however, undesirable when the pollutant in question cannot feasibly be eliminated, or when its elimination will produce ancillary social losses that outweigh the benefits. 
179 (1989). For a good critical discussion, see Stenzel, Right-to-Know ProvisionsofCalifornia'sProposition 65: The Naivete of the Delaney Clause Revisited, 15 HARV. ENV. L. REV. 493 (1991). 
Regulatory reform can directly incorporate the lessons of regulatory failure. A general first step would be to adopt a strong presumption in favor of flexible, market-oriented, incentive-based regulatory strategies. This principle means that Congress and administrators should impose costs on people who engage in harmful activity, and should allow the market, rather than bureaucracies, to decide how that activity will be diminished. Such an approach would make it more likely that regulation will increase efficiency, promote its own purposes, and-by focusing public attention on the right questions-further democratic goals as well. 
Incentive-based systems should focus on ends, defined in terms of the number of lives saved or the amount of pollution reduced, rather than on the means of achieving those ends. 10 2 Means (and technologies) are best left to the market, not to bureaucrats. This strategy would also avoid the numerous difficulties found in systems that require government to establish specific technological requirements for industry. 10 3 Ideally, the democratic process would impose appropriate penalties, in the form of taxes designed to discourage and reduce the risks after determining what the level of risk reduction should be. 
An advantage of a shift in emphasis from means to ends would be that citizens and representatives would decide the central questions of how much pollution reduction there should be, and at what cost, rather than resolving incidental and often incomprehensible questions of what "technology" is "best." The current system stifles democratic engagement in regulatory choices by entangling public processes in debates of the latter sort. The fixation on means also creates incentives for interest groups to ensure that they are favored in the legislature or in the bureaucracy. By contrast, a system of disclosure and financial penalties allows little room for interest-group maneuvering. In this respect, an incentivebased approach has enormous advantages over the current system. 1°4 
A focus on ultimate ends also promotes coordination and rationality in regulation, by giving government an incentive to attend to appropriate risk levels in different areas,10 5 and by bringing a salutary measure of §§ 7403-7431 (West Supp. 1991) (toxic substances provision focuses on emissions levels rather than means of reduction); id. §§ 7651-7651o (acid deposition provisions focus on emission levels). It is extremely unfortunate that in its regulation of automobile pollution, the Act specifies means. See id. § 7545(k) (requiring reformulated gasoline-likely a reflection of pressures from agricultural community). Rather than requiring reformulated gasoline or increasing mileage standards, a better approach would simply tax gasoline, or tax the use of high-polluting vehicles. 

demonstrating the irrationality of modem regulatory programs across different areas). structure and sense to risk regulation. Indeed, the major advantage of incentive-based approaches may be the increase in democratic accountability results from this cognitive shift. 
Incentive-based approaches may be employed in a variety of contexts, including environmental protection, occupational safety and health, labor, and broadcasting. 
Particulars in which polluters must pay for the harms they cause leads government to focus on the right questions. To ask how much pollution reduction should be obtained, and at what price, will create strong incentives to improve knowledge of the effects of pollution and pollution control. This increased premium on knowledge would be yet another gain. I focus here on emissions trading, taxation, and disposal systems. 
a. Emissions trading programs. An important and increasingly used incentive-based system is "emissions trading." Under emissions trading programs, polluters who exceed air pollution standards 10 6 can purchase permits from other polluters who are below the maximum levels. Polluters may legally exceed the regulatory standards if they obtain a permit to do so. If the emissions trading program is correctly administered, a region will meet the same pollution standards overall; those who pollute too much will be balanced by those who reduce more than they must. The price of the permits is determined by the market. 107 
In its ideal form, emissions trading would make two simple changes in current law. First, it would require polluters to pay to pollute. It would not (as does current law) allow people to pollute for free. If a company wants to send sulfur dioxide into the air, it must pay a fee to obtain a permit to do so. Second, pollution permits would be tradeable.10 8 A company that is able to reduce its pollution below the permitted level could sell all or part of its permit to someone else. In this way, companies would be economically rewarded for achieving substantial pollution reduction. 
In one bold stroke, a system of tradeable permits would create market-based disincentives to pollute and market-based incentives for pollu106. E.g., Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.A. §§ 7403-7431 (West Supp. 1991)) Analysis of EPA's Emissions Trading Program, 6 YALE J. ON REG. 109 (1989). 
Of course, emissions trading is only one part of a sensible environmental program. For the most dangerous pollutants, pollution prevention is the preferred strategy. 
tion control. By enlisting the aid of private markets, this system would reward rather than punish technological innovation in pollution control. 
Many observers persuasively argue that the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts should be amended to substitute an emissions trading program for the BAT approach.1 °9 Suitably designed, emissions trading holds enormous promise. Such programs do not require a single level of technology, determined by officials in Washington for all industries. In fact, trading programs eliminate the need for centralized, national determinations of what technology is "available" or feasibly available in the future. 
Some argue that emissions trading should be rejected on the theory that it creates a "license to pollute," or that it wrongly treats clean air or water like any other commodity traded on markets.' 10 These commentators point out that those who assault or poison others should not be allowed to do so merely by paying a fee." 1 Why, it might be asked, should pollution be treated differently? 
This objection raises complex issues, and I restrict myself to some brief observations here. As a first approximation, a flat ban on an activity may well be preferable to a cash payment for resulting harm, assuming that there are no transaction costs (such as enforcement expenditures), when and only when the rightlevel of the underlyingactivity iszero. The right level of assaults and poisonings seems to be zero. It would therefore be absurd to allow people to assault and poison others as long as they are willing to compensate people for the harm. Such a strategy would be inconsistent with the underlying goal of eliminating the conduct altogether.1 12 
By contrast, the appropriate emissions level for many pollutants is well above zero. For example, complete elimination of sulfur dioxide emissions would cause a severe energy shortage--one that would dramatically increase poverty, health risks, unemployment, and inflation. In this respect, a ban on sulfur dioxide emissions would be difficult to justify. For those pollutants whose continued emission is necessary to (1981). 

Preference-ShapingPolicy, 1990 DUKE L.J. I (arguing that society will criminalize a particular activity and attempt to shape individual preferences and behavior through punishment whenever the social benefits of doing so outweigh the social costs). achieve desirable social goals, a fee, designed to bring about the optimal emissions level, makes far more sense than a ban. 113 
Still, emissions trading has critics, including many environmentalists.114 To be sure, implementation of such programs would require careful design and administration to ensure (among other things) that large numbers of polluters who receive permits through trades do not locate in the same areas, thus creating dangerous "hot spots"-that is, environmentally disastrous concentrations of harmful substances. 115 
In general, however, most of the criticisms are unpersuasive or illinformed. For example, emissions trading programs will not increase pollution levels. Such programs simply achieve the desired degree of pollution reduction at the lowest possible cost. If the ultimate goal is to reduce pollution sharply, then we should simply issue few permits. As noted, emissions trading systems offer the great advantage of putting the power of deciding pollution levels back into the hands of the citizenry, rather than focusing on the often unintelligible question of what control technology is "best" or "available." '1 16 Public institutions will decide the ultimate and most important environmental policy issues, rather than the confusing and only indirectly relevant questions that current law makes as the actor is willing to pay for it might be objectionable on other grounds. Such decisions might treat the relevant interests as commodities, and it may be wrong to do so. Decisions to allow harm. ful conduct at a price might also have undesirable preference-shaping effects. In the context of socially necessary activities that produce incidental pollution, however, these objections seem unpersuasive. 
A system that requires polluters to pay, rather than allowing them to pollute for free, would not diminish the social opprobrium accorded to polluters. Perhaps most likely, a payment-based system would not have any substantial preference-shaping effects. Moreover, the arguments against treating harmful conduct as a commodity do not appear to apply in the context of pollution control. See Radin, Market-Inalienability,100 HARV. L. REv. 1849 (1987) (arguing that some harmful conduct should not be "commodified" because of the resulting injury to "personhood"). In addition, shifting the entitlement from the polluter to the public (by requiring the polluter to pay) could have desirable preference-shaping effects. This decision at least establishes the right starting point-giving breathers, rather than polluters, the entitlement. See supra note 57 (discussing endowment effects). 
17174, 271-84 (discussing problems including strategic bidding, administration, monitoring, initial allocation of rights, and uncertainty of future prices); S. KELMAN, supra note 110; Latin, Ideal Versus Real Regulatory Efficiency: Implementation of Uniform Standardsand "Fine-Tuning"Regulatory Reforms, 37 STAN. L. REv. 1267 (1985) (arguing that, in practice, an individualized approach to regulation is more inefficient than a uniform approach because of increased uncertainty, decisionmaking costs, and strategic behavior). 
To its credit, the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) has long been a strong advocate of emissions trading. See Environmentalists,Industry Disagreeon Basis for Nitrogen Oxides Regulation, Daily Rep. Execs. (BNA) No. 149, at A10 (Aug. 2, 1991) (stating that the EDF has "championed" emissions trading); 
at 271-84. 

crucial. Implementation problems can in turn be solved through market mechanisms and "siting" policies preventing undue collection of polluters.1 7 
These basic ideas also support an emissions trading system in the international arena. Under such a system, some countries would pay others-in cash, retirement of debt, or new technology-to reduce emissions levels or to protect biological diversity. In the frequent cases in which pollution crosses national boundaries, a trading system would produce more efficient reduction techniques and would also be more equitable than an approach that would require all countries to use the same control technology. 
b. Taxation. The simplest reform strategy to control pesticides and other toxic substances would be to impose a tax on their use. Through this single step, people would decrease their use of pesticides. This strategy would encourage the use of alternative methods of pest control, including those that do not rely on chemicals.' 18 Perhaps funds collected from a pesticide tax could be allocated to help farmers use biological techniques efficiently. 
Taxation can also be used to decrease automobile emissions. Instead of existing regulations that impose technological requirements on new cars' 1 9 (which are often ineffective and difficult to monitor, and which create incentives to keep old cars on the road longer120 ), Congress should adopt broad plans to reduce dependence on the automobile. Strategies might include "old car" taxes or increased gasoline taxes.121 
Increased gasoline taxes are an especially promising strategy because they would promote energy conservation and independence while effectively combatting pollution. The gasoline tax in the United States is currently the lowest of any industrialized nation; it should be raised to ensure that gasoline users internalize the environmental costs of their ac117. See generally Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 86. 
successful, and inexpensive in the long run as well. See B. COMMONER, supra note 99, at 97-98. 
(regulation of emission control by performance standards for new sources are ineffective, resulting in increased demand for older vehicles and enforcement problems, because industries find the program easy to subvert given the infrequency of enforcement audits). 
at 171, 181-88 (L. Brown ed. 1991) (advocating the institution of"green taxes" and the restructuring of government incentives to reduce pollution and place an emphasis on "sustainable progress" as opposed to maximum economic growth). tivity. 12 2 Such an approach would avoid several problems of the prevailing command-and-control method of controlling automobile pollution, including inefficiency, a tendency to increase old car retention rates, and technological breakdown by specified antipollution devices. 123 
It is not sufficient to respond that gasoline taxes (or any other efforts that require actors to internalize the social costs of their harmful activity) would be "regressive," in the sense that the poor would feel their effects more sharply than the well-to-do. To be sure, any effort to use incentives is likely to be harder on those with few resources than on those with many. Indeed, any strategy to control many social problems will increase prices, and thus hit the poor especially hard. For at least three reasons, however, a system requiring an activity to reflect its true social costs should not be deemed illegitimate merely because it has more severe consequences for the poor. 
First, well-functioning markets ensure that the prices of products reflect their social costs. Any pricing system, in any market, works against the poor in the sense that poor people are less able to pay for commodities than are those with greater resources. The wealthy will always be able to afford the prices set by the market for products-from soap to computers to food-more easily than the poor. But when society determines that certain commodities should be available to the poor, and that the market prices of those commodities are too high for some people, the sensible solution is to reduce poverty or to grant government subsidies to people who are unable to afford those commodities. It is not to make ad hoc adjustments to the pricing system by allowing government to fix prices and thus to keep prices artificially low. Government price-fixing will be inefficient and will produce a range of unintended harmful consequences, including misallocation of supply and demand, leading to scarcity.' 24 
When government refuses to ensure that products (like energy) reflect their environmental costs, the result is analytically the same as a government decision to fix prices. Such a refusal will lower the price of the resulting products, and some poor people will always benefit from lower prices. But such a result is hardly a desirable approach to the problem of poverty, any more than an across-the-board, governmentally relevant inquiry requires more than purely scientific calculations; it must involve judgments ofsocial values as well, for there is of course no value-free way to ascertain the damage done by pollution. See generally S. BREYER, supra note 3, at 64-68 (arguing that government-imposed price controls lead to shortages by keeping prices artificially low and allowing few upward price adjustments as the seller's costs inevitably increase over time). mandated ten percent reduction in the price of (say) automobiles and soap, which it rather resembles. 
Second, the pollution tax is no more regressive than command-andcontrol strategies. Suppose, for example, that government continues to require expensive, statutorily specified antipollution devices for new cars. This system also imposes costs that will ultimately be reflected in prices-but in a more arbitrary, less predictable, and less visible way than a direct tax. 125 Despite the common assumption that technological requirements impose costs on industry and not on consumers, industry will usually raise prices and thus pass costs on to consumers. The view that regulatory requirements are directed at companies rather than consumers is thus a highly artificial misunderstanding of regulation, one that ignores its real-world effects. 
Third, and finally, a failure to require enterprises to bear the full environmental and social costs of their activities is not a sensible redistribution strategy. The class of beneficiaries simply does not correspond to the category of needy people. A government subsidy that lowers the cost of sources of carbon-dioxide and other greenhouse gases benefits people who use those harmful substances. These beneficiaries are not the people who can legitimately claim government support. For all these reasons, the apparently regressive 126 character of any "pollution tax" does not count as a reason against its use. 
c. Deposits. Deposits might be especially useful in the regulation of solid and hazardous waste. The current waste control regulations ensure that neither producers nor consumers of waste materials pay disposal costs; 1 27 neither has an incentive to reduce waste. A deposit system, however, would make it more expensive to dispose of substances in landfills or in the oceans, by requiring that those who handle waste pay a deposit, refundable in whole or in part upon a showing of safe disposal connected with antipollution goals. We cannot know whether antipollution technology achieves pollution benefits commensurate with the costs, because the technology will invariably be placed on all new cars, regardless of the amount of pollution in the relevant area or the consequences for old cars. 
taxes is to require that goods reflect their true social costs. A regulatory system that accomplishes this goal should not be characterized as a "regressive tax" system. 
Stat. 2795 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 42 U.S.C.), focuses primarily on waste treatment rather than waste minimization. For an especially helpful discussion of possible improvements, see Mennell, Beyond the ThrowawaySociety: An Incentive Approach to RegulatingMunicipal Solid Waste, 17 ECOLOGY L.Q. 655 (1990) (arguing that current policies toward waste disposal should be altered to force consumers and manufacturers to consider the true social costs of waste disposal; possible options include curbside charges based on weight or volume, or a system in which the purchaser pays the disposal costs at the point of sale). and recycling. The government would thus encourage recycling and discourage the accumulation of solid and hazardous waste. 
Market-based incentives should also form the basis for the regulation of occupational safety and health. Congress or OSHA might rely far more on employers' actual performance in reducing deaths and injury and far less on their compliance with rigid and unrealistic national standards for workplace design. A tax on employers for maintaining dangerous conditions, greater reliance on workers' compensation and on disclosure of risks to workers, and more active bargaining and employee involvement in the process of monitoring workplace safety, are all promising techniques. 128 
Strategies of this general sort can also promote democratic goals. A tax or fine system ensures that someone in a position of public accountability will decide on appropriate levels of risk. Disclosure strategies allow workers to learn about risks and risk levels, and to take action accordingly. 129 In the workplace, such strategies enlist employee support in reducing occupational risks, and in a highly decentralized manner. 130 This step would greatly improve the current system, which relies on the national dictation of risk levels. 13 1 Nationalized risk decisionmaking prevents employees from becoming involved in the choice among risk levels, salaries, and other goals,1 32 and it is particularly vulnerable to interestgroup pressures. Greater decentralization would reduce these difficulties. 
A system that promotes disclosure of occupational risks also fortifies the political processes at all levels of government. Disclosure ensures EMPLOYMENT LAW 191-93 (1990) (discussing employee involvement plans (EIPs) that are designed to address a number ofworkers' issues, including job hazards). These strategies have proven successful in other countries, including Sweden. See S. KELMAN, REGULATING AMERICA, REGULATING SWEDEN: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH POLICY 199-203 (1981) (legislation in the 1970s has given safety stewards greater power to force employers to comply with safety regulations; various labor-management agreements urge management to take an active part in labor-management safety committees). 
See also the discussion in OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, April 1, 1990-March 31, 1991, 26-32 (1991), and in particular the analysis of OSHA's hazard communication standard at 28-29. 
information to workers in a "clear and nontechnical" form, as well as direct regulation of the workplace by the government). 

a certain floor. See Rose-Ackerman, supra note 3, at 358-64. better-informed decisions, enhanced by greater public understanding of risk levels and a recognition of the inevitability of choice among competing and diverse social goods. In particular, local communities would be in a better position to decide on the appropriate mix among environmental, economic, employment, and other goals. 
Disclosure also increases flexibility, participation, and voluntariness in regulation, while decreasing informational pressures on agencies and dependence on government generally. In this respect, a shift from command-and-control to incentive-based strategies holds out enormous promise. 
tions apply in areas outside of environmental and occupational safety and health regulation. In labor law, for example, greater encouragement of collective bargaining and worker organization (though perhaps through less traditional forms than ordinary unionization13 3) should replace centralized national prescriptions. 
These recommendations could also be employed to regulate broadcasting. The considerations outlined in Part II suggest reasons to be skeptical of unrestricted markets in broadcasting.1 34 In their capacity as political participants, members of the public appear to have aspirational goals that conflict with market outcomes in this area. The regulatory status quo produces a number of problems; most notably an accelerating "race to the bottom" in terms of the quality of programming. Television and radio tend to be excessively influenced by the concerns of advertisers, rarely deal with serious problems, and are frequently violent, sensationalistic, prurient, dehumanizing, and banal.1 35 Inevitably, such programming will have effects on the information, beliefs, and even desires of listeners and viewers. Indeed, these effects might well be understood as externalities. In these circumstances, a regulatory response may be justified. 
That response need not, however, take the form of a rigid and to some degree ineffectual "fairness doctrine." 136 Instead of imposing uni133. See generally P. WEILER, supra note 128, at 187-224 (1990) (discussing possible future options for worker participation). 
views. See L. POWE,AMERICAN BROADCASTING AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT (1987). To be sure, first amendment questions lurk behind any effort to regulate broadcasting. I do not discuss those issues here, although a conception of the first amendment that would argue for, rather than against, regulatory efforts seems entirely plausible. See Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367, 390 (1969) (viewers' and listeners' first amendment rights demand that the marketplace of ideas form obligations, the licensing agency might award extra "points" to applicants who provide high-quality broadcasting or who attend to public issues-even if those applicants were less competitive in the marketplace. This type of "point" strategy would not dictate outcomes, but it would create market-like incentives to engage in desirable behavior. Alternatively, government could require that ordinary broadcasters give a specified percentage of their profits either to public broadcasting or to private companies that are willing to sacrifice some of their advertising revenues and audience to provide higher-quality fare. This system would introduce some of the virtues of environmental emissions trading systems into broadcasting regulation. 
LESSONS FOR THE JUDICIARY 
The suggestions made thus far are principally directed at legislators and administrators. As I have indicated, a focus on substance requires a movement away from the traditional preoccupation with the judiciary to a focus on congressional and bureaucratic processes. These remain illunderstood despite the fact that they have far more important roles in government regulation. 137 Concern with regulatory substance does, however, have consequences for judicial review as well. Concentration on regulatory results may require an adjustment in statutory interpretation and in decisions about which regulatory approaches are "arbitrary" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). 138 I offer a few suggestions here. 139 
Statutory interpretation usually involves an ascertainment of meaning through an examination of the statutory text, structure, and history. 14° When the meaning of a statute is otherwise clear, courts should not rely on any substantive ideas about the regulatory state to subvert that meaning. Statutory meaning is, however, a function of interpretive principles, without which text and history are unintelligible. Some of these principles are simply parts of language, some can be traced to constitutional norms; and others are a product of judicial understandings about institutional concerns. 
In easy cases, interpretive principles are so widely shared as to be invisible. For example, the Clean Air Act does not preempt state tort be protected from monopolization, whether by government or by private licensee); L. BOLLINGER, IMAGES OF A FREE PRESS (1991); Sunstein, supra note 135. 
(examining these sources). law-not because of any language in the text itself, but because of agreed-upon conventions about the limited preemptive effect of federal statutes. 14 1 In more difficult cases, however, interpretive principles are mentioned explicitly. Thus, for example, courts use canons of construction to construe statutes so as to avoid constitutional doubts, 142 and to favor Indian tribes. 14 3 These and many other principles give meaning to statutory silences and help resolve cases otherwise in equipoise. 
Interpretive principles are not static. They change over time, with new understandings about which principles are better adapted to contemporary government. An understanding of regulatory aspiration and failure could well form the basis of new principles of statutory interpretation. Indeed, such understandings play a large role in existing doctrine, whether explicitly or implicitly. 144 Courts might ultimately develop a set of principles attuned to the often-salutary goals of regulatory programs and to the ways that these programs break down in practice. 
For example, courts might be encouraged to take into account the sometimes counterintuitive systemic effects of government regulation. 145 The consequences of different strategies are often relevant both to statutory meaning and to the question of "arbitrariness" within the meaning of the APA. In addition, courts might better understand the paradoxes of the regulatory state, and consider, for example, the possibility that regulating new risks can perpetuate old risks, that especially severe regu141. See e.g., Mansell v. Mansell, 490 U.S. 581, 587-88 (1989) (in areas of traditional state law preeminence, such as domestic relations, a federal law will not be read so as to preempt state law unless preemption is "positively required"); Puerto Rico Dep't of Consumer Affairs v. Isla Petroleum Corp., 485 U.S. 495, 499-501 (1988) (the Court looks for a "clear and manifest" purpose by Congress to supersede existing state law, before preemption by a federal statute is allowed); Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, 471 U.S. 707, 715-16 (1985) (where local health and safety regulations are concerned, there is a presumption that the local regulations coexist with similar federal regulations). 
National Labor Relations Act to require resolution of difficult cases under first amendment religion clauses); Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 129 (1958) (narrowly construing the broad power delegated to the Secretary of State to issue passports because the right of a citizen to travel abroad is an important liberty and cannot be deprived without due process of law). 
occupy a unique position in the United States because of the tribes' continued sovereignty; as a corollary of this, the Court will construe ambiguous statutes in their favor); Three Affiliated Tribes v. Wold Eng'g, 467 U.S. 138, 149 (1984) (when interpreting statutes that benefit the Indian tribes, it is a settled rule that any doubts should be construed in favor of the Indians). 
construction and proposing an alternative approach to statutory interpretation); Sunstein, supra note 80, at 434-40 (discussing how judges often look at the consequences of their decisions, even if not expressly called upon to do so by the statute in question). 
desire that regulatory standards not worsen existing problems in upholding EPA's authority to analyze the likely impacts of new standards in setting standards). lation can produce underregulation, and that requirements of best available technology can retard technological development.146 These paradoxes bear on a number of issues in litigation. 147 
Other principles might be derived from considerations of regulatory goals and failures. To allow de minimis exemptions from regulatory requirements would do much more good than harm. 14 The failure to permit such exemptions may cause inefficiency and produce risks, not benefits, to health and safety. In most cases, courts should assume that Congress wants at least some form of balancing of the various effects of regulatory statutes.1 49 Statutes that forbid balancing are usually underenforced or have unanticipated, but serious, adverse consequences. Courts should also construe statutes generously on behalf of disadvantaged groups, which, by definition, face systematic obstacles in the implementation process.1 50 
To say this is not to say that such interpretive principles should overcome unambiguous statutory text and history. But a better understanding of regulatory substance will inevitably affect the practice ofjudicial review in difficult cases. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The basic commitments of contemporary administrative law find their source in the liberal republicanism of the founding generation and 
concurring); Sunstein, supra note 77, at 413-29. 
482 U.S. 137 (1987) (finding that legislation that required consideration of all impairments in determining whether Social Security disability applicant could be eligible for benefits supported regulations that denied consideration of such impairments when assessing severity of disability); Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 356-61 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (EPA may allow exemptions from clear statutory regulatory language for reasons of administrative necessity or where the resulting harm is de minimis); Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy, 613 F.2d 947, 955-56 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (under the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the FDA has the power to label any substance as a "food additive" if even minute amounts of the substance enter a food; in practice, however, the FDA can find such additive amounts "insignificant" and not worthy of FDA regulation). 
64452 (1980) (striking down an occupational health and safety standard promulgated by the Secretary of Labor because the Secretary did not make a threshold finding that a significant risk to workers existed); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Thomas, 824 F.2d 1146, 1152-54 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (congressional silence on the definition of "ample margin of safety" does not require that the EPA set a zero level of emissions for certain pollutants for which the EPA cannot determine a harmless level of emission). 
(1989) (arguing that disadvantaged groups should receive the benefit of the doubt when a court interprets a regulatory statute because these groups face special difficulties in bringing an enforcement action). in New Deal understandings of the twentieth-century state. Those commitments call for an extensive regulatory apparatus, one that attempts simultaneously to promote economic prosperity and to protect the disadvantaged. The foundations of modem regulation are self-consciously pragmatic. When current strategies have failed, they should be changed. Existing approaches that do not address serious problems, or that produce problems of their own, should be replaced by new ones. 
I have sought to provide some illustrations of the enormous opportunities we now have with which to accomplish the goals of social regulation without returning to discredited laissez-faire principles or perpetuating the rigidities and paradoxes of current programs. Above all, regulatory reform should be attuned to the incentive effects of regulatory initiatives. Having rejected markets, regulatory programs should nonetheless take advantage of market forces where these can be harnessed to promote regulatory goals. For the most part, economic and democratic goals can work together. Efforts to increase information, to promote disclosure, to produce greater decentralization, and to shift from command-and-control to incentive-based systems promise to decrease regulatory costs and increase regulatory benefits while simultaneously bringing about dramatic improvements in the democratic process. To this extent, the prescriptions for increasing the efficiency of regulatory programs will also serve the end of increased democratization.1 51 
In evaluating reforms, little is to be gained by generalities that point to the frequent problems in either government regulation or in private markets. Even the question whether there should be "more" or "less" regulation tends to confuse, rather than clarify, matters.1 5 2 Questions about the existence and extent of current problems are too dependent on context to allow for global prescriptions. It is far more helpful to rely on particularized understandings of how markets and regulation are likely to break down-to learn, in short, from the past. Ultimately, the proposals suggested here would create a system unembarrassed to use government to promote democratic aspirations and economic welfare, but insistent on strategies that embody the flexibility, adaptability, productive potential, and decentralization characteristic of private markets. 
More generally, the next generation of administrative law should witness a large-scale shift from judicially policed administrative procedure to regulatory programs designed by legislators and bureaucrats. To be sure, the legal culture has only begun to explore the real-world conse151. I do not, of course, suggest that the goals of efficiency and democracy are always incompatible. 
one of size). 
particular areas. Two Executive Orders, Exec. Ord. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. § 127 (1981), reprintedin 5 U.S.C. § 601 note (1988), and Exec. Ord. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. § 323 (1985), reprintedin 5 U.S.C. § 601 note (1988), which set forth substantive principles of cost-benefit analysis and cost-effectiveness, might be seen as forerunners of this sort of approach. In addition, the implementing guidelines of the Office ofManagement and Budget, along with the coordination of authority within that agency, are steps in the right direction. See OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET, REGULATORY PROGRAM OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT, April 1, 1990-March 31, 1991 (1991). The guidelines have usefully counteracted problems of overregulation, lack of accountability, and lack of coordination. They also make some progress in dealing with the related problems of poor incentives and inefficiency. One remaining difficulty, however, is that the guidelines do not respond to the important problem of failure to regulate. 
Constitutionalism 
and Secession 
Cass R. Sunsteint 
The Soviet Constitution guarantees a right to secede.' The American Constitution does not. Although some secessionists in the American South, invoking state sovereignty, claimed to find an implicit right to secede in the founding document, it was more common to invoke an extratextual and nonjusticiable "right to secede" said to be enshrined in the Declaration of Independence.' In any case, no serious scholar or politician now argues that a right to secede exists under American constitutional law.3 It is generally agreed that such a right would undermine the Madisonian spirit of the original document, one that encourages the development of constitutional provisions that prevent the defeat of the basic enterprise.4 
Eastern European countries are now deciding about the contents of proposed constitutions. They are often doing so in the context of profound cultural and ethnic divisions, both often defined at least roughly in territorial terms. These divisions have propelled t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence and Co-Director, Center for the Study of Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Marcella David, Jon Elster, Larry Kramer, Bernard Manin, and Michael McConnell for helpful comments, and to Sean Donahue and Simon Steel for research assistance. This paper was originally prepared for a conference sponsored by the Liberty Fund, Inc., at the University of Arizona in December 1990, and I am most grateful to the participants in that conference for valuable assistance. 
' Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Art 72: "Each Union Republic shall retain the right freely to secede from the USSR." The translation is reprinted in John N. Hazard, The Union of Soviet Socialist Rei3ublics 31, in Albert P. Blaustein arid Gisbert H. Flanz, eds, 18 Constitutions of the Countries of the World (Oceana, 1990). 
1 Dwight L. Dumond, The Secession Movement, 1860-1861 120-21 (Macmillan, 1931). 3 As a formal matter of constitutional interpretation, the issue has been settled since Texas v White, 74 US 700, 724-26 (1869) (holding secession of Texas from the Union unconstitutional because the states' acceptance of the federal Constitution represented a waiver of the right to secede). See also Akhil Reed Amar, Some New World Lessons for the Old World, 58 U Chi L Rev 483, 501-02 & n 68, (1991) (discussing secession). 
4 Lincoln set out the basic Madisonian view: "Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national governments.... [N]o government proper ever had a provision in its organic law for its own termination." First Inaugural Address (Mar 4, 1861), reprinted in T. Harry Williams, ed, Selected Writings and Speeches of Abraham Lincoln 117 (Hendricks, 1943) ("Lincoln Writings"). claims for local self-determination that could readily be transformed into attempts to guarantee a right to secede or even into secession itself. In Eastern Europe in particular, debates over the right to secede have already played an extraordinarily important role in discussions of new institutional arrangements. Various political actors have vigorously asserted a right to secede in Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, and the Czech and Slovak Republics.5 Active secession movements have played a central role in current efforts to establish democratic governance. Such movements have led to claims for a constitutional right to secede, paralleling the Soviet right but to be respected in practice. A draft of the Slovak constitution, for example, creates a right to secede.6 
It is likely that these claims will be asserted all the more vigorously in the future. The claims for secession, or for a right to secede, raise exceptionally large questions about the theory and practice of constitutionalism. It is therefore an especially important time to explore the relationship between secession claims and constitutionalism in general. 
My principal claim in this essay is that whether or not secession might be justified as a matter of politics or morality, constitutions ought not to include a right to secede. To place such a right in a founding document would increase the risks of ethnic and factional struggle; reduce the prospects for compromise and deliberation in government; raise dramatically the stakes of day-to-day political decisions; introduce irrelevant and illegitimate considerations into those decisions; create dangers of blackmail, strategic behavior, and exploitation; and, most generally, endanger the prospects for long-term self-governance.8 Constitutionalism, 5 See, for example, Celestine Bohlen, East Europe's Past Imperils 3 Nations, NY Times A16 (Dec 16, 1990) ("EastEurope'sPast"). The Croatian Parliament has adopted a constitution that would give it a right to secede from Yugoslavia upon a two-thirds vote of the local legislature and a simple majority vote in a plebiscite. See CroatiaTakes the Right to Secede, NY Times A9 (Dec 22, 1990). In October 1990, Slovenia passed a constitutional amendment creating a right to secede. 
There are active secession movements elsewhere-in Canada and India, for example-and while I do not explore them here, this article bears on the issue of secession generally. 
See Draft Constitution of the Slovak Republic, Arts 2, 7 (on file with U Chi L Rev).. 
It would follow that courts should not find such a right to be implicit in constitutions. 8 Lincoln made many of these arguments: Plainly, the central idea of secession is the essence of anarchy. A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people. Whoever rejects it does, of necessiy, fly to anarchy or to despotism. Unanimity is impossible; the rule of a minority, as a permanent arrangement, is wholly inembodying as it does a set of precommitment strategies, is frequently directed against risks of precisely this sort. Political or moral claims for secession are frequently powerful, but they do not justify constitutional recognition of a secession right. 
The principal argument for recognition of a right to secede is that it would operate as a powerful deterrent to oppressive and discriminatory practices, and also serve as an effective remedy for these practices. Usually, however, these goals can be promoted through other, more direct means. If they cannot be, a negotiated agreement embodying secession or a right of revolution-also not recognized in founding texts-is a preferable safeguard. The opportunity for a negotiated agreement or a right of revolution would provide a remedy against most of the relevant abuses without raising the continuous risks to self-government that would be created by a constitutional right to secede. 
In the process of making this argument, I hope also to disentangle the various possible grounds for a moral claim to secession and to indicate which of those grounds have force in different contexts. Some of the discussion will provide support for the view that secession is often justified as a matter of political morality. In such cases I argue against national efforts to stop secession through military or other action. 
In Part I, I discuss constitutions as precommitment strategies, designed to foreclose debate over certain fundamental questions. These strategies should often be seen as enabling rather than constraining, that is, as devices not only for limiting government, but also for facilitating the difficult process of self-government. This argument has powerful roots in the American constitutional tradition and applies with particular force in the context of secession. The argument also has general implications for the theory of what does and does not belong in constitutions. This theory remains in a surprisingly primitive state, and I will venture some preliminary remarks on the subject. 
In Part II, I discuss reasons why a subunit of a nation might want to secede, and provide a brief assessment of those reasons as a matter of political morality. My conclusion is that those reasons often create a strong moral claim for secession. Even when this is so, however, the creation of a right to secede in a founding docuadmissable; so that, rejecting the majority principle, anarchy or despotism in some form is all that is left. 
First Inaugural Address (Mar 4, 1861), in Williams, ed, Lincoln Writings 117, 120 (cited in note 4). ment is usually unjustified. Part III discusses qualified rights to secession, arguing that even though these are superior to a general right of exit for subunits, they are inferior to an across-the-board waiver of that right by all subunits in a nation.9 
I. CONSTITUTIONS AS PRECOMMITMENT STRATEGIES 
It is often said that constitutionalism is in considerable tension with democracy. Thomas Jefferson was emphatic on the point, arguing that constitutions should be amended by each generation in order to ensure that the dead past would not constrain the living present. 10 Many contemporary observers echo the Jeffersonian position, claiming that constitutional constraints often amount to unjustified, antidemocratic limits on the power of the present and future.1 Responding to Jefferson, James Madison argued that a constitution subject to frequent amendment would promote factionalism and provide no firm basis for republican selfgovernment. 2 
Madison envisioned firm and lasting constitutional constraints as a precondition for democratic processes, rather than a check on them. This vision captures a central goal of American constitutionalism: to ensure the conditions for the peaceful, long-term operation of democracy in the face of often-persistent social differences and plurality along religious, ethnic, cultural, and other lines. This goal is highly relevant to constitutional developments in Eastern Europe, where religious and ethnic hostilities are especially intense. Madison saw differences and diversity as strengths rather than weaknesses, if channeled through constitutional structures that would promote deliberation and lead groups to check, rather than exploit, other groups. It may be possible for Eastern European countries to replicate this approach, although they face far more profound differences of language, ethnicity, history, and religion than those that confronted the Framers of our Constitution. 
To approach the question of secession, it will be useful to provide a brief outline of some of the reasons for entrenching institutional arrangements and substantive rights.' 3 On such questions, constitutional theory remains in a surprisingly primitive state.14 I begin by examining what sorts of considerations might lead people forming a new government to place basic rights and arrangements beyond the reach of ordinary politics. The crucial idea here is that for various reasons, people in a newly formed nation might attempt to do so as part of a precommitment strategy. 
Some rights are entrenched because of a belief that they are in some sense pre- or extra-political, that is, because individuals ought to be allowed to exercise them regardless of what majorities might think. Some of these rights are entrenched for reasons entirely independent of democracy. Here constitutionalism is indeed a self-conscious check on self-government, attempting to immunize a private sphere from public power. Plausible examples include the rights to private property,15 freedom from self-incrimination, bodily integrity, protection against torture or cruel punishment, and privacy. 
But many of the rights that are constitutionally entrenched actually derive from the principle of democracy itself. Their protection from majoritarian processes follows from and creates no tension with the goal of self-determination through politics. The precommitment strategy permits the people to protect democratic processes against their own potential excesses or misjudgments. The right to freedom of speech and the right to vote are familiar illustrations. Constitutional protection of these rights is not at odds with the commitment to self-government but instead a logical part of it.' 6 
'a By using the word "entrenching" here and elsewhere, I refer to simple constitutionalization, not to a decision to immunize a constitutional provision from amendment. I assume throughout that constitutional provisions are much more difficult to change than ordinary statutes, but nonethelsss amendable if there is a consensus that they should be. 
"' For a valuable collection of essays on this topic, see Jon Elster and Rune Slagstad, eds, Constitutionalism and Democracy (Cambridge, 1988). 
" The right to property is an ambiguous case; it is a democratic right as well as a private one. Private property provides for security and independence from government, and these are preconditions for citizenship-a theme that played a large role in republican thought. See J.G.A. Pocock, ed, The PoliticalWorks of JamesHarrington53-63, 67-68, 14452 (Cambridge, 1977). 
16 For an extended elaboration of this theme, see John Hart Ely, Democracy and Dis 
Institutional arrangements can also be understood as an effort to protect a private sphere from majoritarianism. Often this effort stems from a fear of democratic processes. A decision to divide government among the legislative, executive, and judicial branches might be regarded as an effort to check and limit government by requiring a consensus among all three before the state can interfere with the private sphere. 17 Private liberty flourishes because government is partially disabled. So too, a federal system might ensure that the nation and its subunits will check each other, generating a friction that enables private liberty to flourish.' 8 
Structural provisions of this sort limit the political power of present majorities (or minorities), and in this sense raise difficulties for those who believe that the only or principal purpose of constitutionalism is to provide a framework for, democratic governance. But if structural provisions are generally seen as precommitment strategies, some of them can be enabling as well as constraining. 9 We can understand both individual rights and structural provisions in this way. Like the rules of grammar, such provisions set out the rules by which political discussion will occur, and in that sense free up the participants to conduct their discussions more easily. 
The system of separation of powers, for example, does not merely constrain government, but also helps to energize it, and to make it more effective, by creating a healthy division of labor. This was a prominent argument during the framing period in America.2 ° A system in which the executive does not bear the burden of adjudication may well strengthen the executive by removing from it a task that frequently produces public opprobrium. Indeed, the entire framework might enable rather than constrain democracy, not only by creating an energetic executive2 ' but, more fundamentally, trust (Harvard, 1980). 
17 See Federalist 51 (Madison), in Clinton Rossiter, ed, The FederalistPapers 320-25 (New Am Library, 1961). 
"8See id at 323 (federalism and the separation of powers create a "double security" for individual rights because "[t]he different governments will control each other, at the same time that each will be controlled by itself."). 
19 I borrow here from Stephen Holmes, Precommitment,and the paradox of democracy, in Elster and Slagstad, eds, Constitutionalismand Democracy 195 (cited in note 14), and Stephen Holmes, Gag rules or the politics of omission, in id at 19. 
" See Arthur S. Miller, An Inquiry into the Relevance of the Intentions of the Founding Fathers,with Special Emphasis upon the Doctrine of Separationof Powers, 27 Ark L Rev 583, 588-89 (1973) (efficiency was a principal rationale for the separation of powers, in the view of influential Framers such as John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, John Jay, and James Wilson). 
21 See Federalist 70 (Hamilton), in Rossiter, ed, The FederalistPapers 423-31 (cited in by allowing the sovereign people to pursue a strategy, against their government, of divide and conquer. So long as it is understood that no branch of government is actually "the people," a system of separation of powers can allow the citizenry to monitor and constrain their inevitably imperfect agents. In general, the entrenchment of established institutional arrangements enables rather than merely constrains present and future generations by creating a settled framework under which people may make decisions. 
Thus far I have suggested that constitutions might create rights and institutions that follow from some independent theory of what individuals are owed, that are a natural corollary of the commitment to democracy, or that help to facilitate the democratic process by establishing the basic structures under which political arrangements can take place. Constitutional provisions may be facilitative in quite another sense: a decision to take certain issues off the ordinary political agenda may be indispensable to the political process.22 
For example, the initial decision to create a system of private property places severe constraints on the scope of any political deliberations on that fundamental issue, and often serves to keep issues of private property off the political agenda completely. Indeed, Madison understood the protection of rights of property largely as a mechanism for limiting factional conflict in government, not as a means of protecting "rights" and much less as a means of ensuring against redistribution.2" The removal of the issue from politics serves, perhaps ironically, to ensure that politics may continue. 
So too, a nation might protect questions of religion against resolution by democratic processes, not only because there is a right to freedom of religious conscience, but also because the democratic process works best if the fundamental and potentially explosive question of religion does not intrude into day-to-day decisions. More narrowly and no doubt more controversially, the decision to constitutionalize the right to abortion might be justified because it minimizes the chances that this intractable and polariznote 17) (describing need for a vigorous, unitary executive). 
22 See Holmes, Gag rules, in Elster and Slagstad, eds, Constitutionalismand Democracy (cited in note 14). 
'3 See Meyers, ed, The Mind of the Founder 502-09 (cited in note 12). In fact, the failure of the Framers to eliminate slavery in the original Constitution was attributable to ideas of this sort. The example reveals that the decision to take an issue off the political agenda is also a decision to resolve that issue one way rather than another. Such a decision may well be objectionable on democratic or other grounds. ing question will intrude into and thus disable the political process. 
Yet another set of facilitative constitutional precommitment strategies includes provisions that are designed to solve collective action problems or prisoners' dilemmas, that is, situations in which the pursuit of rational self-interest by each individual actor produces outcomes that are destructive to all actors considered together, and that could be avoided if all actors agreed in advance to coercion, assuring cooperation.24 People who are creating their government might voluntarily waive a right whose existence would rematerialize, and create serious risks, without the waiver. A decision to relinquish an otherwise available right advances the interests of all or most who are involved.2 5 
This idea has played a large role in the American constitutional experience. The leading example is the Full Faith and Credit Clause,26 which requires each state to enforce judgments rendered in other states. Every state might have an incentive to refuse to enforce the judgments of other states; if Massachusetts chooses not to honor the judgment of a New'York court against a Massachusetts citizen, then Massachusetts receives a short-term gain because the resources its citizen needs to satisfy any judgment remain within the borders of Massachusetts. But all states would be better off if the law bound each of them to respect the judgments of others. The Full Faith and Credit Clause ensures precisely this outcome, effectively solving a conventional prisoners' dilemma. 
Another illustration is the Commerce Clause. The Supreme Court has consistently interpreted the clause as disabling the states from regulating interstate commerce."' In the period between the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution, battles among the states produced mutually destructive tariffs and other protectionist measures. The adoption of each of these measures may well have furthered the interest of each state considered in isolation.29 Collectively, this system proved disastrous.30 24 See generally Jon Elster, The Cement of Society (Cambridge, 1989); Edna UllmannMargalit, The Emergence of Norms (Oxford, 1977). 
25 Compare Jean Hampton, Hobbes and the Social Contract Tradition (Cambridge, 1986). 
26US Const, Art IV, § 1, cl 1. 27 US Const, Art I, § 8, cl 3 . 28 See, for example, Gibbons v Ogden, 22 US 1 (1824). 
29 Though protectionism can be self-destructive as well, the mere perception of selfinterest is sufficient for purposes of this argument. 
30 For a standard treatment, see John Fiske, The CriticalPeriod of American History, 1783-89 144-45 (Houghton Mifflin, 1916) ("[T]he different states, with their different tariff 
Especially in light of the strong emotional attachments that fuel perceptions of state self-interest, a system in which each state can choose whether to initiate protectionist measures might well lead many states to do so. But an agreement by all states to refrain from protectionism, and thus to waive their antecedent right under the Articles of Confederation, should further the collective interest. The constitutional decision to remove control of interstate commerce from state authority solves the problem.3 ' In this case, as with the Full Faith and Credit Clause, a relinquishment of what appears to be state sovereignty very likely furthers the interest of all states concerned. 
This example illustrates both the importance of precommitment strategies in resolving prisoners' dilemmas, and the potential value of judicial review in a healthy constitutional system. The Supreme Court's conclusion that the Commerce Clause contains an implicit limitation on state power over interstate commerce-a "negative" federal power-was controversial at first and still raises thorny problems for the Court from time to time. 2 The Commerce Clause on its face provides the federal government with only the positive power to regulate, and locates this power in the legislature, not the courts. But the negative commerce power follows naturally from the structural logic of the Constitution. Its enforcement by the judiciary has been an important means of remaining faithful to that logic.3 3 
Finally, constitutional precommitment strategies might serve to overcome myopia or weakness of will on the part of the collectivity, or to ensure that representatives follow the considered judgments of the people. Protection of freedom of speech, or from unand tonnage acts, began to make commercial war upon one another."). For a revisionist view, see Edmund W. Kitch, Regulation and the American Common Market, in A. Dan Tarlock, ed, Regulation, Federalism, and Interstate Commerce 9-19 (Oelgeschlager, Gunn & Hain, 1981) (states under Articles of Confederation actually cooperated to promote freedom of trade). 
31 There is a close parallel here in the recent experience of the European Community with regard to the 1992 economic union. See, for example, Wayne Sandholtz and John Zysman, 1992: Recasting the European Bargain,42 World Pol 95 (1989). 
" See, for example, Hunt v Washington State Apple Advertising Commission,432 US 333 (1977) (North Carolina statute requiring only federal grades on all closed containers of apples shipped into state violated Commerce Clause because it burdened interstate sales of Washington apples and discriminated against such sales). 
11 In the United States, judicial review is itself a product of reasoning based on constitutional structure rather than text. See Marbury v Madison, 5 US 137 (1803). It would be far simpler, however, to make that power explicit. reasonable searches and seizures, might represent an effort by the people themselves to provide safeguards against the impulsive behavior of majorities. Here the goal is to ensure that the deliberative sense of the community will prevail over momentary passions.34 Similarly, a constitution might represent a firm acknowledgement that the desires of the government, even in a well-functioning republic, do not always match those of the people.3 5 Constitutional limits, introduced by something like the people themselves, therefore respond to the agency problem created by a system in which government officials inevitably have interests of their own. This problem arises in all systems of government, including democracies. In countries emerging from communist rule, without established principles of democratic representation, it is likely to pose a special danger, against which constitutional provisions should guard. 
In all of these cases, the decision to take certain questions off the political agenda might be understood as a means not of disabling but of protecting politics, by reducing the power of highly controversial questions to create factionalism, instability, impulsiveness, chaos, stalemate, collective action problems, myopia, strategic behavior, or hostilities so serious and fundamental as to endanger the governmental process itself. In this respect, the decision to use constitutionalism to remove certain issues from politics is often profoundly democratic. 
We can also see many constitutional provisions as mechanisms for ensuring discussion and deliberation oriented toward agreement about the general good rather than factionalism and self-interested bargaining. The states' relinquishment of their preexisting sovereign right to control the entry and exit of goods is the most prominent example. But the institutions of representation and checks and balances have frequently been designed to promote general discussion and compromise, to diminish the influence of particular segments of society, and to produce the incentives for and possibility of agreement. These principles largely guided the development of the United States Constitution. They bear directly 31 This theme runs throughout. The Federalist. See, for example, Federalist 10 (Madison), in Rossiter, ed, The FederalistPapers 77-84 (cited in note 17) (representative rovernment, spread over a large and diverse electorate, can prevent factional passions from lominating public affairs); Federalist 78 (Hamilton), in id at 464-69 (independent, life-tenired judiciary with authority to proclaim unconstitutional acts void is an important check )n majority power). 
35 See Federalist 78 (Hamilton), in id at 464, 467 (judicial review of the constitutional,ty of laws maintains primacy of "intention of the people" over "intention of their agents"). on the attempts of Eastern European countries to meld constitutionalism with democracy in the midst of extraordinary diversity and pluralism.3 6 
Secession has become an extremely prominent issue in Eastern Europe. As of this writing, the situation is highly fluid, indeed changing almost daily. Anything said here about the situation will likely be significantly out of date by the time of publication. But a brief review of the current situation will serve as a useful prelude to the discussion. 
The future of Yugoslavia, which has six republics, remains in severe doubt in light of strong pressures for independence in Slovenia and Croatia. Polls have shown more than 80 percent support for independence in the Slovenian Republic.3 7 The Slovenian Parliament voted in February 1991 to "invalidate" all federal laws, with Slovenian President Milan Kucan claiming that the vote means that Yugoslavia "has ceased to exist." 8 If Slovenia secedes, Croatia will probably do so as well. 39 The Croatian Parliament has given itself veto power over national laws.40 The new Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, is a firm Serbian nationalist who has awakened fears of oppression among non-Serbs. 41 He has claimed that "every Serb must live in a Serbian state. '42 Milosevic has refused to recognize the supremacy of the eight-member Yugoslavian Presidency.43 The Yugoslavian government has nonetheless claimed that it may use military force to ensure against secession." Secessionist pressures may be moving Yugoslavia toward civil war. 5 Widespread ethnic violence and ultimate disintegration seem possible," despite recent signs of greater moderation.47 
The federal structure of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic is also under considerable pressure. The current solution is a new provisional, nonconstitutional arrangement that dramatically limits the authority of the national government, placing it in the two republics.4 Under the new arrangement, the national government has power over defense, foreign policy, and monetary policy, with most other powers placed elsewhere.49 
It appears that only a small percentage of the Slovakians favor secession.50 In December 1990, however, President Vaclav Havel sought dramatic new powers to respond to the claim by leaders in Slovakia that their laws had primacy over those of the national parliament.5' Vladimir Meciar, until recently the Prime Minister of the Slovak Republic, had on occasion argued for Slovakian legal primacy. 52 According to Havel, the consequence of such primacy would be that "our constitution will be broken and our state would inevitably fall into legal chaos."5 Indeed, Havel argued, a system of Slovenian legal primacy would "destabilize all of Europe.15 4 
Here some believe that civil war is a realistic threat. In all, fourteen of the fifteen Soviet republics have asserted their sovereignty in one form or another. Citizens of the Baltic states and several other Soviet republics overwhelmingly support independence. 55 The most highly publicized secession movements have occurred in the Baltic states, and secessionist pressures have placed the future of the Soviet Union in serious doubt. Article 72-guaranteeing a right of secession-has been an important part of the debate. Until recently, however, it provided no firm basis for secession, in part because of the absence of a legal mechanism for its enforcement.5 6 Unilateral secession movements were said to violate Articles 73 and 74, which provide for the supremacy of Soviet law and for Soviet sovereignty. 5 to provide for secession through a two-thirds majority in a referendum and a five-year transition period.5 
The most vigorous secession movements have taken place in Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia. The Soviet Union incorporated these states by force in 1940, after they had enjoyed two decades of independence. All three have seen vigorous secession movements. The Estonian Congress has asked the United Nations and the Soviet Parliament to restore "the free and independent republic of Estonia."59 There was 78 percent support for independence among Estonians." The Lithuanian Parliament unanimously approved a formal declaration of independence." Over 90 percent of Lithuanian citizens support independence.2 The Soviet Union responded with a damaging economic blockade, 3 and also with military force.64 Soviet troops captured the main publishing center in Vilnius and also assaulted broadcasting stations, killing and wounding unarmed civilians in the process6 5 Non-binding plebiscites in Latvia showed 77 percent support for independence.6 
An important opposition movement in the Ukraine has asked for complete independence from Moscow and the creation of an independent Ukrainian state6. 7 The actual government of the Ukraine has not gone so far, but it did proclaim itself a sovereign state, one whose laws took precedence over those issuing from Moscow and extended to the control of troops on Ukrainian territory.68 Without issuing a formal statement of independence, the Parliament of the Ukraine invoked the "supremacy, independence, fullness and indivisibility of the republic's power on its territory and its independence and equality in external relations. 6 9 
Arguments for eventual secession have been made in Soviet Georgia as well.70 In March 1991, the citizens of Georgia voted overwhelmingly (with 95 percent in favor) for independence,7 1 and in April, the Parliament unanimously declared independence.72 The Soviet Parliament responded with a recommendation that Gorbachev impose a state of emergency, 73 and troops have been dispatched to stop internal fighting. 74 The Chuvash Autonomous Republic has claimed sovereignty over its own natural resources; the Mari Autonomous Republic has declared sovereignty; and Russia itself has considered the possibility of secession.75 Buryatia has proclaimed that its laws take precedence over those of the Soviet Union. Moldavia has sought greater autonomy.7 6 Byelorussia has declared its sovereignty as well.7 7 
Movements for secession in the Soviet Union promise to bring about substantial changes in existing institutional arrangements. President Gorbachev attempted to respond with a union plan 78 and an ambiguously worded referendum question. 79 Even if all 15 Soviet republics ultimately remain part of a federal union, it seems certain that secessionist pressures will diminish the central government's power over its subunits in major and potentially destructive ways.80 In any case, these pressures have diverted energy and attention from the effort to bring about democratic self-government and economic prosperity in the wake of the downfall of the previous system. This seems clear even if the grounds for secession are in some or many cases substantial-a question I take up below.8 ' 
For the moment I will not speak to the issue of whether and when secession is desirable or just. Instead I want to ask whether a Constitution ought to recognize a right to secede. I will understand a constitutional right to secede as encompassing (a) an explicit textual provision guaranteeing such a right or (b) an implicit understanding that the constitution creates that right, accompanied in either case by (c) a willingness to enforce that right by a court with the power of judicial review-that is, a court capable of granting and enforcing a subunit's request to secede despite the objections of the central government. As the Soviet experience has shown in the context of individual rights as well as the context of secession, constitutional guarantees on paper often mean nothing without institutions available to vindicate them.82 
At first *glance, the argument for a right to secede seems straightforward. If a subunit no longer wants to exist within the nation, why should it have to do so? This initial challenge draws strength from a number of arguments, spelled out below, including the need for local self-determination, the history of unjust acquisition in Eastern Europe and elsewhere, the claims of ethnic and cultural integrity, and the threat of abridgement of basic rights and liberties. 
The issue of secession is, however, an unusually good candidate for an analysis that stresses the use of constitutionalism as a precommitment strategy. Indeed, the problem of secession closely parallels the problems solved by the Full Faith and Credit Clause and the Commerce Clause, and in some respects follows naturally from those examples. The initial point is that constitutional recognition of a right to secede might well have a range of harmful consequences for democratic politics. In the face of such a right, a threat to secede could under certain conditions be plausible at any given time, allowing the exit of the subunit from the nation to be a relevant factor in every important decision. It is not difficult to imagine circumstances in which it will be in a subunit's interest to issue that threat. Rather than working to achieve compromise, or to solve common problems, subunits holding a right to secede might well succumb to the temptation of self-dealing, and hold out for whatever they can get.83 It is quite possible that some such selfdealing has already occurred in Eastern Europe. 4 
A right to secede will encourage strategic behavior, that is, efforts to seek benefits or diminish burdens by making threats that are strategically useful and based on power over matters technically unrelated to the particular question at issue. Subunits with economic power might well be able to extract large gains in every Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics 27-30, in Blaustein and Flanz, eds, 18 Constitutionsof the World (cited in note 1). 
8 This was Lincoln's view: If the minority will not acquiesce, the majority must, or the government must cease. If a minority in such case will secede rather than acquiesce, they make a precedent which in turn will divide and ruin them; for a minority of their own will secede from them whenever a majority refuses to be controlled by such minority. 
First Inaugural Address (Mar 4, 1861), in Williams, ed, Lincoln Writings 114, 120 (cited in note 4). 
84 See, for example, Clines, UkrainiansDeclare Republic Sovereign (cited in note 68) ("(T]he declarations of sovereignty thus far are laying out a kind of negotiating agenda for Mr. Gorbachev's promised attempt to redefine the union more favorably for the republics decision involving the geographic distribution of benefits and burdens. A constitutional system that recognizes and is prepared to respect the right to secede will find its very existence at issue in every case in which a subunit's interests are seriously at stake. In practice, that threat could operate as a prohibition on any national decision adverse to the subunit's interests. 
A temporarily disaffected subunit could, in short, raise the stakes in ordinary political and economic decisions simply by threatening to leave. The threat would be especially credible and therefore disruptive if the subunit can or might prefer to exist on its own. The recognition of a right of exit on the part of the subunit could thus prevent fair dealing on the nation's part, by allowing the subunit to veto policies that are justified on balance. 
It might also lead to undue caution. The threat to secede might deter the government from taking action that offends a subunit but is on balance justified. Consider, for example, the issue of taxation. A tobacco-growing subunit equipped with the right to secede might be able to veto a decision to raise taxes on (say) cigarettes even if that decision would further the nation's long-term interest. Similar considerations apply to the decision to enter into war, to enact environmental regulation, or to increase or decrease aid to agriculture. A secession right cannot plausibly be justified on the ground that it is a necessary check on national policies designed to ensure that those policies are in the general interest; the fact that a state wants to secede is neither a necessary nor a sufficient reason to believe that the general interest is being violated. 
Family law supplies a helpful analogy. In a marriage, the understanding that the unit is not divisible because of current dissatisfaction, but only in extraordinary circumstances, can serve to promote compromise, to encourage people to live together, to lower the stakes during disagreements, and to prevent any particular person from achieving an excessively strong bargaining position. A decision to stigmatize divorce or to make it available only under certain conditions-as virtually every state in the United States has done-may lead to happier as well as more stable marriages, by providing an incentive for spouses to adapt their behavior and even their desires to promote long-term harmony8. 5 I intend to 85 See, for example, Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (Cambridge, 1983) (discussing adaptive preferences). Family law also supplies a ready counter-argument: restrictions on divorce may increase the power of the stronger party by denying exit to the weaker. It may also, by adapting desires, produce one of the most pernicious forms of inequality, in which the dismake no sweeping comment here on the structure of divorce law; I argue only that in the secession context there are strong reasons for making exit difficult. 
Recognition of a, right to secede would also ensure that any subunit whose resources are at the moment indispensable, and that might be able to exist on its own, is in an extraordinary position to obtain benefits or to diminish burdens on matters formally unrelated to its comparative advantage. Moreover, the shared knowledge that the nation is terminable at the option of any subunit would promote instability. 
In these circumstances, we might understand a waiver of the right to secede as a solution to a collective action- problem or a prisoners' dilemma. For each subunit, acting individually, recognition of the right might increase its authority to obtain a large share of the collective assets during any general allocation. But if the right to secede exists, each subunit will be vulnerable to threats of secession by the others. If the considerations marshalled thus far are persuasive, all or most subunits are quite plausibly better off if each of them waives its right to secede. More generally, the difficulty or impossibility of exit from the nation will encourage cooperation for the long term, providing an incentive to adapt conduct and even preferences to that goal. 
Of course, the existence of a right to secede will have few such consequences if a threat to secede is not credible. Under some conditions, however, the threat will be a real one. Some subunits might well find it in their economic interest to exist on their own. If independence is economically preferable, the threat of secession will be fully plausible. Other subunits will suffer some economic loss if they secede, but still find independence worthwhile because of gains in terms -of cultural or geographical autonomy or capacity for self-governance. Here a threat of secession might be credible even if the seceding subunit would be an economic loser. 
In the context of secession, the practical political problem goes especially deep. The right to secede is different from other potential vetoes on national legislative action precisely because it raises fundamental and often emotional issues having to do with the claims of ethnicity, territory, and history to separation and selfdetermination. These issues have a peculiar tendency to inflame both subunits and those who want them to remain part of the nation. They tend to raise the emotional stakes in such a way as to advantaged accept their fate because there is no alternative. There are undoubtedly parallels here as well in the secession setting. make the ordinary work of politics-not to mention day-to-day interactions in other spheres-extremely hard to undertake. s6 
In Eastern Europe, divisions of this kind promise to be among the most important questions for constitutional resolution in the next generation."' Those divisions threaten not only to split nations into subunits-which may or may not be good-but also to paralyze national and local governments and to deflect them from dealing with the enormous current social and economic problems. Deliberation is often an inadequate check, and it comes at a high price. A waiver of the right to secede protects against inflamed or impulsive behavior."' On some occasions, the emotional stakes should be raised in precisely this way. But constitutional recognition of a right to secede accomplishes the relevant goals at great risk to the fundamental task of creating healthy, long-term constitutional structures. 
The large destabilizing effects of a right to secede may also disrupt expectations whose existence is indispensable both to economic prosperity and democratic self-determination. After secession, it will be extremely hard to disentangle the contributions of the subunit and the nation in order to decide who should be paying whom for what. The sheer volume of the costs of allocation provide at least a consideration against recognition of a right to secede. Much more fundamentally, a nation whose subunits may secede will be far less likely to engage in long-term planning. Interdependence will be both threatening and risky, and thus will be discouraged. 
86 It might be responded that the presence of a secession right may actually tend to enable rather than disable politics; a subunit might be more inclined to accept impositions by the central government as long as it is assured that when the impositions become cumulatively intolerable it can leave. In a well-functioning democracy, however, there is no problem with subunit "acceptance" of national decrees. Because the decrees are unlikely to be punitive, and because the subunit will participate in forming them, acceptance by subunits is generally forthcoming. A secession right is therefore unnecessary to promote acceptable legislation. 
87 See Bohlen, East Europe's Past (cited in note 5); Gorbachev Explains Proposed Union Pact to Party,NY Times All (Dec 11, 1990). 
8 These considerations point out the asymmetry between two seemingly parallel rights, that of emigration and that of secession. The right to emigrate is an important check on tyranny-as, plausibly, is the right to secede. But the right to emigrate does not create the twin and related risks of strategic behavior and inflamed ethnic or cultural conflict. The right to secede, unlike the right to emigrate, is exercised by subunits rather than individuals, aggregates a number of citizens at once, and thus solves a collective action problem faced by individual people who seek to emigrate. This solution to the collective action problem poses the difficulties of strategic behavior and inflamed conflict. The Universityof Chicago Law Review 
For Eastern European countries, it is imperative to develop institutions that can ensure confidence in the long-term health of the newly democratized governmental systems. Without such institutions, the emerging market economies will fail. 9 A waiver of the right to secede should be seen as part of a set of strategies designed to bring about stable institutional arrangements. In this light it should be unsurprising to observe proposed institutional reforms designed to foster stability in the face of separatist appeals, such as the Czechoslovakian plan to allocate much more power to the republics and the "union treaty" proposal in the Soviet Union.90 
There is an analogy here in the history of the American Constitution. The Framers deemed it necessary to protect contractual agreements against state impairment not to help creditors as a class, but to ensure that commercial interactions would occur in the first place." A system in which states can impair contracts will discourage their formation in the first instance, and thus have harmful long-term effects on the economy as a whole. So too, legal protection of national unity should have an important coordinating effect, creating expectations of long-term interaction indispensable to national self-government. 
Thus far I have argued that a waiver of the right to secede is a sensible precommitment strategy, one that is likely to remove a serious threat to democratic processes. There are at least two possible responses to this line of argument. The first is that if the existence of the nation confers mutual benefits-an assumed precondition for its continuation-then subunits will rarely threaten to secede even if constitutionally authorized to do so, and the threat will rarely be credible even if made. The costs of secession will usually be at least as large for the subunit as for the nation. On this view, recognition of a right to secede would never or rarely have the adverse effects claimed for it. A well-functioning nation simply will not face serious secession threats; subunits will invoke the right only in the most extraordinary circumstances. Indeed, in those circumstances the right is a necessary corrective to the status quo. 
Greenhouse, East Europe Finds Pain on Journey to Capitalism, NY Times Al 
" See, for example, Wise, Czechs, Slovaks Reach Agreement on Federal,Regional Power-SharingPlan (cited in note 48);'GorbachevExplains ProposedUnion Pact (cited in note 87). 
91 US Const, Art I, § 10, cl 1 (barring the states from passing "any... Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts"). See also Federalist 44 (Madison), in Rossiter, ed, The Federalist Papers280, 282-83 (cited in note 17). 
This rejoinder may be correct. Under certain circumstances, recognition of a right to secede would probably make little difference. But the rejoinder seems too optimistic. Sometimes secession may well further the economic interest of the subunit, or the threat might be credible because an economic loss would be counteracted by gains in terms of symbolism or subunit autonomy. Moreover, national politics affecting multiple subunits are subject to unpredictable and often highly emotional factors. Technocratic rationality does not characterize deliberations in which the specter of secession is involved. The mere possibility of secession may prevent calm negotiation.2 
There can be no assurance that secession will not be threatened simply because things are generally going well and there is mutual interdependence. Inflamed subunit sentiments have been a characteristic feature of recent developments in constitution-making, in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.93 And in Eastern Europe in particular, social, economic, and environmental problems-many demanding strong action from the central government-have been quite severe, further fueling ethnic and regional conflicts. In these circumstances a right to secede would be especially dangerous. 
The second response would generalize the first, claiming that the case against a constitutional right to secession is simply too speculative. All of the harmful effects are possible, but there is no good reason to think that they will occur. Perhaps a right to secede is a necessary inducement to persuade subunits to enter the nation at all. Perhaps subunits will rarely invoke the right to secede, because social and political norms will deter them from doing so. Perhaps the costs of secession to all subunits will be so high as to make the threat implausible. The greater the degree of interdependence and cohesion, of course, the higher the costs of secession. Perhaps strategic behavior will be collectively punished, so that it will occur rarely if at all. Perhaps the right to secede will be in 
Is For an example from the American experience, see David M. Potter, The Impending Crisis, 1848-1861 209-11 (Harper & Row, 1976) (describing the breakdown of reasoned deliberation that occurred when Senator Charles Sumner, the prominent Massachusetts abolitionist, was beaten with a cane by South Carolina Representative Preston Brooks after Sumner ridiculed the "loose expectoration" in the speech of Brooks's relative, Senator Andrew Butler, a supporter of slavery). 
note 75) Jonathan Kaufman, Tunnel at the End of the Light for E. Europe, Boston Globe 1 (Oct 21, 1990); Chuck Sudetic, Ethnic Rivalries Push Yugoslavia to Edge, NY Times A14 (Oct 14, 1990) ("Ethnic Rivalries"); Simon Jenkins, Nationalism's Dark Cloud over the DemocraticBattlefield of Europe, The Sunday Times (London) C3 (Jan voked only in-cases in which it is an important safeguard. 
These suggestions are plausible. Under certain conditions, the right to secession would have few deleterious effects, and it may prevent serious harms. This is especially so in cases involving a weak or loose confederation without substantial interdependencies-the very concept now gaining popularity in Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union. In such cases, the risks posed by strategic behavior and inflamed ethnic and other passions will be less severe. For the European Community, for example, a right to secede may therefore be more sensible, and indeed it will provide a greater incentive to join in the first instance. 
For those deciding on the contents of a constitution, the questions are which scenarios are most likely and which provide the worst case. The most that one can do here is to point to the often large emotional attachments to subunits, the possibility of financial gains from strategic behavior, the familiar frailties of human nature, the rational and irrational factors that can make subunits press secession claims, and the potentially debilitating effects of such claims on subunit and national processes of self-government. 
In view of these considerations, it seems highly likely that recognition of a constitutional right to secede would create serious difficulties. In Eastern Europe, where strong nationalist passions persist and threaten to infect daily politics if given an explicit constitutional home, a right to secede would be especially damaging to the prospects for democratic government. All this suggests a strong presumption against a constitutional right to secede. 
Even if a constitutional right to secede would create risks for democratic politics, the case against such a right has hardly been completed. It might well be that the countervailing considerations, justifying a right to secede, outweigh any such adverse effects. 
To explore this question, it will be useful to examine why a subunit of a country might want to secede. The reasons fall into five basic categories. All of them have played a prominent role in discussions of this subject in Eastern Europe. Thus, for example, infringement of civil liberties has played a role in Yugoslavia, where the fear of Serbian oppression partly motivates Slovenian and Croatian secessionism, and in the Ukraine, where Soviet suppression of the Ukrainian Church has played a similar role. Economic self-interest has been a motivating factor in the wealthier republics of Yugoslavia and also in the Soviet Union.9 4 Economic exploitation has been relevant in the Ukraine9. 5 The injustice of the original acquisition is of special importance in Lithuania, Estonia, and Latvia. Claims of cultural and ethnic integrity have played a role in the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic." 
Many of these arguments provide plausible grounds for secession as a matter of political morality.97 I evaluate them briefly here, with special attention to their relationship to a claimed constitutional right to secede. 
A subunit might want to secede because its people are being oppressed, according to (let us assume) traditional liberal understandings of oppression. In the Soviet Union, for example, the '" See Clines, Byelorussia Joins Sovereignty Move (cited in note 77). "5 See Clines, UkrainiansDeclare Republic Sovereign (cited in note 68). 
" See UkrainiansRally Against Moscow, NY Times A10 (Oct 1, 1990); Sudetic, Ethnic Rivalries (cited in note 93); Pellar, Czechs Fearfor Federation(cited in note 54). 
17 For an especially helpful discussion, overlapping with the argument here, see Allen Buchanan, Toward a Theory of Secession, 101 Ethics 322 (1991). The credibility of the moral case makes it especially troublesome to suggest that military force should be used to stop secession-a difficult problem that I cannot discuss in detail here. Sometimes military force will be justified because the ground for secession is itself weak or involves oppression, as in the case of the American Civil War. Sometimes such force will deter other secession movements, and this will justify force when the secession movements are not, all things considered, legitimate ones. But the consequences of the use of military force are generally unpredictable and often worse than first anticipated. In this light the question whether a nation should be kept together through official violence cannot be sensibly answered in the abstract. At any rate, one need not and should not extrapolate from the American experience the proposition that civil war is always preferable to secession. 
11 By traditional liberal understandings, I mean to include rights to freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures, private property, and the rule of law. See Stephen Holmes, Benjamin Constant and the Making of Modern Liberalism 131-38 (Yale, 1984). I do not discuss here the more particular view that secession is necessary to prevent (what some consider to be) abuses of government in the form of redistribution of resources, social and economic regulation, and taxation methods that are characteristic of western industrialized democracies. This view, associated with the ideas about the state set out in different forms in Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (Basic, 1974), and Richard A. Epstein, Takings (Harvard, 1985), might on certain assumptions argue powerfully in favor of a secession right as a means of disabling government. If one wants to disable government in this broad way, a secession right might be more easily justified-though even here alternative mechanisms might be preferable, and the cure might be worse than the disease. 
Note also that a right to secede might be sought, not to disable modern government, but to establish a territorial right vindicated by history, or to ensure self-government by ethnic or other groups. See also Part II.B. (arguing that economic self-interest of a subunit is not a sufficient reason for a right to secede). history of widespread abridgement of free speech, of political liberty as a whole, and of basic guarantees of individual independence an security might well have supported a claim to secede, certainly before the increasing freedom encouraged by the Gorbachev regime in the late 1980s. 
Governmental oppression of this sort might be limited to a subunit, or it might be part of a general pattern of governmental abuse. For example, the government may have limited the right to freedom of speech in only one part of the nation. Alternatively, the oppression might be quite general, and the subunit might want to secede because it sees itself as subject, like other subunits, to an intolerable regime. 
In this latter case, something other than the fact of oppression must also be at work in order to justify secession as distinct from, say, civil disobedience or revolution. If the oppression is general, some independent factor-like cultural homogeneity or a claim to territorial integrity based on history-is necessary to unite one of the many subunits that are, by hypothesis, being oppressed. For this reason, I focus here on the case of a subunit that is singled out for injustice, in the form of abridgement of civil liberties or civil rights. 
When oppression is pervasive, and not otherwise remediable, secession is a justified response; it is fully plausible to say that a subunit is entitled to leave a nation that is oppressing it. Standing alone, however, injustice or oppression does not provide a powerful case for creating a constitutional right to secede. If the central government suspends civil rights and civil liberties, the preferable response is to restore rights and liberties through the pressure of domestic or international law. A selective abridgement of the right of free speech is far more naturally countered by a restoration of that right than by permitting exit from the nation. Abridgement of civil rights or civil liberties appears to provide no good argument for a constitutional right to secede, but instead furnishes reasons for a constitutional order that makes abridgement unlikely. 
If restoration is for some reason impossible, of course, secession might be necessary. In Eastern European nations without a recent history of protection of civil rights and civil liberties, such novel institutions as checks and balances and judicial review may take a long time to develop, and provide weak safeguards, especially at first.99 In such cases a constitutional right to secede could 99 In America, judicial review-itself an extratextual practice-did not take root until fourteen years after the enactment of the written Constitution. Marbury v Madison, 5 US 137 (1803). be understood as an indirect, second-best means of reducing the risk of oppression. The oppression is not by itself a sufficient ground for secession, but the secession right is necessary to forestall it, buttressing the other constitutional safeguards. A possible preliminary conclusion, then, is that the risk that a central government will abridge the liberties of members of a subunit, or a history of such abridgement, combined with the infeasibility of eliminating the oppression, can justify both secession as a matter of political morality and the creation of a right to secede. 
The implications for constitutional practice are twofold. The first and most obvious is that constitutional systems should contain powerful safeguards against the abridgement of civil rights and civil liberties. The most important such safeguards are checks and balances, federalism, a specification of protected rights, and judicial review. If the constitution establishes these safeguards and the central government observes them, this ground for secession will disappear altogether. This is admittedly a large task in Eastern Europe, but it is far more likely than a secession right to produce sound long-term results. 
The second and more complex implication is that a constitutional right to secede may be necessary to deter the abridgement of civil rights and civil liberties. This argument has foundations in the work of Thomas Jefferson, who favored both small political units and occasional therapeutic rebellions-views that led him to endorse a right to secede. Thus Jefferson wrote in 1816, "If any State in the Union will declare that it prefers separation ... to a continuance in union . . . I have no hesitation in saying, 'let us separate.' "100 
We can find a parallel to this argument in the continuing debates over federalism and rights of interstate mobility. Any society that constitutes its government through a federal system-one that embodies a decision to allow for movement among states and to limit the scope of national law-necessarily creates a built-in safeguard against political or economic oppression. A government that oppresses its citizenry will soon find itself without citizens at all. In Eastern Europe, for example, the existence of national controls that could not be escaped through rights of exit served as an extremely powerful check against change. The denial of the right to travel was therefore the denial of a crucial political right, one that 'oo Thomas Jefferson, Letter to W. Crawford (June 20, 1816), quoted in Lee C. Buchheit, Secession: The Legitimacy of Self-Determination109 (Yale, 1978). belongs on the same plane as voting.10' The recent history of Germany powerfully illustrates this proposition. 
In a healthy federal system, states will often compete to attract citizens by offering better services. The result should be a beneficial "race" to provide a mix of laws and regulations that maximize liberty and security. Indeed, the fact of interstate mobility in the United States is probably a far more powerful check against many forms of state tyranny than the existence of judicial review. Of course, there is a dark side to this process. The "race" can be harmful as well as beneficial. Consider cases in which states compete for revenue-providing industry by eliminating environmental or occupational regulation that would in fact be optimal; here the competition is destructive, and the national government accordingly must be authorized to impose uniform regulation on its subunits. But there can be no doubt that the right of exit operates as a powerful check on tyranny of various sorts. It might follow that a right to secede could be justified as a similar and quite valuable mechanism for ensuring against oppression by the national government. The fact that the method is indirect does not mean that it is not extremely effective. 
In some contexts, a right to secede.might well be justified on this ground. Especially when it seems clear that other institutions cannot protect civil rights and civil liberties, a secession right might be justifiable. But in general, it is doubtful whether the argument overcomes the considerations against a constitutional right traced in Part I. I have noted that there are far more direct and less dangerous means of protecting against the abridgement of civil rights and civil liberties. A good constitution will contain those means. Rights of interstate mobility and a federal structure will operate as additional safeguards. 
At least most of the time, a constitutional right to secede would create severe risks without at the same time conferring benefits that cannot be largely or entirely achieved through other strategies. In Eastern Europe in particular, secession movements have arisen at a time when the abridgement of civil rights and liberties has been dramatically decreased, a point that suggests that '0 See, for example, Shapiro v Thompson, 394 US 618 (1969) (holding unconstitutional a state statutory provision denying welfare to residents who have not resided in the jurisdiction for at least one year on grounds that personal liberty includes freedom to travel throughout country without unreasonable burdens or restrictions); Kramer v Union Free School District,395 US 621 (1969) (invalidating state statute limiting right to vote in school district elections to those who own or lease taxable real property in the district or who are parents of children enrolled in the schools). the secession right is usually not founded on this form of oppression at all. Secession was not a feasible option in Eastern Europe as long as central governments consistently denied civil rights and liberties. For this reason, an attempted justification of a secession right based on those grounds seems unpersuasive. 
A subunit might want to secede because economic self-interest suggests it ought to proceed on its own. The subunit may be subsidizing other people of the nation in various ways; for example, it may have valuable natural resources that are being used by outsiders at costs lower than the subunit would like to charge, or its members may be especially productive. Members of the subunit might come to believe that they will be financially better off if they create their own country. 
In Eastern Europe, this sort of argument appears to have played at least some role in recent discussions. In Yugoslavia, the comparatively rich and developed northern republics of Slovenia and Croatia have sought to secede. Many Slovaks appear to fear that the Czechs will take a disproportionate share of the benefits of western investment, and that the government of President Havel will not protect Slovakian economic interests. 
Whether or not economic self-interest justifies secession as a matter of political morality is a complex question. The answer will turn, at least in part, on whether there is a justification for the economic harms faced by the subunit. This judgment will depend in turn on theories about what the state may do. For example, some appealing to the rule of the state attempt to justify redistribution from rich subunits to poor ones. If such redistribution is indeed justified, then the fact that the economic self-interest of the rich subunit has been jeopardized is not a good basis for secession. 
Regardless of one's view of the propriety of redistribution, however, the fact that secession might further a subunit's economic self-interest provides insufficient reason to create a right to secede. At any given time a subunit may be contributing more than what seems its fair share, and perhaps some subunits will be doing so for very long periods. But unless there is some kind of injustice, the mere fact that secession is in a subunit's self-interest does not justify creation of that right. Self-interest is usually a controversial grounds for political action at the individual level, unless translated into terms that invoke reasons other than self-interest alone; it is all the more difficult to support secession of subunits on this ground. 
HeinOnline -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev. 659 1991 
This is especially so in light of the fact that to allow self-interest to be a justification would produce a range of risks, canvassed above, to the successful operation of the polity. Economic self-interest is an especially weak basis for creating a constitutional right to secede in light of the multiple deleterious effects that such a right would have for the process of national self-government, which may well be in the long-term interest of all subunits of the country. A precommitment strategy is therefore appropriate. 
A more serious argument for a right to secession would stress economic exploitation. By this term I mean not that a subunit is simply losing, but that it can claim, with reasons, that the central government is treating it unfairly. We might hypothesize that the nation is systematically depleting the subunit's resources for the general good, thus reducing the subunit's wealth far below what it would be if the subunit stood alone; or the nation might be unfairly discriminating against the subunit in the distribution of general benefits and burdens. A claim for secession might well be based on this sort of behavior from the nation's center. Indeed, a right to secede-as in the case of abridgement of civil liberties and civil rights-might be justified as a means of deterring economic exploitation of subunits. In Yugoslavia, this idea has played an important role. Slovenia and Croatia are economically advantaged, and they fear that they will have to submit to a Serbian-controlled national government, which they will have to subsidize. 
In some cases, economic exploitation might indeed justify secession as a matter of political morality. But does the prospect of exploitation argue for a constitutional right to secede? There are several possible answers here. The first is that it is hard to define the baseline against which to measure a claim of exploitation; the term itself is a placeholder for ideas that must be substantively defended. No subunit has an antecedent right to a stream of welfare identical to what it would have received if it had not been a member of the nation. Moreover, it is extraordinarily difficult to calculate benefits and burdens, especially over long periods of time. In many cases the 'question of exploitation will be hard to assess in light of the many links by which subunits in a nation become economically interdependent. 
Suppose that in some cases we might agree that a subunit is being exploited by the nation. In such cases, a good constitution will provide both structural and rights-based provisions designed to prevent discrimination against certain subunits, and these pro 
HeinOnline -- 58 U. Chi. L. Rev. 660 1991 1991] visions will make a right to secede unnecessary. The subunit should, for example, be granted full representation in the legislature; this is a built-in, if partial, corrective. (It is only partial because other parts of the nation may unite against the subunit-hardly an unfamiliar phenomenon.) The United States Constitution achieves this goal in part through the establishment of a bicameral legislature in which all states, regardless of size, have equal representation in one house. This requirement is, in fact, the only element of the Constitution specifically protected by the document itself against amendment without the consent of the affected state.102 The constitution could also ban discriminatory taxation, or require unanimous consent to certain measures raising a risk of exploitation. 
These strategies pose dangers as well. Perhaps discriminatory taxation is justified as a redistributive strategy or as a means of taking account of differences in initial endowments. Perhaps discriminatory taxation is a reasonable response to the nature of the object of the tax. Suppose, for example, that a nation decides, out of concern for the environment and the public health, to limit through taxation the growing of tobacco or the mining of high-sulfur coal. Those regions that produce the relevant commodities will bear the brunt of the tax, but this disparate impact does not necessarily make the tax bad or secession justifiable. Moreover, a unanimity or supermajority requirement may forestall desirable national action. In this sense such a requirement poses some of the risks of a secession right. But the basic point is that a right to secede is a second-best and highly indirect remedy, one that creates a range of problems independent of economic exploitation and whose purposes might be accomplished through other means. 
Secession might be sought by a subunit that claims that its membership in the nation originally resulted from unjustified aggression, and that sees itself as having territorial integrity as a matter of history and international law, properly construed. Often some understanding of this kind plays a role in secession claims. Suppose Subunit A existed as an independent entity at an earlier period. The larger unit absorbed Subunit A through war or aggres162US Const, Art V. sion. The subunit now seeks to separate from the nation as a way of undoing an historical wrong. 
In Eastern Europe, of course, ideas of this sort have surfaced prominently and provided an important impetus for secession movements, especially in the Baltic states. Formerly independent Lithuania was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union in 1940 as a result of the Nazi-Soviet Pact, and the incorporation was clearly unlawful. Latvia and Estonia claim, plausibly, that they too were forcibly and illegally incorporated as a result of the same agreement. For these states, the Soviets are an occupying power, and their inclusion in the union resulted from duress in the form of a threatened Soviet attack. 
Arguments of this kind may well provide a sufficient moral reason for secession. Certainly if little time has passed since the original aggression, a right to secede seems self-evident; it corrects the original injustice. But for three reasons, it is doubtful whether the existence of historic abuses is a sufficient reason to create a constitutional right to secede. 
The first is that a well-functioning system of international law is the best, most direct way to prevent and to respond to aggression.1 3- A right to secede is too general, applying in cases when there has not been aggression at all. At most the phenomenon of aggression justifies a moral right to secede in some narrowly defined class of cases in which membership in the nation was originally involuntary. Something like that right already exists as a matter of international law.10 4 A generalized constitutional right to secession is unnecessary to recognize a right to exit from a union created by force. 
The second problem is a practical one. A nation that takes other countries by force, and incorporates them, is unlikely to re103 The Iraqi annexation of Kuwait is a recent example, though here it was necessary to resort to force to bring about compliance with principles of international law. 
104This is the ambiguous and controversial right of self-determination. See Buchheit, Secession: The Legitimacy of Self-Determinationat 8-20 (cited in note 100). The principle of self-determination, recognized in the United Nations Charter and in numerous U.N. Declarations, came to have great importance in the era of decolonization, though the contours of the right-particularly with respect to armed intervention by third parties intent on furthering the right-remain unclear. See also United Nations Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, which proclaims "The principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples" ("[A]ll peoples have the right freely to determine, without external interference, their political status . . . and every State has the duty to respect this right in accordance with the provisions of the Charter.") UN Res 2625 (Oct 24, 1970), in Dusan J. Djonovich, ed, 13 United Nations Resolutions,Series I (GeneralAssembly Resolutions) 337, 339 (Oceana, 1976). spect any right to secede that it has formally recognized. The Soviet Union is at least a partial example." 5 In the event of incorporation by force, a right to secede is especially prone to becoming an ineffectual "parchment barrier."' 06 
The third problem is that the drigins of many, perhaps most, nations often involve aggression and abuse at some point in the past, and it is not easy to decide which such abuses provide a sufficient basis for a right to secede. The category of cases in which secession can plausibly be justified on such grounds is simply enormous, and if secession is generally to be permitted, the result would be an intolerable disruption of established arrangements. This consideration suggests that while the injustice of the original acquisition will often provide a good basis for a secession right, a system that would allow secession in all such circumstances would be hard to defend. 0 7 
In cases of subunits absorbed through aggression, then, the preferable remedy is a system of international law, including an internationally recognized right to restore original borders when sufficiently little time has passed and when exercise of that right would not unduly disrupt existing arrangements. 10 8 Sometimes a right to secede is in fact justified on this ground as a matter of political morality, and this factor argues in favor of some secession movements now occurring in Eastern Europe, especially in the Baltic states. But a domestic constitutional provision guaranteeing the right to secede is both too small and too large a way to deal with this problem. 
Bohlen, Gorbachev Bars Independence Bids of 2 Baltic Lands, NY Times Al (May 15, 1990); Bill Keller, Moscow Lays Out Terms for Baltics, NY Times A18 (June 1 
'' This term originated with Madison. See Federalist 48 (Madison), in Rossiter, ed, The FederalistPapers308, 338 (cited in note 17). 
107For purposes of law and morality, it is both necessary and difficult to make temporal and other distinctions. Subunits initially absorbed by aggression or other unjust means often become well-integrated into a union over time and come to enjoy many benefits from membership in the union. (Hawaii is an example.) At least when a good deal of time has passed, it is hardly clear that injustices of several generations past by themselves justify secession. 
annexed through aggression have a good moral justification for secession would take me far beyond the current discussion. For a valuable discussion of the crucial territorial dimension to secession claims, see Lea Brilmayer, Secession and Self-Determination:A Territorial Interpretation,16 Yale J Intl L 17 
Often a claimed right to secede is built on an understanding that the subunit has a cultural integrity that entitles it to self-determination. The subunit perceives itself as both homogeneous and -substantially different in terms of basic norms and commitments. The very fact that it is governed by a broader entity appears to be a form of tyranny, or an unjustifiable absorption by foreigners. Rule by outsiders eviscerates the subunit's distinct identity. 
Ideas of this sort have frequently fueled secession movements in Eastern Europe and elsewhere. Slovakia, for example, is more agricultural and devoutly Roman Catholic than is the Czech Republic, and the cultural difference certainly plays a role in the secession movement. Often a claim to cultural integrity is accompanied by a perception that the subunit had territorial integrity in the past, and was the object of unjustifiable aggression. As a practical matter, the two arguments tend to go hand in hand. 
'Whether a claim to cultural integrity justifies secession as a matter of political morality is a complex matter. Certainly ethnic homogeneity can make rule by outsiders impossible or oppressive. Just as certainly, productive interactions among heterogeneous groups can make for an especially successful democracy. History offers examples of both phenomena. It is therefore impossible to say, in the abstract, whether secession can be justified on this ground. Much will depend on how culturally homogenous groups are treated by the larger nation, the nature of the differences between the subunit and the nation, and the forms their hornogeneity takes. For example, a cultural group that oppresses others in its region can hardly make a powerful mbral claim for a right to selfgovernance if the larger nation prizes civil liberties. 10 9 
Here, as before, any legitimate claims that underlie a right to secession might be accommodated by narrower and less dangerous strategies-in particular, federalism and representation mechanisms. A system of federalism often guards against precisely the problem of rule by remote leaders having insufficient identification with or knowledge of subunits. In the Amdrican experience, federalism was designed to ensure local self-determination while at the same time providing and thus benefiting from governance at the national level. Federal systems can allow a large degree of govern109 The attempt at secession by the American South is an example. In such a case, secession would be unjustified even as a matter of political morality. A desire to oppress all or part of the citizenry is not a good basis for secession. The American Civil War was of course fought partly over these grounds. ance by subunits claiming cultural and territorial integrity. Indeed, the national constitution may restrict the central government to certain enumerated powers, including provision of national defense or regulation of interstate commerce,10° or it may expressly reserve certain powers of internal self-governance to the subunits. It may well be that through these routes, federal systems can accommodate many of the concerns that underlie claims to secession based on cultural integrity. 
Systems of representation might also supply a corrective here. Seats in the national legislature might be set aside for subunit representatives, to ensure that the views of subunits are expressed on an ongoing basis during the deliberative process. Such seats might provide a form of proportional or even super-proportional representation. Perhaps a minority veto should be ensured on certain issues. 
In some circumstances, however, these solutions will be inadequate. Sometimes nationhood demands interference with local selfdetermination, as in regulation of intrastate commerce having interstate effects. Sometimes the claim for self-determination is largely an emotional one, coming from a group affronted by the very fact of national incorporation and national rule. Sometimes nationhood involves an inevitable surrender of components of sovereignty claimed by subunits. If full self-determination is the goal, the only remedy will be secession, enabling the subunit to escape entirely from the legal authority of the nation. 
It may be that this argument is sufficient, as a matter of political morality, to justify secession in some contexts. It is surely strengthened if the argument from cultural integrity is accompanied by a claim to territorial integrity in the past. But it is doubtful that, standing alone, the argument from cultural integrity justifies a constitutional right to secede. In such cases, we are often dealing, by hypothesis, with subunits that voluntarily agreed to enter the nation at some earlier time."' In such cases, the claim of cultural integrity will frequently be inadequate, because sufficient commonalities with the nation will likely exist, justifying the original agreement. Whether or not this is so, recognition of a right to secede, based on grounds of cultural integrity, will probably pose 110This is, of course, the strategy followed by the United States Constitution. See US Const, Art I. 
"I If the argument emphasizes the injustice of the original entry, as in the case of the Baltic states, then it is not simply based on cultural integrity and should be analyzed as in Part II.D. dangers to national self-determination that are not counterbalanced by the advantages to the various subunits themselves. Whether or not the interest in cultural integrity provides a good moral justification for secession, it does not support a decision to place a right to secede in a founding document. 
Indeed, cultural integrity is a particularly weak reason to constitutionalize the right to secede insofar as it is precisely the cultural integrity of subunits that most dramatically threatens processes 'of national self-determination. In the most extreme cases, revolution or a negotiated settlement may be justified. But constitutional recognition of a right to secede would be a cure worse than the disease. 
The right to revolt differs in interesting ways from the right to secede. It would be plausible to constitutionalize the former right as, in a sense, the United States Constitution has done through the right of amendment," 2 which in theory could be used by Congress and the states to rewrite the founding document in fundamental ways. But since the point of a revolution is to reject the established order, it is unclear why constitutionalization of any such right would be a useful step at all. If the argument above is persuasive, however, it is even less plausible to constitutionalize the right to secede. The latter right is usually defined in the discrete terms of some subunit-geographical, ethnic, or religious, or some combination of these-and these features of the relevant right pose the distinctive risks of strategic bargaining or an inflamed polity. A right of revolution does not create these risks in an even vaguely similar fashion. 
Nor does a negotiated settlement pose the difficulties involved in a right to secede. The whole point of such a right is that there is no need for the approval of others in order for the right to be exercised. A negotiated settlement can be brought about without a constitutionalized secession right.113 
A possible response to the discussion thus far would be that the right-to secede should indeed be constitutionalized, but hedged with qualifications and limitations that minimize the risk of strategic behavior. At least four possibilities seem plausible. One strat112 US Const, Art V. 
113 Such a settlement might of course be blocked with a constitutional prohibition against secession, even of the voluntary kind. But it is unclear how such a prohibition could be beneficial. egy would allow secession if and only if a large majority of the subunit sought it. Another would allow secession only under certain enumerated circumstances, as, for example, in cases of suspension of civil liberties or economic exploitation. Yet another would create a requirement of prolonged deliberation before secession would be lawful. Such a system might involve, for example, multiple popular votes, with substantial waiting periods between votes.114 A fourth approach would create a right to secede, either absolute or qualified, but make it nonjusticiable. Each of these possibilities raises difficult and general questions about constitutionalism. I deal with them only briefly here. 
All of these routes have large advantages over an unqualified right to secede, but it is doubtful whether the advantages justify constitutionalization of even a qualified right to secede. A requirement of a supermajority would certainly limit the occasions for, and seriousness of, secession threats. But in cases in which the subunit can be energized-for reasons of economic self-interest or ethnic and territorial self-identification-the protection would be inadequate. It is true that a subunit may want to secede for good reasons, but as discussed above, there are better and less disruptive means of ensuring that the good motivations that sometimes underlie secession movements can be addressed. These involve, above all, federalism, checks and balances, entrenchment of civil rights and civil liberties, and judicial review. If these protections are inadequate, it is highly doubtful that a qualified right to secede will do the job. 
There is something to be said in favor of a secession provision that would be limited to specified causes. Such a provision might be treated as ancillary to the nondiscrimination principles and basic protections of liberties. It would furnish a powerful and selfenforcing mechanism against violations of the relevant rights. But to accomplish these purposes, the right to secede is probably too blunt and dangerous an instrument. One might hope that the direct provisions discussed above will be sufficient. More fundamentally, the recognition on paper of a right to secede is unlikely to be a useful supplement if they are not. A state that violates its textual 114 The State of New York has created such a process for dealing with the secessionist demands of Staten Island, a subunit of the City of New York that may prefer to become an independent municipality. Staten Island residents must first approve secession in two referenda, with a period for hearings between the two votes; the state legislature would then have to pass legislation approving the secession. See City of New York v State of New York, 557 NYS2d 914, 158 AD2d 169 (1990) (rejecting equal protection challenge to this scheme). commitments to civil rights and liberties will probably not respect its textual commitment to secession. 
A right to secede after an extended period of deliberation would probably be the best of the various alternatives. Through this route it would be possible to reduce some of the risks of an inflamed polity. Indeed, the very difficulty of obtaining secession would deter efforts to seek that remedy unless it seemed necessary, and would diminish the possibility that any threat of secession could disrupt democratic and deliberative processes. For this reason it could not be said, a priori, that such a system would necessarily be undesirable. But in Eastern European nations with a history of ethnic and religious tensions, even a secession right modified in this way would pose significant risks to self-governance. A prolonged deliberative period over the question of continued ties to the nation could create all of the threats emphasized above. Probably the best result is not to create the right at all. 
A final possibility would be to create a right to secede but to make it nonjusticiable-that is, to make the right one that courts will not recognize or enforce. India's Constitution follows this strategy mainly with respect to certain "positive" rights, including the right to subsistence. 115 Such rights are recognized in the sense that the constitution makes them binding on the legislature, but the courts are unable to protect them. The argument for entrenched but nonenforceable rights is that their entrenchment establishes norms that government is morally and politically obliged to respect, but whose judicial enforcement would create, in especially severe forms, the various difficulties produced when judges lacking policymaking competence or a good electoral pedigree are responsible for the vindication of constitutional rights. 116 The right to subsistence is a plausible candidate for this strategy because of "' Part IV of the Indian Constitution includes "Directive Principles of State Policy," which are nonjusticiable. See Art 37: "The provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws." These provisions include minimalization of inequalities in income and elimination of inequalities in status, facilities, and opportunities (Art 38, cl 2); "equal pay for equal work for both men and women" (Art 39(d)); free and compulsory elementary education (Art 45); the securing of a "living wage" for all workers (Art 43). The right to subsistence is most directly stated in Art 39, which provides: "The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing: (a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood. . . ." Constitution of India (1949), reprinted in Albert P. Blaustein, et al, India 62-64, in Blaustein and Flanz, eds, 7 Constitutions of the Countries of the World (cited in note 1). 
11 See Lawrence Gene Sager, FairMeasure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Constitutional Norms, 91 Harv L Rev 1212 (1978). the vagueness of the right and, more fundamentally, the obvious problems in its judicial definition and implementation. Perhaps the right to secede should be placed in this category. 
The principal difficulty with this claim is that nonjusticiable rights are usually those whose elaboration would strain judicial capacities. Here there is no such problem. To make the right to secession nonjusticiable would reflect not a problem of definition or implementation, but instead ambivalence about the right itself. As distinguished from the right to subsistence, there is nothing vague about the right to secede. Moreover, as the recent experiences of constitutionalism in Eastern Europe and China reveal, judicially unenforceable constitutional rights are frequently not rights at all. By itself this consideration makes it important to ensure that constitutional rights are generally enforceable, lest the specification of unenforceable rights lead, in a system unaccustomed to such rights at all, to a process in which constitutional rights are generally not subject to real-world vindication. 
If the case for a right to secede is persuasive, then the right should be both entrenched in the text and judicially enforceable. If the case is weak, then an unenforceable right is no better than no right at all. In any case, the right to secede does not have the characteristics that sometimes justify entrenched but unenforceable rights. 
CONCLUSION 
Claims for recognition of a constitutional right to secede raise large questions about the nature of constitutional protections in the emerging Eastern European democracies. I have suggested that constitutional protections should often be understood as an effort to facilitate rather than merely to frustrate democratic processes. Such efforts take many forms: the protection of rights central to self-government; the creation of fixed and stable arrangements by which people might order their affairs; the removal of especially charged or intractable questions from the public agenda; the creation of incentives for compromise, deliberation, and agreement; and the solution of problems posed by collective action problems, myopia, impulsiveness, and prisoners' dilemmas. Ideas of this sort provide a helpful if partial foundation for considering possible provisions in new constitutions. In any case, they suggest that a right to secede does not belong in a founding document. 
In some cases, a right to secede will be fully justified as a matter of political morality. Nothing I have said argues against the view that subunits sometimes have good reasons for seceding. On the contrary, I have attempted to catalog the reasons for secession and in the process to show that those reasons are often powerful. But the existence of occasionally powerful moral claims supplies insufficient reason for constitutional recognition of the right to secede. A nation that recognizes this right, and is prepared to respect it,-may well find that it has thereby endangered ordinary democratic processes. A decision to allow a right of exit from the nation will divert attention from matters at hand, allow minority vetoes on important issues, encourage strategic and myopic behavior, and generally compromise the system of self-government. For this reason, a waiver of the right to secede should be seen as a natural part of constitutionalism, which frequently amounts to a precommitment strategy directed against problems of precisely this sort. People deciding on constitutional provisions often choose, in advance, to waive seemingly important rights when the waiver would serve the general interest. 
To say this is not, I emphasize, to deny that there are good reasons why a subunit might want to secede. In Eastern Europe, it is plausible to say that such reasons exist in several places. I have suggested that even when this is so, there are generally -more direct means of accomplishing the desired goals, such as local self-determination through federalism, firm protection of civil rights and civil liberties, and institutional and substantive guarantees against economic exploitation. It may be that the more direct means are in some circumstances inadequate. In such cases, however, the proper remedy is to reach a negotiated solution, to exercise the unwritten right to revolt, or to apply the pressure of domestic and international law, rather than to create a constitutional right to secede. 
DEMOCRATIZING AMERICA THROUGH LAW* 
Our system of government is ineffective, inefficient, and undemocratic. Current institutions are the source of these problems. Without great difficulty, legal reforms could dramatically improve these institutions. 
I propose three such reforms. First, government should rely much more than it does now on the provision of information, on disclosure, and on education. Second, economic incentives should replace the command-and-control regulation that has become so characteristic of our governmental institutions. Third, the law should promote more decentralization in the private and public spheres, allowing greater flexibility for states and localities, for employers, and for workers. 
In recent decades, prescriptions of this general sort have been set out by economists with considerable care and clarity. There can be no doubt that legal initiatives in these directions would increase the efficiency of contemporary government; they would also help guarantee that regulation is actually effective in accomplishing its goals. These would be large improvements, especially in a period in which American industries must compete in increasingly international markets. I will therefore devote considerable attention to explaining how efficiency and efficacy might be brought about by legal reforms. 
It is important to emphasize, however, that we are in the midst of a period in which much of the world has been embarking on the task of democratization. In such a period, it would be especially odd to concentrate our regulatory efforts on efficiency and efficacy alone. This is so particularly in light of the fact that from the standpoint of democratic theory, the contemporary American system of public law is nothing to celebrate. Democratic deliberation on the central issues is discouragingly rare. Sensationalistic anecdotes often dominate public debate. Powerful interest groups-on the left, right, and center-exert excessive influence over regulatory policy. Real participation in the public and private * This essay is derived from a lecture Professor Sunstein delivered December 5, 1991, as part of the Donahue Lecture Series. The Donahue Lecture Series is a program instituted by the Suffolk University Law Review to commemorate the Honorable Frank J. Donahue, former faculty member, trustee, and treasurer of Suffolk University. The Lecture Series serves as a tribute to Judge Donahue's accomplishments in encouraging academic excellence at Suffolk University Law School. Each lecture in the series is designed to address contemporary legal issues and expose the Suffolk University community to outstanding authorities in various fields of law. 
t The author is the Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. He gratefully acknowledges the helpful comments of Lucian Bebchuk, John Donohue, and Richard Posner on an earlier draft of this essay. 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 949 1991 spheres is at best episodic. In this light, few matters deserve higher priority than institutional changes designed to increase the democratic character of the modem state. 
I claim here that the three general reforms would promote not only efficiency and efficacy, but democracy as well. Strategies of disclosure and education are the precondition for a well-functioning democratic process. Without information, people cannot carry out their roles as citizens. Economic incentives have the fortunate consequence of requiring participants in the democratic process to focus on the key question: How much reduction in (say) risk do we want, and at what price? By contrast, existing approaches tend to distract attention from that question, and to direct it toward other issues that are at once less relevant and less intelligible. Decentralization is, under current conditions, an indispensable part of any strategy for democratization. The national government is simply too remote for general citizen control. 
The reforms for economic efficiency therefore go hand-in-hand with reforms for democratization. To be sure, we will at some stage have to make some difficult choices between efficiency and democracy.' But for the next generation, the three fundamental changes will bring about powerful movements in both directions. 
In this essay I will be painting with an extremely broad brush.2 My aim is to set out the very general contours of reform strategies. In order to do this, the discussion of particular questions will have to be greatly compressed. In the near future, of course, the particulars will deserve much greater detail. I sacrifice attention to specifics with the understanding that in thinking about reform of American public law, the general defects of the system have been lost too often, in favor of discussion of unnecessarily incremental changes. 
This essay has four parts. In Part I, I discuss the rise of the modem regulatory state, with particular reference to the New Deal period. Here I explore how the New Deal attempted simultaneously to increase economic efficiency and to promote democratization-and how it failed, in important respects, on both counts. In Part II, I explore the current state of regulatory government. I attempt to show its multiple inefficiencies and to say something about the consequences of those inefficiencies for the economy. I also explain why the current system of public law fails from the democratic point of view. In Part III, I outline remedies for the current situation, arguing that across a broad range, the goals of 
some sections of this essay. 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 950 1991 economic efficiency and democratization are entirely compatible. Part IV offers some significant qualifications to this general claim. 
I. 
THE NEW DEAL 
President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, undertaken in the 1930s, represented a fundamental restructuring of the American legal system. Some people think that it amounted to a kind of constitutional amendment.' We need not go so far in order to recognize its foundational status in modem American government. 
The New Deal operated against a well-defined constitutional backdrop.4 That backdrop included the three basic cornerstones of the American legal system: checks and balances; federalism; and individual rights. The New Dealers viewed all of these in the context of the Great Depression, which left huge numbers of Americans out of work. In that context, the New Dealers thought that the pre-existing system of individual rights protected both too little and too much. That system consisted largely of the common-law catalogue of rights "against" government, including most notably private property and freedom of contract. 
For the New Dealers, this catalogue protected too much, since it immunized existing holdings of property from democratic control. Not everything that people had, under the common law, was genuinely entitled to legal protection. The pre-existing system of rights also protected too little, since it furnished no safeguards against the various hazards of the market economy, including unemployment, homelessness, disability, and disease. 
The emerging conception of rights called for redistribution of various kinds and also for recognition of a novel category of protected interests. The ultimate result was President Roosevelt's second Bill of Rights, including "the right to a useful and remunerative job," "the right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation," "the right of every family to a decent home," "the right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy good health," "the right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and unemployment," and "the right to a good education." 5 Institutional changes followed from these ideas. Against the backdrop constitutional amendment). 
framework of Constitution); Sunstein, ConstitutionalismAfter the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REV. 421 (1987) (same). 
PAPERS AND ADDRESSES OF FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 41 (1969) (speech delivered Jan. 11, 1944). of the new conception of rights, the original system of checks and balances seemed anachronistic.6 Far from a precious safeguard of liberty from government, that system appeared an unnecessary constraint on democratic action designed to promote economic productivity and to protect the disadvantaged. The most radical attacks on checks and balances-including The Coming American Fascism,' a publication intended not as a warning but rather as an optimistic statement of the wonderful things to come-were rejected. But the attack on the system of checks and balances did have two enduring legacies. It helped produce a concentration of judicial and lawmaking power in the presidency, which was no longer restricted to execution of the laws, narrowly understood.' It also contributed to the New Deal enthusiasm for "independent" agencies. These novel entities combined traditionally separated functions and were immunized from direct control by any of the constitutionally specified branches. 
Under the New Deal reformation, the system of federalism fared little better. Those who produced the original framework envisioned states as an obstacle to national action,9 and also as an arena for democratic selfdetermination. For the New Dealers, the states were not a guarantor of freedom, but on the contrary a barrier to necessary social change. A redirection of authority from the states to the national government was indispensable if public officials were to carry out their new tasks. Greatly expanded national power, mostly under the commerce clause, was the result. 
Once authority was thus redirected, there was no doubt that the presidency would be the principal beneficiary. In a single bold stroke, Roosevelt united the Hamiltonian belief in an energetic executive with the Jeffersonian belief in collective self-determination. The presidency became the focal point for democratic self-governance. 
In the New Deal period, the belief in economic productivity and the belief in democracy were thoroughly merged. New institutions were necessary above all to improve the operation of the economy-increasing business confidence, providing the preconditions for stock markets, ensuring people of the stability of banks, managing the business cycle, and protecting farmers against undue economic fluctuations. Eventually spurred by Keynesian economics, the New Deal understanding of the role of the state was centered on the goal of economic prosperity. Roosevelt's program is often associated with protection of the disadvan6. See R. TUGWELL, THE BATTLE FOR DEMOCRACY (1935). 
America). 
taged, and this idea was indeed central to him.'° But government assurance of the successful performance of the economy was the principal goal of the New Deal reforms. 
This idea did not conflict with democratic ideals. On the contrary, the market system that preceded the New Deal was subject to sustained challenges in this period, precisely on democratic grounds. Before the rise of modern regulatory institutions, common-law courts, which were hardly accountable to the people, created much of the basic system of governance. Thus the law of property, tort, and contract was a crucial regulatory system. It had been created by the unelected judiciary. 
In the early part of the century, courts went so far as to interpret the Constitution as embodying common-law principles." In this way they immunized the common law from democratic control. By contrast, the new entities created by the New Deal were intended to be popularly accountable. Indeed, those entities would be supervised by the people in ways that would lead to large gains in democratic self-governance. Thus it was that the belief in economic prosperity and democratic government marched hand-in-hand. 
Contemporary governmental structures are best understood as an outgrowth of the New Deal reformation. Our current system is not, of course, by any means identical with what emerged from the New Deal period. There have been occasional bursts of governmental activity and retrenchment, and these have been quite important. Above all, the "rights revolution" of the late 1960s and early 1970s witnessed an extraordinary growth of new regulatory entities, rivalling the New Deal itself in scope and importance.' 2 Of particular interest was the creation of institutions designed to reduce risks in consumer products, the workplace, and the natural environment. 
Here the rhetoric of "rights" and "redistribution" accompanied the claims of democracy and efficiency. The new entities were supposed to protect the "right" to a safe workplace, an unpolluted atmosphere, and in clean water-and also to shift resources from (among others) employers to employees. Both economic and democratic goals were important here as well. The new institutions were supposed to remove a substantial drain on the economy, and also to reflect democratic judgments about risk reduction. 
Much the same can be said about the new attack, prominent since the Roosevelt's reaction to invalidation of National Industrial Recovery Act and support for child labor, minimum wage, maximum hours, and collective bargaining measures). 
hours of work). 
1960s, on discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and disability. Discrimination has been challenged as a barrier to economic productivity and to the political equality so crucial to democratic principles. In the area of civil rights, economic and democratic aspirations played a central and complementary role. 
At least since the election of President Reagan in 1980, we have been in a period of retrenchment, in which New Deal reforms have often been rethought in favor of renewed attention to the capacities of private markets. The enforcement practices of federal agencies have been significantly changed as a result. But there has been no fundamental rethinking of current institutions. The changes have been largely incremental. 
How has our system of public law actually performed? Has it promoted economic prosperity and democratic governance? We now have considerable evidence on both scores. And while there have been some significant successes,"l much of the overall story is dismaying. 
The current system of public law has been extraordinarily inefficient. The annual net cost of regulation has been estimated at between $44 and $200 billion. 4 There is no question that we need not spend this amount for the benefits we actually receive. 
So-called economic regulation-calling for price and entry controls in various sectors of the economy-produced unnecessary and exorbitant costs for American consumers. Thus it is estimated that airline deregulation yielded gains to airlines and travellers of about $15 billion annually.'5 The corresponding numbers for trucking deregulation and railroad deregulation were $30 billion and $15 billion. 6 The Natural Gas Act, which allowed government control of gasoline prices, certainly contributed to the dangerous gas shortages of the 1970s.' 7 The resulting inefficiencies led to decreases in industrial production, losses of hundreds 1991] of thousands of jobs, and reductions in the supply of gas for millions of Americans.1 8 
Nor are inefficiencies limited to the area of economic regulation. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has delayed the entry of beneficial foods and drugs into the market, significantly increasing risks to safety and health.' 9 The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) fuel economy standards appear to have produced uncertain gains in light of the fact that manufacturers were in any case moving to smaller and more efficient cars; but they did lead to significant losses in lives as a result of producing more dangerous, lighter vehicles.2 ° The United States spent no less than $632 billion for pollution control between 1972 and 1985.21 Some studies suggest that alternative strategies could have achieved the same gains at less than one-quarter of the cost. 22 
So much for the facts. What is the cause of the current situation? A pervasive source of regulatory inefficiency in the United States is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized "command and control" regulation, which dictates, at the national level, control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies and individuals in an exceptionally diverse nation. Command and control regulation is a dominant part of American government in such areas as environmental protection and occupational safety and health. 
In the environmental context, command and control approaches usually take the form of regulatory requirements of the "best available technology" (BAT), which are almost always imposed only on new pollution sources. BAT strategies are pervasive in federal law. Indeed, they are a defining characteristic of regulation of the air, the water, and conditions in the workplace.23 
One of the many problems with BAT strategies is that they ignore the enormous differences among plants and industries and among geographical areas. In view of these differences, it is wildly inefficient to impose nationally uniform technological requirements. It does not seem sensible to impose the same technology on industries in diverse areas-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. 
There are other sources of inefficiency as well. BAT strategies require 
(1983) (discussing harmful effects of FDA screening). 

(1988) (Clean Water Act). 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 955 1991 all new industries to adopt costly technology, and allow imposition of more lenient standards on existing plants and industries. Through this route BAT strategies actually penalize new products, thus discouraging investment and perpetuating old, dirty technology. The result is inefficiency in investment strategies, in innovation, and even in environmental protection. 
Such strategies also fail to encourage the development of new pollution control technology, and indeed, serve to discourage it by requiring its adoption for no financial gain. Under the BAT approach, a company that innovates will simply have to invest more in pollution control. It will be punished rather than rewarded for the development of new control technology. BAT strategies are also extremely expensive to enforce, imposing on the EPA and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) an extraordinary monitoring burden. 
Additional inefficiency stems from the fact that BAT approaches focus on the technology at the end of the pipe. This is merely a way of aiming at symptoms rather than underlying causes of pollution. For example, sulfur dioxide emissions (the major source of acid rain) are controlled by forcing coal-fired power plants to adopt costly "scrubbing" strategies. A much cheaper method of control is to encourage companies to switch to cleaner coal.24 
In general, governmental specification of the means of achieving desired ends is a good way of producing inefficiency. Instead of permitting industry and consumers to choose the "means"-and thus to impose a form of market discipline on that question-we often select the means in advance. The governmentally-prescribed means is often the inefficient one. 
Other inefficiencies in existing law stem from inadequate attention to the problem of incentives. Consider, for example, the Superfund statute, which was created to deal with the problem of abandoned toxic waste dumps. Congress' basic strategy was to impose joint and several liability on everyone connected with the dump in question-managers or owners of the site, generators of the waste, and transporters. 25 At first glance, the strategy seems both fair and efficient: fair, because it imposes cleanup duties on everyone; efficient, because it is likely to deter everyone from contributing to the problem of abandoned waste sites. 
A predictable consequence of this strategy is to produce incentives, not to clean up, but instead to have protracted litigation on the liability question. If everyone is liable, it is almost as bad as if no one is. The liability interest group pressures behind Clean Air Act). 

HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 956 1991 of each person is effectively "decreased" by virtue of the sheer numbers of people who are liable as well. For each person, contemplating possible courses of action, liability must be understood in the context of a situation in which many other people will be liable too. If hundreds of people are subject to suit, one can be sure that there will be endless litigation on the liability question. Thus it is that on average, seven years and at least $4 million in transactions costs are necessary before final clean-up even begins.26 
More generally, studies of the costs and benefits of regulatory programs show a crazy-quilt pattern, including both too much and too little regulation. Consider, for example, expenditures per life saved. 2 ' There is now considerable data on the amount of money spent to save lives in various government programs. Some programs pay for themselves in terms of health and related savings. The lives saved are purely a bonus, in the sense that they come for free. Other programs cost between $100,000 and $300,000 per life saved-surely an amount well worth spending. But still other programs cost $89 million per life saved, $92 million per life saved, even $132 million per life saved. To be sure, some disparities, even significant ones, might well be expected in a democracy.28 But it is difficult to believe that these differences reflect anything but interest-group power and irrationality of various sorts. In any case, they are highly inefficient. 
This brief summary should be sufficient to suggest that from the standpoint of efficiency, much of modern government is ill-directed. Some programs are not beneficial at all. Others have unnecessary and costly side-effects. We could obtain the same benefits much more cheaply. 
Sometimes inefficiency in government, particularly when described by economists, seems a dry and technical matter. But the consequences of the status quo are anything but technical. They include a range of adverse effects on human beings: excessively high prices, greater unemployment, lower benefits in terms of safety and health, more poverty, and increased difficulty for American companies and workers attempting to compete in an increasingly international market. 
B. 
The New Deal aspired not only to greater efficiency but also to more democracy. The New Dealers hoped for a system in which citizens and representatives, operating through responsive but expert organs, would make deliberate decisions about the basic system of public law. In place of the undemocratic; ad hoc systems of common-law ordering and judgemade constitutionalism, new regulatory institutions would be subject to political will and carry out public instructions. The new regime was to combine a high degree of accountability with a high degree of deliberation. 
In practice, this democratic aspiration has often been defeated. People rarely have enough information to participate at all, or at all well, in the processes of government. The extraordinary concentration of regulation in Washington has hampered democratic deliberation both in localities and in the private sphere. The use of complex technological mechanisms, and their centrality to actual outcomes, have contributed to the power of well-organized interest groups over the regulatory process. Thus it is that the New Deal has helped bring about a kind of Madisonian nightmare of government by faction.2 9 
Democratic failures have often been documented.3 ° The BAT approach, for example, is severely deficient from the standpoint of a wellfunctioning political process. That approach ensures that citizens and representatives will be focussing their attention not on what levels of reduction are appropriate, but instead on the largely incidental and nearly impenetrable question of what technologies are now available.3' Because of its sheer complexity, this issue is not easily subject to democratic resolution. Moreover, the issue is not the relevant one for democratic politics, which is the appropriate degree and nature of environmental protection-an issue to which the BAT question is only indirectly related. 
The focus on the question of "means" also tends to increase the power of well-organized private groups, by allowing them to press environmental and regulatory law in the service of their own parochial ends. These ends include, for example, the promotion of ethanol, which is helpful to corn farmers though not necessarily to environmental protection; other fuels might well be preferable on environmental grounds. Ends favored by parochial interests also include governmentally-compelled use of coal "scrubbers," which are helpful to eastern coal, although not necessarily to air quality. The use of already-clean coal might well be better.32 In this respect, the BAT strategy is emblematic of a far more general factionalizing of regulatory policy). 
AND THE COURTS (1983). 
Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENVTL. L. 171 (1988). 

HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 958 1991 problem in current regulation. Centralization at the national level diminishes opportunities for citizen participation. It promotes intense and unproductive struggles among well-organized factions. Education of citizens about the key issues-risk levels and risk comparisons-is at best episodic. In their capacity as consumers, citizens, workers, or users of the air and water, people are inadequately informed of the risks that they face. Public attention tends to be focussed on particular incidents, which are gripping and sensationalistic, but often misleading. 
In these circumstances, it is difficult to ensure that citizens and representatives will be involved in deliberating about different strategies for achieving social goals, or for deciding what those goals are in the first place. By directing attention to means, the system also creates powerful incentives for interest groups to ensure that they are favored in the legislature or the bureaucracy. Thus it is that current institutions cannot carry out Roosevelt's goal of linking the Hamiltonian commitment to an energetic executive with the Jeffersonian belief in self-government. The democratic aspirations of the New Deal have largely been defeated. 
REMEDIES 
It would be most fortunate if the inefficiencies in current regulation could be remedied through reform strategies that simultaneously promoted democratic government. In this section, I argue that the same reforms that would increase efficiency would indeed promote democracy. I deal with three such reforms: disclosure and education; economic incentives; and decentralization. 
Many Americans are unaware of the risks that they face in day-to-day life. Often workers do not know about toxic substances in workplaces, or about the risks that they cause. Consumers of ordinary foods are unable to evaluate the dangers posed by fats, calcium, sugar, and salt. People in small communities do not know that toxic waste dumping has occurred; and if they know the facts, they do not know the risks. 
Scenarios of this sort are especially likely in light of the fact that ordinary people have a difficult time obtaining information about risk. Causation is extremely complex here, and accurate inferences are extremely difficult to draw. Often risks take many years to materialize. Individual susceptibility varies. Changing technology makes learning from the past a hazardous enterprise. 3 
It would be reasonable to say that in cases of this sort, the interest in freedom or autonomy-quite apart from efficiency and democracy-requires a governmental remedy. Knowing choices are a precondition for liberty. Claims from efficiency and democracy argue in the same direction.3 4 Disclosure by the government itself, or by others at the government's behest, will often promote both efficiency and democracy. 
When information is lacking, there may well be a conventional case of market failure under economic criteria.3 5 To be sure, information-like other goods-is a scarce commodity. Perhaps the market has produced the optimal level of information. The optimal level is not complete information. If so, there is no market failure-even if there might be a problem under noneconomic criteria. But there are several reasons why the market for information may indeed fail. 
First, information is sometimes a public good. Once it is available at all, or to anyone, it is available to everyone or to many people. People can thus capture the benefits of information without having to pay for its production. Once created, a report discussing the risks posed by carcinogens in the workforce may well benefit employees a great deal-but no individual employee has the right incentive to pay his proportional share for the report. Each employee has the incentive to "free ride" on the efforts of others. The result is that too little information will be forthcoming. 
The point applies to materials about shared risks in general. Indeed, the point applies to materials about all information of shared importance. It suggests that there is a strong prima facie case, on economic grounds, for governmental interference in the information market. 
Second, manufacturers may have poor incentives to provide information about hazardous products. Competition over the extent of danger may decrease total purchases of the product rather than help any particular manufacturer obtain greater sales. The phenomenon has sometimes played a role in discouraging competition over safety among manufacturers of tobacco products. At least in principle, the phenomenon may occur frequently.36 
Information asymmetries may produce a "lemons" problem, in which government may create inefficiency. By providing information, however, the government promotes a certain conception of liberty. 
33, at 356. 
sense the market often works as an effective check on dangerous products. 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 960 1991 dangerous products drive safe ones out of the market.37 Imagine, for example, that producers know which products are safe, but that consumers cannot tell. Safe products may not be able to compete if they sell for no higher price than dangerous ones, if safe products are more expensive to produce, and if consumers are unable to tell the difference. In that case, the fact that sellers have information, while buyers do not, will ensure that "lemons"-here dangerous products-will dominate the market. Regulation designed to provide information is the proper remedy. 
All this suggests that there is frequently a market failure in the provision of information. At least as a presumptive matter, government remedies are an appropriate response. These remedies might take the form of governmentally-provided information, education campaigns, or disclosure requirements. Strictly on economic grounds, there is much to be said in favor of these remedies. They may fortify the operation of the marketplace. They may be a precondition for free choice, the background goal of free markets. 
We now have a good deal of empirical information about disclosure of risks. In general, the information suggests that disclosure can be a helpful and cost-effective strategy.38 Workers do indeed respond to new information about risks, quitting or demanding higher salaries. Consumers often react well to the disclosure about danger levels. In general, there is every reason to think that governmentally-mandated disclosure, if suitably designed, is an effective mechanism for promoting economic efficiency. 

Suppose that we wanted to increase the democratic character of contemporary government, by promoting citizen participation in, and control over, governmental processes. A good initial step would be for government to provide enough information so that people can make knowledgeable judgments. 
Government might itself supply information, or require disclosure by private citizens and companies. Return, for example, to the matter of expenditures per life saved.39 There is now considerable data on the amount of money spent to save lives in various government programs. As we have seen, what emerges is a crazy-quilt. Some programs pay for themselves in terms of health and related savings; others are extremely hard to defend. At the very least, the American public should be informed of these disparities so that it can evaluate them. Provision of information about the content and expense of regulatory programs should be high on the governmental agenda. 
Or consider the question of risk regulation in general. On that question, people are poorly informed.' For example, they appear not to know that the risks of nuclear power are substantially smaller than the risks posed by other energy sources. They appear not to have a clear sense of the relationships among different risks that are confronted in everyday life. Smoking, for example, produces 345,000 deaths per year, an annual risk of 3.0 in 103; all occupations produce between 11,000 and 200,000 annual deaths, an annual risk of 1.1 to 20 in 10'; and boxing produces only three deaths a year, an annual risk of 5.4 in 10". 
Information of this sort ought to be widely available. The fact that it is not creates a significant failure in government regulation. At least equally important, it presents a large obstacle to citizenship. The problem appears in the private sector, in local government, and at the state and national levels. Workers uninformed of risks are unable to participate usefully in the process of deciding among different possible levels of workplace safety. Local communities, deciding whether to allow toxic waste sites or plants that produce sulfur dioxide, need to be in a position to make informed choices. 
A large virtue of a federal system is that it permits different states, having different values, to make different choices about social arrangements. In the context at hand, many decisions about the relations among industrial development, employment, pollution, and risk must be made at the state or local level. An absence of information is a severe obstacle to this process. The same is true at the national level, where sensational anecdotes displace reasoned analysis of the alternatives. 
The most general way to put the point is to note that on the framers' view, America was to be a deliberative democracy, in which representatives, accountable to the people, would make decisions through a process of deliberation uncontrolled by private factions.4 Without better information, neither deliberation nor democracy is possible. Legal reforms designed to remedy the situation are a precondition for democratic politics. 
information could help overcome some of the relevant biases. 
in How DEMOCRATIC IS THE CONSTITUTION? 102 (1980); see also THE FEDERALIST No. 10, at 16 (J. Madison) (R. Fairfield 2d ed. 1966). 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 962 1991 
The national government has started a series of steps in the right direction. Mandatory messages about risks from cigarette smoking, first set out in 1965 and modified in 1969 and 1984, are the most familiar example.42 The FDA has long maintained a policy of requiring risk labels for pharmaceutical products. 43 The EPA has done the same for pesticides and asbestos." There are numerous other illustrations. Indeed, the effort to provide information counts as one of the most striking, if incipient, developments in modern regulatory law. Three recent initiatives are especially notable. 
In 1983, the OSHA issued a Hazard Communication Standard (HCS), 45 applicable to the manufacturing sector. In 1986, the HCS was made generally applicable. Under the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the hazards of the chemicals they produce or import; develop technical hazard information for materials safety data sheets, and labels for hazardous substances; and, most important, transmit this information to users of the relevant substances. All employers must adopt a hazard communication program-including individual training-and inform workers of the relevant risks. 
In 1986, Congress enacted an ambitious new statute, the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRKA).4 6 Under this statute, firms and individuals must report, to state and local government, the quantities of potentially hazardous chemicals that have been stored or released into the environment. Users of such chemicals must report to their local fire departments about the location, types, and quantities of stored chemicals. They must also give information about potential adverse health effects. A detailed report suggests that EPCRKA has had important beneficial effects, spurring innovative, cost-effective programs from the EPA and from state and local government.4 7 
The FDA has also adopted informational strategies. In its most ambitious set of proposals, the FDA seeks: (a) to compel nutritional labelling on nearly all processed foods, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (b) to require compliance with government specified serving sizes; (c) to compel companies to conform to government definitions of standardized terms, including, "reduced," "fresh," "free," and "low;" and (d) to allow health claims only if (1991). they (1) are supported by scientific evidence and (2) communicate clear and complete information about such matters as fat and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blood pressure, and calcium and osteoporosis.48 
These initiatives are simply a beginning. Broader and more ambitious programs, coordinating the general communication of social risks, are very much in order. It has been suggested that government might eventually develop a "national warnings system" containing a systematized terminology for warnings.4 9 Such a system could apply to all contexts and risks, and give a uniform sense of risk levels. The existence of a uniform language would make it possible to assess risks across a wide range of social spheres. 
Most important of all, such a system would perform a vital educative function, one that could complement the functioning of markets and provide a necessary precondition for democratic choice. We should ultimately aspire to go far beyond risk regulation, to promote the dissemination of information bearing on democratic affairs in general. 
B. 
By economic incentives, I mean financial penalties imposed on harmproducing behavior or benefits conferred on harm-reducing behavior. Such penalties should supplement and even displace command-and-control regulation. 

It is inefficient for government to prescribe the means for achieving social objectives. Ordinarily it would be far better, on economic grounds, for government to create incentives to engage in socially desirable conduct, and to permit the market to decide how companies respond to those incentives. 
It is especially inefficient for government to dictate technology. A far better approach is to impose a tax on harmful behavior, 0 and to let market forces determine the response to the increased cost. Government should generally impose fees on those who put pollutants into the atmosphere-instead of, for example, mandating costly "scrubbing" technol48. See 56 Fed. Reg. 60,302 (1991) (to be codified at 9 C.F.R. pts. 317, 320 & 381) (proposed Nov. 27, 1991). 

harmful conduct is in the best position to avoid the harm, and in such cases it is possible to say that the apparent victim should be charged with taking preventive or remedial measures. An example would be a case in which workers could cheaply prevent the costs of a chemical in the workplace, by wearing masks or clothing that prevent the harm from occurring. 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 964 1991 ogy for sulfur dioxide. Consumption of the harm-producing good will decline. Producers will shift to less harmful methods of production. They may, for example, substitute clean for dirty coal. 
More generally, government might adopt a simple, two-step reform policy in the area of social risks and social harms."' First, those who impose harm must pay for it-by purchasing permission to do so, perhaps through a licensing procedure. Second, those who obtain the resulting permission should be able to trade their "licenses" with other people. In the pollution context, this would mean that people who reduce their pollution below a specified level could trade their "pollution rights" for cash. 
In one bold stroke, such a system would create market-based disincentives to pollute and market-based incentives for pollution control. Such a system would also reward rather than punish technological innovation in pollution control, and do so with the aid of private markets. Very generally, and quite outside the environmental area, it makes sense to think about programs of this sort for regulation of harmful behavior. 2 
An idea of this kind might be made part and parcel of a system of "green taxes." With such a system, we might levy taxes on people who impose externalities on others-users of dirty automobiles, farmers who employ pesticides, coal-fired power plants, gasoline that produces air pollution, products that contribute to destruction of the ozone layer or the greenhouse effect. Tax levies of various sorts are used by many nations already, though they have been slow in coming to the United States. 53 
These levies have had, or are projected to have, excellent results. Thus a higher tax on leaded gasoline in Great Britain increased the market share of unleaded gas from four to thirty percent in less than a year.54 It is estimated that a doubling of pesticide prices would cut pesticide use in half." It is also estimated that a fee of $110 per ton on carbon would decrease carbon dioxide emissions by twenty percent by the year 2005.56 
An important advantage of such strategies is that they would dramatically increase government revenues. This is an especially worthwhile goal in a period of large deficits. The suggested carbon tax would gener51. Here I generalize from the helpful discussion in Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 31 (defending incentive systems). 
seems plausible. See Mashaw, Implementing Quotas, 79 GEo. L.J. 1769 (1991) (discussing transferable quota requirements). 
50 environmental charges among 14 of its members. See L. BROWN, SAVING THE PLANET 143 (1991). 
ate over $130 billion.57 Other such taxes on polluting activity could produce billions of additional dollars in revenue. 58 
Economic incentives could be applied in other areas as well. Workers' compensation plans, for example, operate as a reasonably effective guarantee of workplace safety. According to a recent study, "If the safety incentives of workers' compensation were removed, fatality rates in the United States economy would increase by almost 30 percent. Over 1200 more workers would die from job injuries every year in the absence of the safety incentives provided by workers' compensation." 9 This contrasts with a mere two to four percent reduction in injuries from OSHA, an amount that links up well with the fact that annual workers' compensation premiums are more than 1000 times as large as total annual OSHA penalties.' The tax system could be used to punish employers who provide dangerous workplaces. 
The Consumer Product Safety Commission could experiment with a system in which producers of harm-producing products would pay a fee into the federal treasury. Ultimately, we might hope for a coordinated system of risk regulation, one that imposed uniform fees for harm-producing activities. 
Thus far we have seen that a shift to economic incentives would be efficient and effective. What consequences would such a shift have for democratic government? 
The answer is that it would have significant consequences, and that these would be extremely beneficial. 61 The current system puts public attention in the wrong places. Imagine, for example, that Congress and the citizenry-following the contemporary model-are asking the question whether ethanol, or some other gasoline substitute, should be required in new cars. It is perfectly predictable that in answering this question, well-organized groups with a significant stake in the outcome will bring their influence to bear. It is also predictable that ethanol producers may seek and actually obtain regulatory benefits, and for reasons bearing little or no relationship to environmental protection. 
At the same time, the underlying substantive question-whether ethanol is actually an environmentally superior product-will have to be resolved on the basis of technological complexities not easily addressed by 
discussion here. the public or its representatives. If this is the issue on which the political process focusses, we are therefore likely to have a series of laws that represent, not public-spirited deliberation with a measure of broad accountability, but instead trade-offs among well-organized private groups, or, in Madisonian terms, government by faction. By directing attention to means, this system creates strong incentives for interest groups to ensure that they are favored in the legislature or the bureaucracy. 
Compare a system of economic incentives. Here the issue is not one of means, but the amount of sulfur dioxide that will be allowed into the atmosphere-an issue to be resolved in the process of deciding how many licenses should be given out, and for how much pollution. This shift would ensure that citizens and representatives would be focussing on how much pollution reduction there should be, and at what cost. The right question would be put squarely before the electorate. No longer would it be possible to pretend that environmental protection is costless. No longer would the central issue be displaced by the largely incidental question of means. 
Moreover, a system of financial penalties allows far less room for interest-group maneuvering. The large question-how much environmental protection at what cost--does not readily permit legislators to favor a well-organized, narrow group, such as the agricultural lobby, or the coal lobby. Special favors cannot easily be provided through a system of economic incentives. The very generality of the question will work against narrow favoritism. To be sure, the ultimate question of pollution reduction may be answered in a way that reflects sustained political pressure rather than democratic deliberation. But the risks are minimized, certainly as compared with the existing system. 
There are other democratic advantages as well. Economic incentives should simultaneously promote coordination and rationality in regulation, by giving government an incentive to attend closely, and for the first time, to how other risks are treated. This should bring a salutary measure of structure and sense to risk regulation in general. As an important by-product, the new system should create a powerful incentive to obtain information about the actual effects of pollution and pollution control. If members of Congress are deciding on the level of risk reduction, they will not want to do so in a vacuum, especially in light of the significant costs of large reductions. Affected groups will therefore be encouraged to engage in research about real-world consequences. 
Information about consequences frequently remains in its most preliminary stages. The new premium placed on information should be a particularly important gain. There is every reason to design regulatory strategies that put a premium on greater research, so that when we act, we know what we are getting, and at what price. 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 967 1991 
All these considerations suggest that economic incentives-favored so firmly on economic grounds-have as one of their principal justifications a series of democracy-reinforcing, faction-limiting characteristics. 
The movement toward economic incentives is preliminary but real. Thus far, it has occurred mostly in the environmental area. An important series of administrative initiatives have brought about "emissions trading," especially under the Clean Air Act.62 Under the EPA's policy, a firm that reduces its emissions below legal requirements may obtain "credits" that can be used against higher emissions elsewhere. 
Through the "offset" policy, which is formally codified in the Clean Air Act, a company may locate in an area not in compliance with national air quality standards, if and only if it can offset the new emissions by reducing existing emissions, either from its own sources or from other firms. Through the "banking" policy, firms are permitted to store emission credits for their own future use. Companies may also engage in "netting," by which a firm modifies a source, but avoids the most stringent emissions limits that would otherwise be applied to the modification by reducing emissions from another source within the same plant. Through the use of "bubbles," existing sources may place an imaginary bubble over their plants, allowing each emitting device within the plant to discharge different emission levels so long as the total emission level is in compliance with aggregate requirements. We now have a good deal of evidence about the emissions trading program. 
For various reasons, the use of the program has been quite limited.6 3 A study in 1986 showed 42 federal bubbles; 90 state bubbles; 2,000 federal offsets; between 5,000 and 12,000 acts of netting; and 100 acts of banking. 61 Despite this limited activity, there is considerable evidence that this policy has been successful. Overall, the program has produced savings of between $525 million and $12 billion.6 5 By any measure, this is an enormous gain. 
On balance, the environmental consequences have been beneficial. Offsets must, by definition, produce environmental gains. The preliminary evidence shows favorable effects from bubbles as well.66 There may be 
DEMOCRA TIZING AMERICA modest beneficial effects from banking and modest adverse effects from netting.67 The overall environmental effect is therefore good, with cost entirely to one side. 
The EPA has also permitted emissions trading for lead. Under this policy, a refinery that produced gasoline with lower than required lead levels could earn credits. These could be traded with other refineries or banked for future use.68 Until the termination of the program in 1987, when the phaseout of lead ended, emissions credits for lead were widely traded. EPA concluded that there had been cost savings of about twenty percent over alternative systems, marking total savings in the hundreds of million of dollars. 69 There have been initial administrative efforts as well with respect to water pollution and ozone depletion.7 ° 
The most dramatic program of economic incentives can be found in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. The Act now explicitly creates an emissions trading system for the control of acid deposition. In these amendments, Congress has made an explicit decision about aggregate emissions level for a pollutant.7 ' Whether the particular decision is correct may be disputed. But surely there are large democratic benefits from ensuring that public attention is focussed on that issue. 
There are other beneficial features to the acid deposition provisions. Congress has said that polluters may obtain allowances for emissions avoided through energy conservation and the use of renewable energy sources. In this way, avoidance of this kind is turned into dollars, in the form of increased permission to pollute. 72 This provision creates an incentive to shift to conservation and renewable sources, without providing further environmental degradation. 
Moreover, polluters are explicitly permitted to trade their allowances; this is a first in national legislative regulation.7 3 In this way, people who are able to reduce their pollution below the specified level receive economic benefits. Again incentives are created for environmentally beneficial behavior. An especially intriguing provision allows spot and advance sales of sulfur dioxide allowances, purchasable at $1,500 per ton.74 
IN GASOLINE, FINAL REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS VIII-31 (Feb. 1985); see also Hahn & Hester, supra note 64, at 387. 
(final rule promulgated Aug. 12, 1988); on water pollution, see Hahn & Stavins, IncentiveBased Environmental Regulation: A New Era From an Old Idea, 18 ECOLOGY L.Q. 1, 18-19 (1991). 
Through this route, polluters must-for the first time-pay a fee for their pollution. Even more intriguing is a provision calling for auction sales of specified numbers of sulfur dioxide allowances.7 5 Here the market is permitted to set the price for polluting activity. 
For the most part, however, the Clean Air Act does not require polluters to pay for their "licenses." Instead, government continues to permit them to pollute for free. This is a large obstacle to a sensible system of regulation. In the future, Congress should build on the acid deposition model, requiring payments by polluters and others who inflict social harm. 
Under current law, national standards are set both for the environment and for workplace safety and health. 76 But as we have seen, the costs and benefits of regulatory activity are widely variable across both time and space. Consider, for example, the issue of clean air. To require the same level of ambient air quality in Los Angeles and Wyoming makes little sense in light of the fact that the costs (and benefits) of achieving that level vary so dramatically. Uniform controls seem implausible if Wyoming has already attained a level of X, and if Los Angeles could not do so without suffering profound economic dislocations-including, for example, ceasing use of the automobile. Such controls would be grotesquely inefficient. 
Return to the area of workplace safety. It has been proposed that the current system of collective bargaining should be replaced by nationallymandated minimum standards.77 In fact, the OSHA now imposes a wide range of national requirements for both safety and health. But surely American workers do not agree about the appropriate tradeoffs among health, wages, medical benefits, and jobs. Some employees are willing to subject themselves to greater risks in return for greater benefits.7" Others seek low level risks, and are willing to take lower salaries in return. 79 
protection above the national level. 
Current State of LaborLaw and Its Prospects, 51 U. CHI. L. REV. 1012 (1984). 
lower salary. To some extent, the concern is misplaced, since safety is not an absolute, and since tradeoffs among important social goods, including safety, are a part of any imaginable human life. To some extent the concern may point to a good argument for redistribution of resources, so that people are not faced with such hard choices. But a bar to the preferred (even if hard) choice is not the same as redistribution. 
1991 Just as consumers make safety-related tradeoffs in the purchase of consumer goods, such as cars, so workers differ in the employment market. 
In these circumstances, nationally mandated standards are inefficient. They are ill-matched to the extraordinary diversity of worker values and preferences. It would be far better to allow a degree of workplace differences, matching that diversity. Decentralization would accomplish this goal. 
If our goal is increased democratization, it is indispensable to promote more decentralization. In the area of workplace safety, for example, democratic solutions cannot be achieved at the national level. The market mechanism of "exit"-permitting dissatisfied workers to leavemight well be accompanied by the political mechanism of "voice," by which workers participate in workplace governance.80 In order for that latter mechanism to operate, it is crucial that workplace conditions be decided at the local level. Opportunities for greater decentralization are thus part and parcel of the process of democratizing the employment market. 
In the area of environmental protection, it is also possible to strengthen state and local options, and precisely in the interest of democratization. We might, for example, permit dramatic variations with respect to air and water quality, accompanied by national "floors" designed to take account of interstate effects. Federal laws should be written to minimize preemption of different state solutions. Judge-made preemption doctrines should be designed to require a clear congressional statement before allowing such preemption. 
Moreover, the national government might encourage the provision of information to states and localities to allow them to decide how to deal with such problems as release of toxic wastes. Through all these routes, the democratic process at the local level might be strengthened, thus promoting what is, as a practical matter, the only way to promote more citizen engagement with governmental affairs. 
Here too a number of initial steps have been taken in the right direction. The "New Federalism" of the 1970s and 1980s has modestly contributed to a reinvigoration of state authority. 1 We have seen a dramatic "voice" remedies). 
(ACIR), REGULATORY FEDERALISM: POLICY, PROCESS, IMPACT, AND REFORM 19-21 (1984) (Washington, D.C.). growth in regulatory activity at the state level. Recycling programs are now common. Sometimes fees are required for disposal of solid wastean application of the basic principle that "polluters pay." Six states now maintain programs for the reduction of sources of solid waste. California has been especially inventive, adopting programs for reduction of toxic substances" and, perhaps most dramatically, for reducing air pollution in the badly polluted Los Angeles area. The latter program will require conversion of all cars to electric power or other "clean" fuels by 2007; other provisions will encourage public transportation and limit the use of automobiles.8 
North Carolina has adopted a "pollution prevention program" designed to prevent pollution before it occurs, rather than to impose technology at the end of the pipe. These are simply a few of the many respects in which recent initiatives have begun to implement Justice Brandeis' aspiration that the states might serve as "laboratories" experimenting with different systems for attaining social goals. 4 
Nor has the national government been inactive in this area. 5 Under EPCRKA, discussed above, information about the toxic chemical emissions must be provided to the states. The resulting information has been used as the foundation for a wide range of laws at the state level.86 Oregon now requires pollution reduction goals, as does Massachusetts. States have used the inventory as a basis for enforcement activity. Other national initiatives might similarly act as a spur for state and local decisions. 
There are some important qualifications to the arguments I have made thus far. Informational strategies, economic incentives, and decentralization have genuine limitations. In some cases, these approaches are inadequate. I outline some of the relevant considerations. 
There are two problems with informational strategies. First, the provision of information is expensive. Second, the provision of information is sometimes ineffectual or even counterproductive. 
DRUG COSM. L.J. 283 (1988). 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY IN THE 1990s: TOWARD A NEW AGENDA 59, 62 (N. Vig & M. Kraft eds. 1991). (1991). 
Consider, for example, the fact that the government estimates the cost of the new FDA rules at no less $1.7 billion over twenty years. The president of the National Food Processors Association claims that the first year costs alone will exceed $2 billion.87 In either case, the cost is high. OSHA's hazard communication policy is estimated to save 200 lives per year-a lot-but at an annual cost of $360 million."8 The expenditure per life saved is therefore $1.8 million. This is far better than a large number of regulations, and an amount well worth spending; but it is more than many agencies spend for life-saving regulations. It is therefore not the case that the OSHA rule stands out as a means of saving lives especially cheaply. 
When informational strategies are costly, there are two possible responses. The first is to do nothing. If the savings-in terms of health, life, informed choice-are relatively low, costly strategies, even informational ones, make little sense. There will therefore be circumstances in which a government remedy for an absence of information is unwarranted. 
The second possibility is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure. By a regulatory strategy, I mean a mandatory outcome, such as a flat ban on the materials in question, or governmental specification of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum level of carcinogens in the workplace. Sometimes the regulatory strategy will be cheaper, because the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is so high. This is likely to be the right response when most or all people would respond to the information in the same way. In that case, it is unnecessary to provide information, and better simply to dictate an outcome that, by hypothesis, is generally preferred. For an especially dangerous substance, one that reasonable people would not choose to encounter, a flat ban is appropriate. 
Even when informational strategies are not prohibitively expensive, they may be ineffectual, and thus have low benefits. People have limited ability to process information.8" They have a notoriously difficult time in thinking about low-probability events. Sometimes they discount such events to zero; sometimes they treat them as much more dangerous than they actually are. If people are told, for example, that a certain substance causes cancer, they may think that it is far more dangerous than it is in fact. But some carcinogenic substances pose little risk. 
For example, California's Proposition 65, an initiative designed to promote citizen awareness of risk levels, requires warnings for exposure to 
(H. Arkes & K. Hammond eds. 1986). carcinogens. At first glance the requirement seems unexceptionable, indeed an important advance. But it has in some cases been counterproductive. Consumers appear to think that twelve of every 100 users of a product with the required warning will die from cancer. This estimate exceeds reality by a factor of 1000 or more.' With respect to information, less may be more. If information is not provided in a clear and usable form, it may actually make people less knowledgeable than they were before. The Truth-in-Lending Act has suffered from this problem.9 
The problem is aggravated by the fact that people tend to use heuristic devices that produce systemic errors. A particular problem here is the "availability heuristic," in accordance with which people tend to think an event is probable if they can readily bring to mind memories of its occurrence. Thus, for example, an airplane disaster will be thought relatively probable, whereas a death from diabetes will not be. There is a good deal of evidence that people overestimate risks from highly visible or sensational causes, but underestimate risks from less dramatic ones.92 
There is evidence as well of another problem for informational strategies: people often believe themselves to be immune from risks that they acknowledge are significant and real with respect to others. 93 In one study, for example, ninety-seven percent of those surveyed ranked themselves as average or above average in their ability to avoid both bicycle and power mower accidents.94 Disclosure of information may be an unhelpful tool when people do not internalize the new data. 
There is also evidence that people feel frustrated and frightened by probabilistic information, and greatly prefer a certain answer. The desire to reduce cognitive dissonance may prevent people from recognizing that risks are real even when information is provided.9" The same desire may undermine efforts to provide risk information when the truth is that people must inevitably operate under conditions of uncertainty. This desire may also prevent people from recognizing that conditions are dangerous even in the face of solid information to this effect. 1991] 
There is a pervasive risk of information overload, causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as equivalent to no information at all.96 Finally, initially held beliefs are not easy to modify, even when new information, undermining those beliefs, has been presented. 97 
Yet another problem is that disclosure requirements may have unanticipated adverse effects. For example, companies may respond to disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at all (if this is an available option). The result will be the removal from the market of information that is useful overall. If industry responds to a requirement of evidentiary support for scientific claims with mere "puffing," consumers may have less information than they did to begin with. If advertisers must conduct extensive tests before they are permitted to make claims, they will be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at all.98 
Finally, information may be an inadequate strategy where greater safety is a public good.99 Imagine, for example, that the replacement of carcinogen X with safe product Y would benefit all workers simultaneously. Imagine, too, that each worker is bargaining separately with the employer. In that case, no individual employee would have a sufficient incentive to decrease his demand for wages and other benefits to obtain increased safety. Because the benefits of the new substance would be provided to everyone, no individual employee would "pay" enough to obtain them, preferring instead to take a free ride on the efforts of others. The result will be too little safety on conventional economic criteria. Here a regulatory response is appropriate. 
All this suggests that there are real limitations to informational strategies. These limitations should, however, be taken merely as qualifications of the broader point, or as providing helpful guidance to those seeking to design effective information requirements. They do not bear fundamentally on reform efforts. 
The first and most important point is that some of these very limitations can be overcome through more and better information. An awareness of the distorting effects of current heuristics can help overcome those effects; general publicity about those effects might therefore supply a corrective. In addition, well-tailored programs would minimize the relevant risks by putting the information in its most understandable form. 
Statements Their Potential for Confusing and Misleading the Consumer, J. MARKETING, Winter 1982, at 61, 70. 
on transactions cost barriers to free mobility of labor. If labor were completely mobile, the problem should disappear. Instead of labelling a substance a "carcinogen," a uniform system of risk regulation could give better awareness of risk levels. While informational strategies are no panacea, they would accomplish considerable good, at least if the possible obstacles are kept firmly in mind. 
B. 
There are several possible problems with the use of economic incentives. The clearest cases arise when the appropriate response to a harmproducing activity is a flat ban. With an especially dangerous pollutant, an increased price is inadequate. The pollutant should be eliminated from the market, at least if its social benefits do not outweigh the relevant danger and less dangerous substitutes are available. But if a flat ban is not desirable, there should be a strong presumption in favor of economic incentives. 
Another problem is that economic incentives might be thought to operate as a regressive tax, in the sense that they raise prices in general, and the rise will come down especially hard on the poor. An increase in the price of gasoline, or in the cost of high-polluting vehicles, will make things more difficult for poor people in particular. Indeed, any effort to require manufacturers and sellers to "internalize" the costs of their production might seem objectionable insofar as it increases prices in a way especially hard on the indigent. 
In general, I do not believe that this objection is persuasive.'0 0 Any regulatory solution will increase prices; economic incentives are not distinctive in this regard. And if the solution is otherwise sensible, it ought not to be treated as a "regressive tax," any more than the pricing system itself is a regressive tax. Moreover, a refusal to require enterprises to bear the social costs of their activities is hardly an effective way of benefiting the poor. The class of people burdened by this refusal includes many people not poor at all; and the refusal burdens many poor people. 
It is certainly correct, however, to worry about the consequences of price increases, produced by market forces or by government, for poor people. The point suggests that the taxes or fines produced by economic incentives might be accompanied by subsidies or transfer payments to people who are needy. Some of these subsidies might be funded out of the very revenues produced by the program itself. 
It is also possible to argue, as against economic incentives, that they improperly "commodify" certain interests. Perhaps some such interests-the right to bodily integrity, the right to freedom from pollutionought not to be traded on markets at all. Perhaps such trading debases and diminishes the interests in question, with harmful consequences for social attitudes.'0 1 
In some settings the objection seems plausible. Thus there is reason to question a decision to allow trading of body parts, or of gestational capacities. But in the general context of regulatory law, it is doubtful that the argument takes one very far. It seems implausible to suggest that social attitudes would be materially changed by a system in which polluters and others who cause harm must pay. Indeed, a shift of the entitlement from the polluter to the pollutee might have desirable effects on social attitudes, by establishing the correct starting point. 10 2 In any case, it seems far better to require people who cause harm to pay, rather than to allow them to do so for free. 
Any incentive-based system must confront a range of practical problems. In the environmental context, for example, there is a risk that polluters will cluster in a particular area, thus subjecting people in that area to unacceptably high danger.'o 3 Determining the amount of any tax or fine is not a simple scientific exercise. It entails a democratic judgment about appropriate risk levels, and that decision will pose great difficulties. But these sorts of questions should be treated as matters of detail. They do not bear fundamentally on the shift to economic incentives. 
C. 
Decentralization is not a preferred approach in at least three categories of cases. The first involves national moral commitments that cut across local boundaries. The most obvious candidates here are the prohibition on discrimination on the basis of race and sex. Here decentralized solutions are inadequate. The whole point of the national commitment is to ensure adherence to a principle that transcends state boundaries. The Civil War, establishing a prohibition on slavery and a requirement of racial equality, is the core example. 
The second category involves interstate spillovers, of which air pollution is the most conspicuous example. Because air pollution in California will affect Nevada, we cannot rely entirely on intrastate controls. There are inadequate political safeguards in one state against the imposition of harms on another. In such cases, national intervention is necessary. 
commodification in general, see Radin, Market-Inalienability, 100 HARV. L. REV. 1849 (1987). 
e.g., Kahneman, Knetsch & Thaler, Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the 
pected Disparity in Measures of Value, 99 Q.J. ECON. 507 (1984). 
Even here, however, such intervention should take the form of "floors"minimum standards-rather than nationally dictated outcomes. 
The third category is the most interesting. In a federal system, states compete with each other for revenue-attracting business and industry. This competition creates an important "race to the bottom" with respect to regulatory controls. In many respects this is entirely healthy. The right of exit is a critical check against oppressive law. Indeed, the right of exit is probably a more important constraint on oppressive legislation than the Supreme Court's decisions under the dormant commerce clause, even if all these are taken together. 
But the "race" can have unfortunate consequences as well. Suppose, for example, that state A wishes to impose occupational safety and health controls--or even disclosure requirements-on industries within its borders. Suppose that such industries are free to leave. It may well be that in such circumstances, no state will impose the relevant controls, even though all states, if agreement were possible, would choose to do so. President Roosevelt made precisely this argument in supporting child labor legislation at the national level. 
In some cases, then, the race to the bottom will put states in a prisoners' dilemma, requiring a cooperative solution in the form of a binding agreement through the national government. Through legislation at the national level, states can prevent the mutually destructive competition to attract business and industry. 
This argument does not prove as much as might appear. Sometimes national legislation will not be in the interests of the states' own people, since it will drive down profits in a way that will have adverse effects on (among other things) poverty, employment, and the general availability of goods and services. But national legislation will sometimes be justified on this ground. 
D. 
In most of this essay, I have argued that economic and democratic goals can march hand-in-hand. Across a wide range, we can attempt precisely the same reforms to bring about both of these goals. For this reason, there is no need to choose between efficiency and democracy, at least for most of our efforts in the next generation. 
It would be a mistake, however, to pretend that there is no potential for conflict. An exploration of that potential of course raises extremely large and complex issues. I make only a few brief observations. 
The most important point is that efficiency is a function of aggregated private willingness to pay, a criterion that is, to say the least, problematic from the democratic point of view. A system is efficient if entitlements have been allocated so as to "maximize value," with reference to private willingness to pay. For believers in a democratic system, however, this criterion is distorted, and in two ways. First, a democratic system operates on the principle of one person, one vote. By contrast, a market allocates "votes" in accordance with how much people are willing to pay for things. Since willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay, rich people will be willing to pay far more than poor people. Indeed, the indigent can pay nothing at all. The principle of political equality, so central to democratic theory, is violated by the efficiency criterion. 
Second, a democratic system, at least in America, is not supposed to represent an effort to aggregate private preferences."° Instead the process is a deliberative one, in which different information and perspectives are brought to bear. In that deliberative process, preferences are supposed to be transformed into values. °5 Markets do not have this function. 
The notion of aggregating private willingness to pay accurately captures the economic ideal of "consumer sovereignty." But whatever its value in some contexts, this is a caricature of the American conception of sovereignty. That conception aspires not to aggregated consumption choices, but instead to a transfer of the power of governance from the King to "We the People." Insofar as markets accurately capture private willingness to pay, they are a powerful tool of prosperity, and on a certain, not wholly implausible view, of liberty as well. But this salutary function is not the same as democratic self-governance. The considered judgments of the citizenry may well diverge from aggregated consumption choices."°c And when there is such a divergence, the former should generally prevail. 
These objections to the willingness to pay criterion, invoking democratic principles, are hardly irrelevant to the reform of American public law. They suggest that exclusive use of the principle of cost-benefit analysis is highly objectionable. They suggest that there will indeed be conflicts between democratic aspirations and the goal of economic efficiency. But if what I have said is persuasive, a great deal can be done before reaching those conflicts. 
because of the paradoxes created by multimember bodies. See K. ARROW, SOCIAL CHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES (1955) (discussing these paradoxes). 
(discussing transformation of preferencing in politics). 
(discussing divergence between democratic outcomes and market choices). 
HeinOnline -- 25 Suffolk U. L. Rev. 979 1991 
CONCLUSION 
Throughout its history, American government has benefited from its democratic features and from structural characteristics that promote effectiveness and efficiency. The benefits are especially conspicuous when viewed in comparison to other governmental systems. But in its current incarnation, it suffers from significant failures. The modern regulatory state is often ineffective. It has not been efficient. It is hardly a model of democratic self-governance. In a period in which nations all over the world are seeking to promote both efficiency and democracy, it would be unfortunate indeed if we did not subject our own institutions to skeptical scrutiny. 
In this essay, I have suggested three reforms in contemporary public law. Information-based strategies, increasing disclosure and education, should supplement or even displace regulatory systems. Economic incentives, including taxes and fines, should substantially displace command-and-control regulation. Decentralization, allowing bargaining and participation in the private and public spheres, should in many contexts be substituted for centralized dictates from Washington. All of these proposals would respond simultaneously to inefficiencies in modern government and to severe problems from the democratic point of viewmost notably factional influence and absence of opportunities for the exercise of political influence. 
I do not contend that reforms of this sort would accomplish all that is now required, from the standpoint of either efficiency or democracy. There are genuine limits to all three strategies. At some point, moreover, it will be necessary to reconcile some serious conflicts between efficiency and democracy. But we now have both the information and the tools by which to accomplish an enormous amount of reform. We need not rest content with the paradoxes and failures of existing institutions. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cuss R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
t is generally understood that the recent revolutions in Eastern I Europe are producing a large-scale “transition.” It is important, however, to distinguish among the quite different features of the current changes. The new reform movements actually involve three distinctive transitions. The first is a transition from a command economy to markets. The second is a transition from a system of one-party domination to democracy. The third is a transition from a system in which government is unconstrained by laws laid down in advance to constitutionalism and the rule of law. 
Although important work is occurring on all these fronts, participants in current debates generally assume that the three transitions are not closely connected. At the present. and for the foreseeable future, it seem; clear that the transition to markets, and the accompanying efforts to promote economic development, will be foremost in the minds of the reformers. Democratization appears also on the agenda, but it is taking a secondary role. In the meantime, the movement for constitutional reform generally draws little public attention, and indeed has been dwarfed by other matters. In many circles, the drafting of the Constitution is thought to involve symbolic or even irrelevant matters having no real connection to the hard pragmatic work of economic and political reform. 
I believe that the separation of the three transitions, and the devaluation of constitution-writing, are extremely unfortunate and potentially dangerous mistakes. In fact the transitions are closely re* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago; Co-Director, Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Richard A. Epstein and Stephen Holmes for helpful comments on a previous draft. Different versions of some of this essay will appear in Constitutional Political Economy and in the Cardozo Law Review. 
Copyright 0 1991 by Cass R. Sunstein. lated. The right kind of constitution could play a crucial role in fueling economic development and democratic reform; indeed, it may be indispensable to them. The wrong kind of constitution-or no constitution at all-could be devastating to both of these. 
To offer only one example: Firm constitutional Protection of property rights, combined with an independent judiciary is an excellent way of encouraging international investment in one’s nation. Such devices should spur domestic investment and initiative as well. Without such constitutional protection, there will be a serious obstacle to the necessary economic activity from international and domestic enterprises. Anyone who engages in these activities will do so with knowledge that the state may take their property or abrogate their contracts. To say the very least, this will be an obstacle to economic development. 
In Eastern Europe, there is a far more pressing need for constitutional protection of economic and democratic rights than there was in the United States or the West. In the United States, for example, the process of constitution-making was much simplified by virtue of the fact that well before that process began, private property, the common law, and civil society were firmly in place. The constitution-makers could build on, and attempt to protect, existing achievements. The market and the institutions of civil society-private intermediate associations operating between the individual and the state, including religious organizations, charitable trusts, local community groups, business enterprises-antedated the Constitution. 
The task of constitution-making in Eastern Europe is both more critical and more daunting, precisely because of the absence of well-established institutions protecting market ordering and civil society. The emerging constitutions must not only create the basic governmental structures and protect the conventional catalog of liberal rights, but also concern themselves with the creation of safeguards for the transition to (some version of) market ordering. If they fail to do so, a large amount of the important work will occur on the legislative front, where there may be special barriers to success. A particular problem is that democratic politics may make it difficult to create real markets, which produce such transitional problems as inflation and unemployment. Even more fundamentally, the process of constitution-making could become irrelevant to many of the fundamental issues now facing Eastern Europe. There is a serious current danger that the moment of constitutional opportunity will be irretrievably lost; and if it is, both prosperity and democratization will be at risk 
This essay comes in three parts. The first briefly discusses the relationships among property, democracy, and economic growth. My principal goal is to show that property should be seen as a political right, one that reduces dependence on the state and creates the kind of security that is indispensable to genuine citizenship in a democracy. Property rights are not in conflict with democracy; in a variety of ways they help provide the preconditions for self-governance. The creation of private property also serves a number of functions indispensable to economic development. 
The second part speculates about the contents of a constitution that is self-consciously designed, as Western constitutions have not entirely been, to create a market economy and to promote the institutions of civil society. My particular goal here is to argue that constitutionalism can play a crucial role in protecting both economic development and democratic self-government. A well-drafted constitution can guard against a system in which ownership rights are effectively subject to continuous political revision; such a system reintroduces all of the problems, both economic and democratic, introduced by common ownership of property. Through cataloguing possible provisions, I hope to begin a process of helping to develop a kind of “economic bill of rights” for constitution-making in Eastern Europe. Such a development might ultimately count as one of a range of contributions of the recent events to the theory and practice of constitutionalism, and to the long-overdue integration of economics and constitutionalism. 
The third part deals with two problems that cannot be solved through constitution-making. The first problem is that of interpretation. The meaning of any text is a function of interpretive principles, and these cannot be spelled out in the text itself. The second problem is the task of initially allocating entitlements. That task must be undertaken through ordinary legislation, and it will have a range of surprising effects. 
We should begin by distinguishing between two sorts of constitutions. Westerners often think that Soviet-style constitutions are not constitutions at all. In fact, however, they embody a distinct conception of constitutionalism. Crucially, such constitutions do not distinguish between public and private spheres. They apply their prohibitions and permissions to everyone. 
Moreover, such constitutions contain duties as well as rights. They do not merely grant privileges to citizens, but also impose obligations on them. Finally, and most important of all, the central provisions of Soviet-style constitutions set out very general social aspirations or commitments. Their provisions are designed to state those aspirations, not to create concrete entitlements that citizens can attempt to vindicate, through an independent judiciary, against government officials. These aspirations include a wide range of “positive” rights. 
Thus, for example, the Soviet Constitution includes the right to work (Art. 4O), the right to rest and leisure (Art. 41), the right to health protection (Art. 42), and the right to maintenance in old age, sickness, and disability (Art. 43). It imposes on citizens the duty to “preserve and protect socialist property” and to “enhance the power and prestige” of the Soviet State (Art. 62). The Polish Constitution includes the right to work (Art. 68), the right to rest and leisure (Art. 69), and the right to health protection (Art. 70). The Romanian Constitution includes the right to leisure (Art. 19), the right to work, including equal pay for equal work and measures for the protection and safety of workers (Art. 18); the Bulgarian Constitution offers the right to a holiday (Art. 42), the right to work (Art. 40), the right to labor safety (Art. 41), the right to social security (Art. 43), and the right to free medical care (Art. 47). 
Along each of these dimensions, Western constitutions are quite different. The provisions of such constitutions generally apply only to the government, and not to private actors. They do not impose duties. Most important, they aim to create solid individual rights, ones that can be invoked by individual citizens, as of right, in an independent tribunal authorized to bar governmental action. Western constitutions generally do not include broad aspirations. 
The individual rights protected by Western constitutions are not, of course, limited to private property and economic liberties. They include other political and civil liberties and rights as well, and these are indispensable safeguards. My principal goal here, however, is to understand how constitutionalism might work simultaneously to promote the transition to economic markets and the transition to democracy, and for this reason it will be valuable to focus on the right to private property. In this section, I briefly outline some of the functions served by that right. The basic story should be familiar. I recount it here because it seems especially important to keep it in mind while exploring the recent wave of constitution-making in Eastern Europe. 
It is generally agreed that a system of private property helps to bring about economic prosperity. There are at least four central reasons.’ 
First, the institution of private property2 creates and takes advantage of the powerful human inclination to bring goods and services to oneself and to people one cares about.3 This claim does not depend on a proposition about human selfishness. The desire to acquire goods might be deeply altruistic, in the sense that people may want to give their goods to others, including the most vulnerable. 
In a system of private property, the gains from the use and cultivation of ownership rights accrue to a designated owner. A system without private property stifles incentives and thus induces both l I draw in this section on J. Waldron, The Right to Private Property (1988). . 
2 As a technical matter, a system of private property should not be identified with a market economy. The distinguishing feature of a market economy is free alienability of ownership rights. The distinctive feature of a system of private property is that individuals are entitled to decide how resources will be used. See J. Waldron, supra note 1, at 60. In practice, however, these closely related ideas tend to go hand-in-hand. 
3 Aristotle made the basic point: “Men pay most attention to what is their own: they care less for what is common; or, at any rate, they care for it only to the extent to which each is individually concerned.” See Aristotle, Politics, 1261 (p. 44) (trans. Barker). sloth and waste.4 These points, too, do not depend. on especially cynical accounts of human nature. It is necessary only to glance briefly at history, past and present, and to acknowledge that human beings will frequently attempt to accumulate resources. Social institutions appealing to this inclination will increase social productivity. 
Second, a system of private property performs a crucial coordinating function. It ensures that the multiple desires of hundreds, thousands, or millions of consumers will be reflected in market outcomes. In this way it protects against the perverse forms of scarcity produced by a command economy. Public officials cannot possibly know what and how much people will want in advance. Their decisions will thus create both too much and too little production. By contrast, a system of ownership rights signals people to devote their productive activity to places in which that activity is most valued. A command-and-control economy is far inferior in this regard. Every citizen of Eastern Europe has seen multiple illustrations. 
Third, the institution of private property solves, all at once, a serious collective action problem faced by people in any system without that institution.5 When property is unowned, no one has a sufficient incentive to use it to its full advantage or to protect it against exploitation. The creation of private property overcomes this problem. It ensures that externalities from use will be internalized by people who are producing either social harms or social benefits.6 
The point can be made more vivid by a glance at the problem of environmental deterioration. In recent years, it has been increasingly recognized that that problem-especially severe in Eastern Europe 4 This is a claim about the likely facts, not a necessary truth. Powerful social norms may operate as a surrogate for private property, helping to overcome some of the problems discussed in text. Cf. Ullmann-Margalit, The Emcrgence of Norms (1978). 
5 The point is elaborated in Demsetz, Toward a Theory of Property Rights, Am. Econ. Rev.: Proceedings and Papers 57 (1967). 
6 The text uses a pre-Coasian understanding of both harms and benefits, see Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1960); that is, it assumes that we can know without much reflection what sorts of things are “costs”of what sorts of activities. As Coase would have it, costs should be seen as relational entities produced by acts and omissions by many people and not clearly attributable to any one of them. An understanding that something is a cost of something else looks like a descriptive proposition, but it must a&ally be justified on moral grounds. but of critical importance in the West as well-is in significant part7 a product of the collective action problem produced by the fact that the air and water are public goods, that is, collectively rather than privately owned.* The consequence is that the environmental costs of polluting activity are widely diffused among the public and not “internalized,” or taken into account, by polluters. Because they do not bear the direct cost, polluters lack an incentive to limit their polluting activity. This system creates a built-in tendency toward excessive pollution levels. 
A system without private property can be understood as a massive version of this unfortunate state of affairs. If property is unowned, everyone has an incentive to exploit it, and no one has an incentive to use it to its full advantage. Activity levels will have no relationship to their actual social costs and benefits.9 Ownership rights overcome the difficulty. They operate like a well-functioning system of environmental law; they ensure that people have incentives to take account of both the benefits and the harms of what they do. This is an exceedingly important task for a constitutional democracy. 
Finally, a system of private property creates the kind of stability and protection of expectations that are preconditions for investment and initiative, from both international and domestic sources. A company deciding whether to invest in a country will have a greater incentive to do so if it knows that its investment will be protected, and that government confiscation is prohibited by the government’s basic law. A citizen who is seeking to begin a business will be far more likely to do so if he can operate against a secure and stable background, protected against the vicissitudes of government policy. In this way, too, economic development can be facilitated by property rights. 
7 This is not, of course, the only possible understanding of the environmental problem. There are other, noneconomic reasons to think that the level of pollution is too high. See S. Kelman, What Price Incentives? (1982). * Hardin, The Tragedy of the Commons, 162 Science 1243 (1968). 9 I do not mean to endorse here the economic conception of costs and benefits, which is based on private willingness to pay and which will be unacceptable for many purposes. On any valuation, however, a system of collective ownership threatens to create the dangers mentioned in the text. 
The connection between property and prosperity may be reasonably well understood; but the right to private property has not always been considered a precondition for democracy. On the contrary, private property has frequently been thought an obstacle to democracy, and for this reason highly objectionable, or perhaps at best an institution necessary for economic growth and therefore to be reluctantly accepted, despite its corrosive effects on the democratic process.10 
There is indeed some tension between a system of property rights and a system of democracy. If property rights are secure, there is a firm limit on what the democratic process is entitled to do. In this sense the tension is a real and enduring one. Notably, markets impose conspicuous short-term cost+--unemployment and inflation-and in the emerging Eastern European democracies, there will probably be. a continuous temptation to slow down the transition to markets or perhaps to reject the transition altogether. For this reason the simultaneous transition to democracy and to economic markets-without the protection of constitutionalism-will be exceptionally difficult. 
In important respects, however, it is quite plausible to think that the right to a stable system of property rights-one with which the state will interfere only occasionally or in a limited way, with a provision for compensation - i s actually necessary. to democracy and not opposed to it at all. 
The most fundamental point about the relationship between property and democracy is that a right to own private property has an important and salutary effect on the citizens’ relationship with the state and-equally important- o n their understanding of that relationship. Because of this effect, it can be seen as a necessary precondition for the status of citizenship. Personal security and personal independence from the government are guaranteed in a system in which rights of ownership are protected through public institutions. 
This theme has played a large role in republican thought. On the republican view, the status of citizen implies a measure of indelo I do not deal here with the relationship between individual development and property rights, though I believe that property rights do in fact promote that goal. For a good discussion, see J. Waldron, supra note 1, ch. 10. 
l1 And long-term ones as well. pendence from government power. This view was often associated with exclusionary practic-eas s , for example, in the notion that people without property should not be allowed to vote. One may deplore the exclusion without rejecting the proposition that a democratic state should attempt to give citizens a sense of independence from the state itself. In fact the republican tradition, read in light of modern understandings, argues not for an abolition of private property but instead for a system attempting to ensure that everyone has some. 
In this sense, the ownership of private property is closely associated with the rule of law.12 Both of these create a realm of private autonomy in which the citizenry can operate without fear of public intrusion. That realm is indispensable to the public sphere itself. Only people with a degree of security from the state are able to participate without fear, and with independence, in democratic deliberations. In this sense, a sharp, legally-produced distinction between the private and the public can usefully serve the public sphere. Contrary to a conventional understanding, it need not harm it at all.13 
Even more fundamentally: The division between private and public spheres is hard to defend or even to understand if it is treated as a metaphysical one, or as a claim that public power is not behind the private sphere. But if we understand the division as a political one, to be justified in public terms, it becomes both intelligible and indispensable. The (legal) creation of a private sphere, undertaken by the state, is a key part of the process of creating civil society and market ordering. If these can be justified, the private sphere itself becomes unproblematic, at least in the abstract. Of course its particular l2 F. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom (1948). Initially Hayek’s discussion of this point seems exceptionally confusing. He identifies markets and property on the one hand with the rule of law on the other; but the rule of law seems to imply, not necessarily markets and property, but instead firm constraints on official discretion and institutions to enforce those constraints. Such constraints can be created with or without property, that is, a command economy can set down clear rules in advance. (Consider some of the American law of environmental protection, which relies on command-and-control methods, but which usually does not delegate open-ended authority to bureaucrats.) But the identification seems more plausible in light of the considerations discussed in the text. 
l3 Cf. Holmes, Gag Rules and Democracy, in Constitutionalism and Democracy (J. Elster &A. Hylland eds. 1988). 
I O content can always be criticized, and is frequently subject to democratic redefinition. 
The creation of private property can also be connected with the traditional proscription on punishment by reference to vague laws or punishment without laws at all.14 That proscription is designed to provide the citizenry with a wall of personal security, creating zones of freedom in which people can operate without fear. A system of private property performs closely related functions. 
A central point here is that in a state in which private property does not exist, citizens are dependent on the good will of government officials, almost on a daily basis.15 Whatever they have is a privilege and not a right. They come to the state as supplicants or beggars, rather than as rightholders. Any challenge to the state may be stifled or driven underground by virtue of the fact that serious challenges could result in the withdrawal of the goods that give people basic security. A right to private property, free from government interference, is in this sense a necessary basis for a democracy. 
In American law, the unconstitutional conditions doctrine operates as a response to this concern in the context of funding, licensing, and employment. 16 The government may not use its power to grant (say) welfare benefits as a way to pressure the exercise of free speech rights. In fact, the creation of property rights should be seen as an unconstitutional conditions doctrine writ very large. The idea is that government may not use its power over property to pressure rights in general; the existence of prop erty rights generates a strong barrier against this form of pressure. just as the unconstitutional conditions doctrine provides a degree of insulation in narrower settings. 
There is a more particular sense in which private property helps to promote resistance to government. If government owns the presses, or the means of distribution, freedom of speech cannot easily l4 See the classic discussion in L. Fuller, The Morality of Law (1964). l5 The demoralizing effects of such regimes are well known to citizens of Communist nations, and indeed to visitors-as well. Continuous dependence on government officials has a range of predictable corrosive effects on both character and spirit-a worthy subject for inquiry by a modern Tocqueville. 
l6 See generally Sullivan, Unconstitutional Conditions, 102 Harv. L. Rev. 1413 (1989); Epstein, Unconstitutional Conditions, State Power, and the Limits of Content, 102 Harv. L. Rev. 4 (1988). I I exist. Indeed, if government owns the paper itself, or allocates it in its discretion, there will be serious problems for the system of free expression. More generally, private ownership facilitates the kind of security on which diversity and pluralism depend. Political censorship may be altogether unnecessary if it is understood that current holdings are vulnerable to state control. 
The final point is that one of the best ways to destroy a democratic system is to ensure that the distribution of wealth and resources is unstable and constantly up for new evaluation by the political process. A high degree of stability is necessary in order to allow people to plan their affairs, to reduce the effects of factional or interest-group power in government, to promote investment, and to prevent the political process from breaking down by attempting to resolve enormous, emotionally laden issues about who is entitled to what. Stability and security-a sense of context-are important individual and collective goods. A system in which property rights are open to continuous readjustment will produce serious harm.17 
In addition, government control of property-through constant readjustment of ownership rights-simply reintroduces the collective action problem originally solved by property rights. Public choice theory can be seen in part as a generalization of this simple insight. 
Like the right to freedom of religious conscience,18 moreover, the right to property helps create a flourishing civil society, an intermediate level between the government and the individual. The development of a civil society can in turn be understood as a mechanism both for creating economic prosperity and for promoting democratic self-governance. A constitutional system that respects private property should be regarded, not as an effort to oppose liberal rights to collective self-government, but instead as a way to fortify democratic processes. 
I have not dealt with the question of redistribution. In the West, enthusiasm for property rights is often thought to entail a reluctance’ to allow redistribution, or (worse) complete indifference to the poor. The proper response is twofold; First, property rights help create wealth, and greater wealth will often benefit the most vulner 
I7 For this reason the embrace of “context-smashing” in R. Unger, Politics (1985), seems’ most puzzling. 
l8 Cf. Holmes, supra note 13. able as well. Time and again it has been shown that economic growth does more than welfare and employment programs to benefit the disadvantaged. Of course growth does not do everything, and it must be supplemented. The second point, then, is that welfare and employment programs are a necessary part of any system of property rights. Such rights are best defended in self-consciously instrumental terms, because of the good things that they do. When they do not accomplish good, or enough good, they must be accompanied by other social strategies. 
Properly understood, the defense of property rights is a defense of programs of redistribution as well. These programs are not designed to produce economic equality-a truly disastrous goal-but instead to bring about genuine equality of opportunity and, equally important, freedom, for all people in society, from desperate conditions, or from circumstances that impede human functioning.19 
I have said that the task of economic development cannot be rigidly separated from the task of constitution making. Without constitutional protection of property rights, there will be continuous pressure to adjust distributions of property on an ad hoc basis. When a group of people have acquired a good deal of money, it will be tempting to tax them heavily. When another group has verged on bankruptcy, there will be a temptation to subsidize them. After the fact, these steps may seem fair or even necessary; but if everyone knows that government might respond in this way, there will be a powerful deterrent to the creation of a market economy. No citizen- a n d no international or domestic investor-can be secure of his immunity from the state. 
A pervasive risk is that governmental control over property rights will undo the decision, made in the basic system creating such rights, to solve a collective action problem faced-by public ownership. If property rights are insecure-if they are subject to continuous governmental examination- t h e system will approach equivalence to one in which there are no such rights at all. This will introduce all l9 See Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in Liberalism and the Good (R. Douglass, G. Mara, & H. Richardson, eds., 1990); A. Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (1985). of the problems, described in Part I, to which a system of property rights is supposed to respond. Above all, it will create individual vulnerability to government and at the same time produce both too little and too much use of existing resources. It will deter economic development and impair the movement toward democracy as well. 
I have claimed that a constitution can accomplish a great deal in easing the transition to economic markets and private property. In order for it to do so, constitutional protections must be judicially enforceable-that is, a court must be available to vindicate any rights that the constitution creates. Ordinary citizens must have a general right to raise constitutional objections before an independent tribunal authorized to provide redress. Without judicial review, constitutions tend to be worth little more than the paper on which they are written. They become simple words, or public relations documents, rather than instruments that confer genuine rights. While the efficacy of courts in social reform is disputable,20 there can be little doubt that judicially enforceable constitutions can have a significant effect both on real-world results and on legal and social culture in general. 21 To be sure, some nations in the West have prospered with little or nothing in the way of judicial enforcement of constitutions. But these nations were able to benefit from the background of civil society, market economies, and well-defined property rights. For them, constitutional protections were far less important. 
AFor Eastern Europe in general, the drafting of the constitution appears to pose two especially distinctive challenges. The first is to begin the process of creating a legal culture with firm judicial protection of individual rights. By individual rights, I mean, first and foremost, traditional “negative” rights against government, prominent among them private property and freedom of contract. It is of course misleading to think of these as genuinely negative rights. They depend for their existence on governmental institutions will2o See G Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope (1991) z Mucd of the effect is deterrence of harmful governmental action before the fact, rather than governmental losses in actual litigated cases. The fear of losing in court has often proved a substantial deterrent to government. 
CHICAGO WOR.KING PAPER IN LAW & ECONOMICS ing to recognize, create, and protect them. But this point is a semantic one; the defense of the traditional rights need not depend on the false claim that they are negative. 
The second challenge is to facilitate the creation of a market economy and of a civil society-that is, a realm of private action containing institutions (churches, markets, corporations, labor unions, women’s organizations, and so forth) that are independent of the state and constrained minimally by it. Through meeting these challenges, a constitution could simultaneously promote democratic goals and help bring about economic prosperity. 
To carry out this task, constitution-makers should avoid three strategies that contain serious risks. All of these strategies are characteristic features of communist constitutionalism. Unfortunately, all of them appear to be influencing current debates in the post-communist era. The draft Constitutions tend to replicate the errors of the communist constitutions themselves.22 
place for setting out very general social aspirations, or for imposing positive duties on government (such as the provision of a social welfare state including such guarantees as equitable remuneration, leisure time, social security, and occupational safety and health). There are three reasons why this would be a dangerous strategy, at least under current conditions. 
First, to state aspirations and impose positive duties-prominent of course in the Soviet Constitution-runs the risk of turning a constitution into something other than a legal document with realworld consequences. It is important to remember that if it is to create rights realistically enforceable in the world, a constitution should not list all things to which a country aspires. It should limit itself, for the most part, to rights that it is genuinely able to enforce. A constitution that creates positive rights is not likely to be subject to judicial enforcement, because these rights are vaguely defined, simultaneously involve the interests of numerous people, and depend for their existence on active management of government institutionssomething for which judges are ill-suited. The existence of unen22 These draft Constitutions are on file with the Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, University of Chicago Law School, and can be obtained from that Center. forceable rights will in turn tend to destroy the negative rightsfreedom of speech, freedom of religion, and so forth-that might otherwise be genuine ones. If some rights are shown to be unenforceable, it is likely that other rights will be unenforceable as well. 
The second problem with positive rights is that they will work against the general current efforts to diminish the sense of entitlement to state protection, and to encourage individual initiative and self-reliance. Both markets and democracy tend to develop these highly salutary characteristics. Sometimes liberal constitutionalism is praised because it responds accurately to “human nature,” and does not try to tinker with it. There is undoubtedly something to this idea; efforts fundamentally to revise human character are usually doomed to failure. But liberal constitutionalism might be defended precisely on the ground that it has healthy effects on human character. Markets and democracy tend to create certain types, with many valuable characteris tics.23 
To say this is emphatically not to say that in the post-reform era, nations in Eastern Europe should eliminate social welfare protections and leave their citizens to the vicissitudes of the market. Such a route would be a recipe for disaster, since it would allow for mass suffering of the kind that is unacceptable in any nation. But these protections should be created at the level of ordinary legislation, and subject to democratic discussion, rather than placed in the foundational document. 
The third problem with positive rights is that they establish government interference with markets as a constitutional duty. The current effort is to limit such interference, and to establish the preconditions for private markets, free trade, and free contract. To impose a constitutional duty of interference is to move in precisely the wrong direction. 
constitution as a place for creating “duties” as well as rights. Such duties are not likely to be enforceable through courts. Their statement in a constitution tends to weaken the understanding that the document creates protected rights, with real meaning, against the 23 See J Mill Considerations on Representative Government, ed. C.V. Shields (1881: Niw York: Liberal. Arts Press, 1958). To say this is not of course to say that all of those characteristics are always good ones. state. Moreover, countries in Eastern Europe are attempting to eliminate the effects of the notion that the state imposes “duties” on citizens, rather than giving them rights. It may be that in the West, more emphasis on duties would be a good idea. Perhaps the Western emphasis on “rights” has harmed social deliberation, especially in the United States, where duties should be taken more seriously.24 But this is the direction from which Eastern Europe ought to be emerging. 
dangerous strategy is to make constitutional provisions binding against private people and private organizations as well as against the state. In almost all Western systems, the constitution applies only to the government, not to the people in general. This is extremely important, because it recognizes and helps create a private sphere--a civil society that operates independently of the state. It also frees up private organizations-employers, religious organizations, unions, and so forth-to act as they choose. If the people want to apply particular constitutional provisions to particular private organizations, of course they can do so, through ordinary legislation. But it is a mistake to apply such provisions through the constitution itself. Above all, this strategy works to erase the distinction between the private and public spheres, in a way that would tend to defeat current aspirations in Eastern Europe. As noted, that distinction should be enthusiastically embraced on substantive political grounds. 
Ironically, these dangers are more serious for the East than for the West. In the United States, for example, the institutions of private property and civil society are firmly in place, and social injustice frequently occurs precisely because of the absence of positive protections and of safeguards against the power of private institutions. The case for a firm right to some forms of social assistance is at least a plausible one in America. Such a right would not seriously jeopardize existing legal and social institutions; it could not possibly threaten the general belief in markets, solid property rights, and civil society. 
In systems that are seeking for the first time to establish free markets and civil society, and that already have a strong public commitment to a social welfare state, the relevant considerations point in precisely the opposite direction. A dramatic legal and cultural shift, creating a belief in private property and a respect for markets, is indispensable. It is therefore surprising but true that the case for a strongly negative constitution, protecting market arrangements, is under current conditions powerful in Eastern Europe, even if it is ambiguous in the West. 
We might draw a more general conclusion from this discussion. It is often said that constitutions, as a form of higher law, must be compatible with the culture and mores of those whom they regulate. In one sense, however, the opposite is true. Constitutional provisions should be designed to work against precisely those aspects of a country’s culture and tradition that are likely to produce harm through that country’s ordinary political processes. There is a large difference between the risks of harm faced by a nation committed by culture and history to free markets, and the-corresponding risks in a nation committed by culture and history to social security and general state protection. Constitutions should work against the particular nation’s most threatening tendencies. This point explains why extremely powerful safeguards against sex discrimination and ethnic and religious oppression are necessary in Eastern Europe (a point that would, however, take me well beyond the scope of this essay). It is above all for this reason that constitutions designed for one nation are ill-adapted for others. 
In the next few years, it will be critical to develop a set of potential provisions for inclusion as an “economic bill of rights” section of the proposed constitution. Indeed, this section could serve as one of the many possible new contributions of current constitution-makers to the general theory and practice of constitutionalism. 
I provide in this section a preliminary outline of constitutional provisions that might be adopted in the interest of creating a wellfunctioning system of property rights and economic markets. The outline amounts to little more a list; it is intended only to provide a starting point for discussion. 
government must ensure that action may not be taken against citizens unless it has laid down, in advance, a pertinent law. The rule of law requires that any such restriction must be clear rather than vague and publicly available rather than secret; and it must operate in the world as it does on the books.25 
A guarantee of the rule of law is both an economic and a democratic right. It creates a wall of protection around citizens, giving a guarantee of immunity and ensuring them that they may engage in productive activity without fear of the state. And by creating this wall of protection, the guarantee creates the kind of security and independence that are prerequisites for the role of a citizen in a democracy. 
Many constitutions contain protection of this kind. The American Constitution embodies this idea in the fifth amendment, which says, “nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.“2 6 A provision of this general sort is indispensable on both economic and democratic grounds. Without such a provision, there is not, in fact or in law, a system of private property. 
is a procedural rather than substantive protection of property. It means that citizens will be provided with a hearing before government may interfere with their holdings. A provision of this sort accomplishes two functions. 
First, it promotes accurate factfinding. A hearing before an independent tribunal ensures that property will not be taken capriciously, or on the basis of whim, or for discriminatory or irrelevant reasons. In the hearing, it is necessary to show the facts that would justify a deprivation of property as a matter of law. Second, the hearing right carries out an important dignitary and participatory function. To say that people cannot be deprived of property without a hearing is to say that before it acts against them, the government must listen to what they have to say. This constraint improves governmental legitimacy as well. There is considerable evidence that people feel more secure and trustful if government affords them an opportunity to be heard before it undertakes action harmful to their interests. 
25 See L. Fuller, The Morality of Law (1964). 26 U.S. Const. Amend V. I9 , 
(a) In generai Many constitutions protect contractual liberty from governmental invasion-as in, for example, a provision to the effect that government shall not pass any “Law impairing the Obligations of Contracts.” 2 7 Constitutional protection of contracts ensures citizens that when they engage in economic arrangements, they can do so free from the spectre of governmental interventions. Without this right, there will be a serious deterrent to productive activity. 
For those countries that choose this route, there are two central questions. The first is whether the protection applies prospectively, or only retroactively. One might think that the state should be free to create the background against which people enter into agreements, and that therefore there should be no limit on the state’s power to set out, in advance, limits on the terms on which people may contract. This is the approach taken in American law, which allows the government to affect contractual ordering however it wishes, so long as it does so in advance. 
The second and related question is the extent of the “police power,” pursuant to which limits on contractual freedom will be permitted. It is obvious that the state can forbid contracts for murder or assault. It will probably be agreed that the state may forbid contracts to work for less than a certain monthly wage, or for more than a certain number of hours per week. But does this mean that a state can impair a contract retroactively simply because it believes that the outcome is unfair to one side?28 If so, freedom of contract becomes a dead letter. 
(b) Ban on wage andprice controls. Limits on wages and pricesin the form of floors or ceilings-are of course a standard method 27 Art. 1, section 9, section 10. 
28 Sometimes people think that the appropriate remedy for a harsh bargain is to disallow the bargain. But it is not at all clear that this remedy helps the weaker side. Usually someone in bad circumstances will be presented with a range of unfavorable alternatives, and will choose the least unfavorable of them. To disallow this option does nothing to improve the bad circumstances, and simply forces the person to choose the second-least unfavorable option. It is crucially important for the emerging democracies to understand this point. Efforts to close off market options are tempting when those options seem few and produce harsh results; but the closing off is an utterly ineffectual remedy. 
A particular problem here is that well-organized private groups will frequently seek assistance, in the form of regulatory laws enabling them to function as a cartel. This strategy might at first glance have a public interest justification, but it can ultimately be disastrous. A system that creates minimum prices for (say) milk may help some milk producers, but it will also create scarcity in an important commodity and also increase prices for consumers, many of them likely to be poor. Maximum prices can in turn produce scarcity, often of important commodities. 
A system in which government generally sets minimum and maximum prices will eventually produce many of the economic and democratic problems that Eastern European nations are attempting to solve. The United States has witnessed this very problem with regulation of energy prices; such regulation helped produce the energy crisis of the 1970s. 
On the other hand, it is also plausible to think that controls on wages and prices will sometimes be desirable during and after the transition to a market economy. Even in such an economy, legal controls on wages and prices sometimes have at least plausible justifications. The category is not limited to the minimum wage; it includes price supports of various kinds as well. A ban on wage and price controls may be excessively strong medicine for the problem at hand. 
protecting occupational liberty. 
(a) Protection offlee entry into occupations, trades, and business. A provision of this sort can be found in the German Constitution. This is a salutary protection against governmental restrictions on an important form of liberty, one that is part and parcel of free labor markets. 
It does, however, contain an ambiguity, similar to that arising under the protection of freedom of contract. It seems clear that government can impose certain limits requiring that jobs be performed by people who are trained to do them. It can, for example, ensure that doctors actually know something about medicine, or that lawyers are trained in the law. If this is so, it will be necessary to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate interferences with free entry into occupations, rather than simply to say that the government has no role to play in this regard. This issue is probably best resolved through judicial interpretation, not in the text itself. 
(b) The right to choose one’s occupation. A provision of this general sort can be found in the German Constitution. It overlaps a good deal with protection of free entry into trades, and has similar virtues. It also raises a similar interpretive difficulty, involving the legitimacy of provisions designed to ensure that people are genuinely qualified for jobs. 
(c) A prohibition on forced labor. This provision seems indispensable to the emerging Eastern European democracies. It nicely complements the right to choose one’s occupation, by saying that government cannot require people to engage in work that it prefers them to undertake. It also tends to guarantee free labor markets. Such a provision also carries forward, in a particularly crisp way, the traditional liberal prohibition on slavery, embodied in the general idea that “we were not made for one another’s uses.“z9 
create a market economy, the Constitution should say that government may not give itself a legal monopoly over any sector of the economy. A right of exclusive management of agriculture or telecommunications is a sure way of stifling competition and of impairing economic productivity. Indeed, such a right will reintroduce all of the problems discussed in Part I of this essay. The government should be banned from embarking on this course. 
Under certain narrow conditions, an exception might be permitted-as, for example, where government cannot efficiently perform a certain function unless it creates a monopoly, and where competition is impossible. This is an extremely rare circumstance, however, and a strong burden should be imposed on government to show that it is present in any particular case. 
It would probably be a mistake to create a constitutional prohibition on government monopolies that exist in fact but that are not created through law. In the transition from communism, some de 29 J. Locke, Two Treatises on Government 311 (Laslett ed. 1960). facto monopolies are likely, and it is hard to see how a constitutional court can prevent them. Here we encounter one of the limits of constitutionalism: the narrow remedial power of the judiciary. 
follows from what has been said thus far that government should be constrained from imposing special disabilities on private enterprises, that is, from taxing, regulating, or otherwise discouraging private entities from operating on equal terms with official organs. Government might well seek to create such disabilities as a way of insulating itself from competition or of protecting its own instrumentalities. If it does so, it will create severe harms to civil society and to economic markets. A prohibition could accomplish considerable good 
of course there will be some hard interpretive questions here. To see whether there is discrimination, one will have to explore whether private and public enterprises are similarly situated. This will not always be an easy question to answer. 
tion. Protection of the right to travel serves both economic and democratic functions. Especially in a system with some degree of jurisdictional decentralization, the right to travel is a safeguard against oppressive regulation. If citizens can leave, there is a powerful deterrent to such regulation; people are able to “vote with their feet.” It is fully plausible to think that in the United States, the right to travel has-been one of the greatest safeguards against legislation harmful to economic development. The right to-travel internally creates a built-in check on tyranny, at least in a federal system. The right to leave one’s nation serves the same function. In this sense the right is simultaneously an economic and a political one. 
series of provisions amounting to a “fiscal constitution,” that is, a document designed to regulate institutions dealing with the relationship between government and the economy. Of course such provisions would overlap with those discussed above. I offer a few examples here. I do not discuss monetary arrangements and institutions, because they would call for lengthy discussion; but certainly provisions bearing on that issue warrant consideration. 
(a) Ban on tarz@ and duties. It has probably been established, through both theory and practice, that tariffs and duties are on balante harmful to the citizens of a nation. Despite this fact, there is constant pressure for these measures, from the usually narrow groups and interests that would benefit from them. Because tariffs and duties would create aggregate harms but short-term and narrow gains, it might be sensible to enact, in advance, a constitutional prohibition on them. The problem with this strategy is that it is at least reasonable to think that tariffs and duties are necessary under some conditions, and perhaps their availability is an important device for government to have while it is negotiating with other nations. 
(b) Balanced budget. In the United States, there has recently been some interest in a constitutional amendment that would require “balanced budgets. ” The case for such an amendment is not obscure. For legislators or governments with short-term electoral and domestic problems, it may well make sense to spend more than one receives. The dangers of such a course are felt by future generations. A constitutional provision might be directed against this form of myopia. 
On reflection, however, it would probably be a mistake to include such a provision in a Constitution. A decision not to balance the budget might be the right one in any particular year. The consequences of unbalanced budgets are sharply disputed among economists. It is hardly clear that they are seriously harmful. Moreover, a provision to this effect would not readily be subject to judicial enforcement. 
(c) Restrictions on the taxing power. A fiscal constitution might also impose restrictions on the power of taxation. Most plausible here would be a ban on retroactive taxation. If government may tax resources accumulated in a period in which they could not be taxed, it should not, consistent with the rule of law, be permitted to introduce a tax that will be imposed retroactively. There are also questions here about possible restrictions on progressivity. 
(d) Ban on controls on export or import of currency. It might well make sense to accompany a right to travel with a prohibition on legal controls on the export or import of currency. Such a prohibition could serve similar functions in guarding against protectionism. 
I have not dealt with two problems of special importance to the emerging Eastern European democracies. The first is that the interpretation of constitutional provisions is of critical importance, and interpretation cannot be entirely constrained by those who write the Constitution. I have argued, for example, that a constitution should ensure that private property cannot be taken without just compensation. But a constitution cannot possibly spell out, in advance, what government action must be in order to qualify as a “taking.” Because of the limitations of language, that task must be left to judges dealing with particular cases and particular measures. The same point applies to all provisions now under consideration in Poland and elsewhere. Constitutions set out the broad outlines for decision, but in light of the limitations of words and human foresight, they cannot do much more than that. 
More fundamentally, the meaning of any text is a function of interpretive principles. To say that the original understanding is binding, or that there should be an interpretive presumption in favor of property rights, or that courts should minimally intrude into political processes, or that a commitment to constitutional equality is a commitment to the elimination of castes-all these are fully understandable claims, but their contents are not “in” any text, and they must be justified in substantive terms. Frequently, debates over interpretive principles purport to be semantic; actually they involve the selection, on political and moral grounds, of norms with which to give meaning to constitutional texts. No document can avoid the grant of discretion to interpreters in choosing among various possible norms. 
The second problem is that a system of private property has to be created rather than merely recognized. In light of the current experience of Eastern Europe, the notion of “laissez-faire,” as a description of markets, stands exposed as the conspicuous fiction that it is. Markets depend for their existence not on passivity, but on active governmental choices. Most of those choices cannot be made in a Constitution. The movement for privatization-for the creation of property rights- i s exceptionally important, and it must accompany the writing and implementation of constitutional rights. The Constitution will work against the backdrop of property rights, and it will protect those rights once created; but the act of creation will not occur at the constitutional level. 
In Eastern Europe, the problem is especially formidable. It is sad but true that existing ownership rights often have their source in arbitrariness or in injustice. Who owns what is a function of past acts, public and private, many of which are irrelevant or unacceptable from the moral point of view. In the West, this fact can be conveniently ignored, because the role of fate, injustice, force, or the state in initial allocations is not really visible. And in important respects this is all to the good; a constant focus on the origins of property rights might make it hard to proceed, day to day, with existing allocations. In Eastern Europe, by contrast, any allocation will be very visible indeed. It will occur all at once or in various steps, but in any case people will see that some people are getting property through government decree, and others are not. The task of allocation is for this reason much more difficult. 
Sometimes it is thought that the allocation of initial entitlements “does not matter,” in the sense that at least in the absence of transactions costs, people will bargain their way toward the same outcome regardless of that allocation. This basic idea is the fundamental claim behind the Coase theorem.30 Although the Coase theorem has been highly influential in American law, and has contributed to many major advances in our understanding, the proposition is sometimes false. Its falsehood relates in important ways to current reform efforts in Eastern Europe. 
The central point here is that whether people have a preference for a commodity, a right, or anything else is in part of function of whether the government has allocated it to them in the first instance. There is simply no way to avoid the task of initially allocating an entitlement, and the decision to grant an entitlement to one person frequently makes that person value that entitlement more than he would if the right had been allocated to someone else. (It also makes other people value it less than they otherwise would.) The initial allocation serves to influence, to legitimate, and to reinforce social understandings about presumptive rights of ownership. That allocation has an important causal connection to individual perceptions about the good or right in question. 
3o See Coase, supra note 6. 
The point is simply a factual one, and it has received considerable empirical confirmation. The effect on preferences of the initial allocation of a commodity or an entitlement is commonly described as the “endowment effect.“31 The endowment effect has immense importance. It suggests that any initial allocation of an entitlement-and government cannot refuse to make an initial allocation-may well have effects on preferences. 
Economists and psychologists have found this effect in many places, including both real exchange experiments and surveys. For example, a recent study showed that people who were allocated certain consumption objects-pens, coffee mugs, and binocularsplaced a much higher valuation on those objects than did those who were required to purchase them. 32 No such effects were observed for money tokens in otherwise identical experiments. In a similar study, some participants were given a mug and others a chocolate bar; both were told that they could exchange one for the other. Participants in a third group, not given a prior entitlement, were told that they could select one or the other; 56% of these selected the candy bar. By contrast, 89% of those initially given the mug refused to trade it for the candy bar, and only 10% of those initially given the candy were willing to trade it for the mug. 33 The different evaluations could not be explained by reference to anything other than the initial endowment. 
Studies based on survey research have made similar findings. One such study found differences between payment and compensation valuations of trees in a park of about five to one.34 When hunters were questioned about the potential destruction of a duck habitat, they said that they would be willing to pay an average of $247 to prevent the loss-but would demand no less than $1044 to accept it 35 In another study, participants required payments to accept degradation of visibility ranging from 5 to more than 16 times higher than their valuations based on their willingness to pay.36 According to yet another study, the compensation demanded for accepting a new risk of immediate death of .OOl% was one or two orders of magnitude higher than the amount of willingness to pay to eliminate an existing risk of the same size.37 A related survey showed similarly large status quo biases in willingness to pay for changes in risks? A powerful status quo bias appears to affect reactions to risks or losses. 
In many settings, then, it has been shown that people place a higher value on rights or goods that they currently hold than they place on the same goods when in the hands of others. There are multiple possible explanations for endowment effects. In many cases, endowment effects reflect a genuine preference-shaping consequence from the initial assignment.39 Endowment effects may 35 J. Hammock and G. Brown, Waterfowl and Wetlands: Toward Bioeconomic Analysis (1974). 
36 Rowe, d’Arge, and Brookshire, An Experiment on the Economic Value of Visibility, 7 J. E nv. EC. and Management 1 (1980). 
37 Thaler supra note 31, at 44. 
38 Thus’people were willing to pay $3.78 on average to decrease the risk from an insecticide, but 77% refused to buy the product at any price, however reduced, if the risk level would increase by an equivalent amount. Viscusi, Magat, and Huber, An Investigation of the Rationality of Consumer Valuations of Multiple Health Risks, ‘18 RAND Journal of Economics 465 (1987). 
39 Such effects may also come from experience; people who use a product or have an entitlement may learn to appreciate its value. They may be a product of strategic considerations; someone may be unwilling to give up a right because the concession would reveal weakness in bargaining. Sometimes they might be produced by the wealth effect of the initial allocation of the entitlement. Different allocations produce differences in wealth-someone with more entitlements is to that extent richer-and perhaps some allocations have wealth effects sufficiently large to affect the point to which people will bargain. 
Such effects might also derive from anticipated after-the-fact regret. People who trade one good for another may think that in the event of disappointment, they will be left not only with a good of uncertain value, but also with a feeling of responsibility for that very fact. Notably, some of these explanations do not depend on real preference change at all. They account for endowment effects reflect an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance: High valuation of what one owns, and low valuation or what one does not, is a means of reducing dissonance, and in some respects it is highly adaptive. Perhaps, too, the initial allocation has an important legitimating effect, suggesting that the entitlement “naturally” belongs where it has been placed, and putting a social burden on even voluntary changes. In some cases the divergence between willingness to pay and willingness to accept is probably a product of the change in social norms brought about by the change in the allocation of the entitlement.40 
For present purposes, it is not necessary to explain the mechanism behind endowment effects. It is enough to say that the initial allocation has preference-shaping effects and that when this is so, there is no acontextual “preference” with which to do legal or political work. 
If all this is correct, large consequences follow. In Eastern Europe, property rights have often yet to be allocated. A series of decis i o n s -not feasibly placed in the Constitution-must be made to establish who owns what. The distinguishing feature of a system of freedom of contract is that rights of ownership are alienable. But such a system can operate with quite different initial allocations of rights. Should workers have a presumptive right to be fired only for cause, a right that employers can “buy” through contract? Or should employers have a presumptive right to fire employees at will, a right that employees can purchase in an agreement? Does the right to own a plant include the right to pollute, subject to an agreement to cease, obtained by neighbors? Or do the neighbors own that right initially, with a provision for purchase from the plant owner? A regime of freedom of contract is consistent with all of these systems. The key point is that the initial allocation will affect the valuation of the rights by both current owners and would-be purchasers. And if while holding preferences constant. But these sorts of explanations do not appear sufficient. 
4o The endowment effect should probably not be seen as a case of individual irrationality, as has been found in certain reactions to low-probability events or in certain kinds of preference-reversals. It is by no means clear that status quo bias of this kind is irrational. it does so, the initial allocation will have important consequences for ultimate outcomes. 
For transition in Eastern Europe, it is important also to understand that much of governmental behavior-the acts of government and of those who seek to influence it-might well be a product of endowment effects. The point has a range of positive implications; indeed, it helps to explain a wide range of political outcomes and political behavior. Political participants should be able to exploit endowment effects by attempting to describe the status quo in a way that takes advantage of the phenomenon of status quo bias. So too, political actors are frequently successful when they are able to identify and control the perception of the status quo. One exampleprominent in Eastern Europe before and after communism-is provided by constant political efforts to lower expectations by describing the status quo, or the expected status quo, as systematically worse than in fact it is-so that the citizenry will rarely perceive deviations as losses but instead only as gains. The phenomenon occurs during elections, during wars, and during debate over the economy. 
With respect to current dilemmas in Eastern Europe, the existence of endowment effects shows the importance of initial entitlements in creating preferences and beliefs: Probably the most that can be said is that the initial allocation should be undertaken democratically and with a firm awareness of the (perhaps surprising) consequences. But the Constitution cannot plausibly make that allocation. It can only protect property rights once they have been created. Like the problem of interpretation, the problem of allocating initial entitlements points to important limits in constitutionalism. 
The three transitions now taking place in Eastern Europe should be brought more closely together. Above all, the task of constitution-making can help facilitate the transitions to economic markets and to democratic self-government. To this end, I have outlined some possible constitutional provisions designed to protect the basic institutions of private property, free markets: and civil society. A similar analysis might be applied to provisions not directly concerned with the protection of markets-including rights to as 
sociational liberty; freedom from discrimination on the basis of sex, race, religion, and ethnicity; and rights of political and religious liberty. 
The most general point is that with strong constitutional protection of private property and economic markets, nations in Eastern Europe can take an important step on the way to both economic growth and democratic self-government. The connection between private property and prosperity is well understood; the experience of Eastern Europe confirms a less obvious point, involving the contributions of such rights to the security indispensable to citizenship. In this light such rights can be defended not on the ground that they conform to “human nature,” but on the contrary as part of a system having salutary rather than destructive effects on human character. Both markets and democracy are most plausibly defended in these terms. 
To say this is hardly to challenge programs that redistribute resources, training, or opportunities to the poor, or that otherwise protect the vulnerable. The instrumental arguments that justify private property call for efforts to ensure that everyone can have some of it. These arguments powerfully support government programs supplementing market arrangements.41 
Without strong constitutional provisions on behalf of property rights, civil society; and markets, there will probably be a substantial temptation to intrude on all of these institutions, and, by so doing, to recreate the very problems that such institutions are supposed to solve. In Eastern Europe, the task of constitution-making is more difficult, and far more pressing, than it was in the West, in which a well-established backdrop of rights and institutions was already in place. The ironic conclusion is that the case for a firm negative constitution, and for creation and protection of property rights and free markets, is very strong in Eastern Europe; and this is so even if the corresponding case is, in Western countries, somewhat ambiguous. 
41 To say this is not, however, to say that such programs should be guaranteed constitutionally. Nor is it to deny that diffkult instrumental judgments must be made about the efficacy of different programs, some of which undoubtedly undermine their own goals by creating dependency. 
No constitution can make the initial allocations of property rights; this must be left to democratic processes. Moreover, no constitutional text can control the process of interpretation, and thus there is always a risk that written documents will be given a meaning other than that which would promote a nation’s welfare. But large-scale social change is always accompanied by risks, and the ubiquity of risk provides no reason for resignation or discouragement. A constitution offering firm protection to property rights could do a great deal to ease the transition to markets and democracy. 
Different versions of some of this essay will appear in Constitutional 
comments should address them to: 
Cass R; Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2265216?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy & Public Affairs This content downloaded from 132.203.227.63 on Mon, 25 Apr 2016 13:18:33 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms CASS R. SUNSTEIN Preferences and Politics The drafting of the United States Constitution, it is often said, signaled a rejection of conceptions of politics founded on classical ideals in favor of a quite different modem view., The precise terms of the alleged shift are not altogether clear, but it is possible to identify the most prominent strands. The classical conception assumes a relatively homogeneous people and prizes active participation by the polity's citizenry. In the classical conception, the polity is self-consciously concerned with the character of the citizens; it seeks to inculcate in them and to profit from a commitment to the public good. Plato said that politics is the "art whose business it is to care for souls";2 and under the classical conception, civic virtue, not private interest, is the wellspring of political behavior. 
Whether or not the state imposes a "comprehensive view"3 on the nation, it relies relatively little on private rights to constrain government. The 
I am grateful to Jon Elster for many valuable discussions of these issues; to Elizabeth Anderson, Joshua Cohen, George Loewenstein, Jon Macey, Jane Mansbridge, Frederick Schauer, and Elisabeth Wood for helpful comments on an earlier draft; and, for their lively responses, to participants in the University of Toronto Legal Theory Workshop and the University of Chicago seminar led by Gary Becker and James Coleman on rational models in the social sciences. Some of this essay develops arguments set forth in chaps. I and 2 of my After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, I990). 
i. See Gordon Wood, The Creation of the American Republic, I776-1787 (New York: W. W. Norton, I972); Thomas Pangle, The Spirit of Modern Republicanism: The Moral Vision of the American Founders and the Philosophy of Locke (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I988); and Martin Diamond, "Ethics and Politics: The American Way," in The Moral Foundations of the American Republic, ed. Robert Horwitz (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, I986), pp. 75-1o6. 

Studies 7 (I987): 1-25. & underlying vision of "republican" politics is one of frequent participation and deliberation in the service of decision, by the citizenry, about the sorts of values according to which the nation will operate. 
In the modern account, by contrast, government is above all respectful of the divergent conceptions of the good held by its many constituents. 
People are taken as they are, not as they might be. Modern government has no concern with souls. Although electoral processes are ensured, no special premium is placed on citizen participation. Self-interest, not virtue, is understood to be the usual motivating force of political behavior. 
Politics is typically, if not always, an effort to aggregate private interests. 
It is surrounded by checks, in the form of rights, protecting private liberty and private property from public intrusion. 
In this system, the goal of the polity is quite modest: the creation of the basic ground rules under which people can satisfy their desires and go about their private affairs. Much of this is famously captured in The Federalist No. io, in which Madison redescribed the so-called republican problem of the corruption of virtue as the so-called liberal problem of the control of factions, which, as Madison had it, were inevitable if freedom was to be preserved. 
In fact, the conventional division between the American founders and their classical predecessors is far too crude. The founders attempted to create a deliberative democracy, one in which the institutions of representation, checks and balances, and federalism would ensure a deliberative process among political equals rather than an aggregation of interests.4 But respect for private preferences, rather than collective deliberation about public values or the good life, does seem to be a distinguishing feature of American constitutionalism. Indeed, the view that government should refuse to evaluate privately held beliefs about individual welfare, which are said to be irreducibly "subjective," links a wide range of views about both governmental structure and individual rights. 
In this article I want to explore the question whether a contemporary democracy might not sometimes override the private preferences and beliefs of its citizens, not in spite of its salutary liberalism but because of it. 
for deliberation in government and placed a high value on political virtue. Many liberals do not take private preferences as the basis for social choice, without regard to their sources and consequences, or to the reasons that might be offered in their support. See my "Beyond the Republican Revival," Yale Law Journal 97 (I988): I539-89. and It is one thing to affirm competing conceptions of the good; it is quite another to suggest that political outcomes must generally be justified by, or even should always respect, private preferences. A large part of my focus here is on the phenomenon of endogenous preferences. By this term I mean to indicate that preferences are not fixed and stable, but are instead adaptive to a wide range of factors-including the context in which the preference is expressed, the existing legal rules, past consumption choices, and culture in general. The phenomenon of endogenous preferences casts doubt on the notion that a democratic government ought to respect private desires and beliefs in all or almost all contexts.5 It bears on a number of particular problems as well, including the rationale for and extent of the constitutional protection accorded to speech; proportional representation and checks and balances; and the reasons for and limits of governmental regulation of the arts, broadcasting, and the environment. I take up these issues at several points in this article. 
The argument proceeds in several stages. In Section I, I set forth some fairly conventional ideas about welfare and autonomy, in conjunction with the endogeneity of desires, in order to argue against the idea that government ought never or rarely to override private preferences. In Section II, I contend that in three categories of cases, private preferences, as expressed in consumption choices, should be overridden. The first category involves what I call collective judgments, including considered beliefs, aspirations for social justice, and altruistic goals; the second involves preferences that have adapted to undue limitations in available opportunities or to unjust background conditions; the third points to in 
Critique of the Behavioral Foundations of Economic Theory," Philosophy & Public Affairs 6, no. 4 (Summer I977): 3I7-44; Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (New York: Cambridge University Press, I983); and John Roemer, "'Rational Choice' Marxism," in Analytical Marxism, ed. 
John Roemer (New York: Cambridge University Press, I986), pp. I9I-20I. Of course, the satisfaction of private preferences in markets or elsewhere may create prisoners' dilemmas or collective action problems, and here governmental controls (or social norms) are a natural solution. I will not, however, deal with this narrower problem here. 
It might well be that literature, in addition to economics and political theory, is a fruitful place to explore this subject. See Martha Nussbaum, Love's Knowledge (New York: Oxford University Press, I990), and "Shame, Separateness, and Political Unity: Aristotle's Criticism of Plato," in Essays on Aristotle's Ethics, ed. Amelie Rorty (Berkeley: University of California Press, I980), pp. 395-435. It is thus no accident that writers in politics and economics sometimes draw on literature. See, e.g., Elster, Sour Grapes. & trapersonal collective action problems that, over a lifetime, impair personal welfare. In all of these cases, I suggest, a democracy should be free and is perhaps obliged to override private preferences. In Section III, I make some remarks about the relevance of these claims to several current issues of constitutional controversy. These include proportional representation in politics and governmental regulation of the speech "market," including rights of access to the media, democratic controls on the electoral process, hate speech, and pornography. 
Should a constitutional democracy take preferences as the basis for political choice? In contemporary politics, law, and economics, the usual answer is affirmative. Modern economics, for example, is dominated by a conception of welfare based on the satisfaction of existing preferences, as measured by willingness to pay; in politics and law, something called "paternalism" is disfavored in both the public and private realms.6 But contains arguments in this direction; for a representative example at the intersection of economics and law, see Richard Posner, Economics of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983), p. 53. There are, of course, criticisms within all of these fields. In economics, see Sen, "Rational Fools"; in politics, see Elster, Sour Grapes. 
It is notable that the great expositors of liberalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries are emphatic in their rejection of the view that satisfaction of existing preferences is adequate for purposes of ethics or politics. See John Stuart Mill, Considerations on Representative Government, ed. C. V. Shields (i86i; New York: Liberal Arts Press, I958), and The Subjection of Women, ed. Susan Moller Okin (I869; Indianapolis: Hackett, i988); and John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 197I). Mill's rejection of that view is especially emphatic in his essay on Bentham, where he criticizes Bentham for the view that "[Ito say either that man should, or that he should not, take pleasure in one thing, displeasure in another, appeared to him as much an act of despotism in the moralist as in the political ruler." Mill, by contrast, emphasized the need to explore the influences "on the regulation of . .. affections and desires," and pointed to "the deficiencies of a system of ethics which does not pretend to aid individuals in the formation of their own character" (Mill on Bentham and Coleridge, ed. F. R. Leavis [London: Chatto & Windus, I9501, pp. 68, 7I, 70). Of course, there is a difference between what a system of ethics and what a system of politics should say about that question, as Mill clearly believed. 
Dewey spoke in similar terms, invoking the need for critical reflection on the "conditions under which objects are enjoyed" and "the consequences of esteeming and liking them," and arguing that "judgments about values are judgments about that which should regulate the formation of our desires, affections and enjoyments" (John Dewey, The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of Knowledge and Action [New York: Putnam, I960], pp. 259, 265, 272-73; emphasis in original). and the idea that government ought to take preferences as the basis for political decisions is a quite modern one. This is not to say that the idea is without foundations. Partly a function of the perceived (though greatly overstated) difficulty of making interpersonal comparisons of utility, the idea is also a product of the epistemological difficulties of assessing preferences in terms of their true connection with individual welfare, and, perhaps most of all, the genuine political dangers of allowing government to engage in such inquiries. 
The constellation of ideas that emerges from these considerations has been exceptionally influential. It embodies a conception of political justification that might be described as "subjective welfarism."7 On this view, the government, even or perhaps especially in a democracy, should attend exclusively to conceptions of welfare as subjectively held by its citizens. A wide range of prominent approaches to politics turn out to be versions of subjective welfarism. These include, for example, certain forms of utilitarianism; the view that some version of Paretian efficiency ought to be treated as the foundational norm for political life; opposition to paternalism in public and private life; approaches to politics modeled on bargaining theory (rational or otherwise); and conceptions of politics that see the democratic process as an effort to aggregate individual preferences. 
It is important to understand that subjective welfarism, thus defined, may or may not be accompanied by a broader notion that ethical and moral questions should generally be treated in welfarist or subjectivist terms. It is as a political conception, rather than an ethical one, that subjective welfarism underlies a wide range of approaches to public life, including ideas about institutional arrangements and individual or collec7. I am grateful to Joshua Cohen for this formulation. I will not explore the complexities of the notion of "preference" here. I mean to refer simply to choices, mostly as these are observed in market behavior. This understanding of course captures the economic notion of "revealed preference" and also is a foundational part of subjective welfarism as I understand it. For a recent and interestingly offhand example, see Ingemar Hansson and Charles Stuart, "Malthusian Selection of Preferences," American Economic Review go (I990): 529, 542: "We use natural selection to explain behavior, or equivalently, preferences." I do not explore the view, much broader than the claims defended here, that the existence of even widely held preferences, thus defined, furnishes no argument at all for governmental action. 
If the notion of preference is intended to refer to an internal psychological force, or to a supposed wellspring of action, difficulties of course abound: people have first-, second-, and nth-order preferences, and their desires can be organized into many different categories, ranging from whimsy to considered judgments. & tive rights. What I want to argue here is that subjective welfarism, even as a political conception, is unsupportable by reference to principles of autonomy or welfare, the very ideas that are said to give rise to it. 
The initial objection to the view that government should take preferences "as they are," or as the basis for political choice, is one of impossibility. Whether people have a preference for a commodity, a right, or anything else is in part a function of whether the government has allocated it to them in the first instance. There is no way to avoid the task of initially allocating an entitlement, and the decision to grant an entitlement to one person frequently makes that person value that entitlement more than if the right had been allocated to someone else. (It also makes other people value it less than they would otherwise.) Government must not only allocate rights to one person or another; it must also decide whether or not to make the right alienable through markets or otherwise. The initial allocation serves to reflect, to legitimate, and to reinforce social understandings about presumptive rights of ownership, and that allocation has an important causal connection to individual perceptions of the good or right in question. 
For example, a decision to give employees a right to organize, farmers a right to be free from water pollution, or women a right not to be subjected to sexual harassment will have an impact on social attitudes toward labor organization, clean water, and sexual harassment. The allocation therefore has an effect on social attitudes toward the relevant rights and on their valuation by both current owners and would-be purchasers. And when preferences are a function of legal rules, the rules cannot be justified by reference to the preferences.8 Moreover, the initial simple fact of endogeneity, but that social rules and practices cannot be justified by reference to preferences that they have produced. 
The point in the text receives empirical confirmation in the "endowment effect" frequently observed in social psychology and economics. See, e.g., David Brookshire and Don Coursey, "Measuring the Value of a Public Good: An Empirical Comparison of Elicitation Procedures," American Economic Review 77 (I987): 554-65; David Harless, "More Laboratory Evidence on the Disparity Between Willingness to Pay and Compensation Demanded," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization ii (I989): 359-70; Richard Thaler, "Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization I (I980): 39-60; and Jack Knetsch and J. A. Sinden, "Willingness to Pay and Compensation Demanded: Experimental Evidence of an Unexpected Disparity in Measures of Value," Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (I984): 507-2I. The endowment effect is the consequence, for preferences and willingness to pay, of the initial allocation of an entitlement. Cf. Martha Nussbaum, "Shame, Separateness, and Political Unity," and and assignment creates the basic "reference state" from which values and judgments of fairness are subsequently made, and those judgments affect preferences and private willingness to pay.9 Of course, a decision to make an entitlement alienable or inalienable (consider the right to vote or reproductive capacities) will have preference-shaping effects. Because of the preference-shaping effects of the rules of allocation, it is difficult to see how a government might even attempt to take preferences "as given" or as the basis for decisions in any global sense. 
To some degree this concern might be put to one side. Surely there is a difference between a government that concerns itself self-consciously and on an ongoing basis with private preferences and a government that sets up the basic rules of property, contract, and tort, and then lets things turn out however they may. If this distinction can be sustained, disagreements about the relationship between politics and preferences turn on competing notions of autonomy or freedom on the one hand and welfare on the other. Subjective welfarism is founded on the claim that an approach that treats preferences as sovereign is most likely to promote both individual freedom, rightly conceived, and individual or social welfare. 
It will be useful to begin with welfare. Even if one accepted a purely welfarist view, one might think that the process of promoting welfare should take place not by satisfying current preferences but by promoting those preferences and satisfying them to such an extent as is consonant with the best or highest conception of human happiness. This view is connected with older (and some current) forms of utilitarianism; it also "Aristotelian Social Democracy," in Liberalism and the Good, ed. R. Bruce Douglas, Gerald Mara, and Henry Richardson (New York: Routledge, I990), pp. 203-52. A similar problem occurs when preferences are produced through an effort to counter the status quo, as in the "grass is always greener" phenomenon, in which people prefer things simply because they are unavailable. There is much less, however, in the way of empirical confirmation of this phenomenon. 
Assumptions of Economics," in Rational Choice: The Contrast Between Economics and Psychology, ed. Robin Hogarth and Melvin Reder (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I987), pp. ioi-i6, esp. pp. 113-14. A related phenomenon is "loss aversion," which refers to the fact that a negative change from the status quo is usually seen as more harmful than a positive change is seen as beneficial. See Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk," Econometrica 47 (I979): 263, 286-88. Loss aversion, together with the "reference state" phenomenon, may help to explain the endowment effect described in note 8 above. has roots in Aristotle.1o Here one does not take existing preferences as given, and one does not put all preferences on the same plane. A criterion of welfare remains the ultimate one, but the system is not focused solely on preference satisfaction, since it insists that welfare and preference satisfaction are entirely different things.II 
A central point here is that preferences are shifting and endogenous rather than exogenous, and as a result are a function of current information, consumption patterns, legal rules, and general social pressures. An effort to identify welfare with preference satisfaction would be easier to understand if preferences were rigidly fixed at some early age, or if learning were impossible; if this were so, democratic efforts to reflect on, change, or select preferences would breed only frustration. But because preferences are shifting and endogenous, and because the satisfaction of existing preferences might lead to unhappy or deprived lives, a democracy that treats all preferences as fixed will lose important opportunities for welfare gains. 
With respect to welfare, then, the problem posed by the endogeneity of preferences is not the origin of desires but their malleability. At least if the relevant cases can be confidently identified in advance, and if collective action can be justified by reference to particular good reasons, the argument for democratic interference will be quite powerful. Respect for preferences that have resulted from unjust background conditions and that will lead to human deprivation or misery hardly appears the proper course for a liberal democracy.12 
Io. For a modern utilitarian account along these lines, see Richard Brandt, A Theory of the Good and the Right (New York: Oxford University Press, I979). For Aristotelian accounts, see Nussbaum, "Aristotelian Social Democracy," and Amartya Sen, "Well-Being, Agency, and Freedom," Journal of Philosophy 82 (I 985): I 69-22 I. 
i i. See Amartya Sen, The Standard of Living, The Tanner Lectures on Human Values, ed. Geoffrey Hawthorne (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, I987). On various conceptions of welfare, see James Griffin, Well-Being: Its Meaning, Measurement and Moral Significance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, I986). 
I2. The objection here is not solely that preferences are endogenous to state action of some sort. As discussed in more detail below, the fact of endogeneity is not in itself an argument for democratic control of preferences. The argument is instead that misery that is a product of unjust background conditions calls for collective change. A subjectively satisfactory status quo produced by unjust background conditions will also call for change in some settings, for reasons taken up below. I do not deal with the possibility that subjective unhappiness that is a product of just background conditions also calls for governmental action, except insofar as an intrapersonal collective action problem is involved. 
Moreover, to say that a preference is endogenous is not to say that it is a mere whim or I I and 
For example, legal rules prohibiting or discouraging addictive behavior may have significant advantages in terms of welfare. Regulation of heroin or cigarettes (at least if the regulation can be made effective) might well increase aggregate social welfare, by decreasing harmful behavior, removing the secondary effects of those harms, and producing more healthful and satisfying lives. Similarly, governmental action relating to the environment, broadcasting, or culture-encouraging or requiring, for example, protection of beautiful areas, broadcasting about public issues, high-quality programs, or public support of artistic achievementmay in the end generate (or, better, prevent obstacles to the generation of) new preferences, providing increased satisfaction and in the end producing considerable welfare gains. The same may well be true of antidiscrimination measures, which affect the desires and attitudes of discriminators and victims alike. A system that takes existing private preferences as the basis for political choice will sacrifice important opportunities for social improvement on welfarist criteria. This point was a crucial one in the early stages of utilitarian thought; it has been lost more recently with the shift from older forms of welfarism to the idea of "revealed preferences." 
Moreover, the satisfaction of private preferences, whatever their content and origins, does not respond to a persuasive conception of liberty or autonomy. The notion of autonomy should refer instead to decisions reached with a full and vivid awareness of available opportunities, with reference to all relevant information, and without illegitimate or excessive constraints on the process of preference formation. When these conditions are not met, decisions should be described as unfree or nonautonomous; for this reason it is most difficult to identify autonomy with preference satisfaction. If preferences are a product of available information, existing consumption patterns, social pressures, and governmental rules, it seems odd to suggest that individual freedom lies exclusively or by definition in preference satisfaction, or that current preferences should, on grounds of autonomy, be treated as the basis for fancy, or highly malleable. Some preferences are in fact relatively stable, even if they are a function of legal rules, social pressures, or existing institutions. A high degree of stability, and great resistance to change, will counsel against efforts at changing preferences, certainly on welfare grounds, and perhaps on grounds of autonomy as well (though even stable preferences may be nonautonomous, as in the case of rigid adaptations to an unjust status quo). In the face of extremely stable preferences, democratic efforts at change will merely breed resentment and frustration on the part of the objects of those efforts. settling political issues. It seems even odder to suggest that all preferences should be treated equally, independently of their basis and consequences, or of the reasons offered in their support. 
For purposes of autonomy, then, governmental interference with existing desires may be justified because of problems in the origins of those desires. Welfare-based arguments that invoke endogeneity tend to emphasize the malleability of preferences after they are formed; arguments based on autonomy stress what happens before the preferences have been created, that is, the conditions that gave rise to them. Because of this difference, the two arguments will operate along different tracks; and in some cases autonomy-based arguments will lead to conclusions different from those that would emerge from arguments based on welfare. In many cases, however, considerations of autonomy will argue powerfully against taking preferences as the basis for social choice. 
Consider, for example, a decision to purchase dangerous foods, consumer products, or cigarettes by someone unaware of the (serious) health risks; an employer's decision not to hire blacks because of a background of public and private segregation or racial hostility in his community; a person who disparages or has no interest in art and literature because the culture in which he has been reared centers mainly around television; a decision of a woman to adopt a traditional gender role because of the social stigma attached to refusing to do so; a decision not to purchase cars equipped with seat belts or not to wear a motorcycle helmet produced by the social pressures imposed by one's peer group; a lack of interest in environmental diversity resulting from limitation of one's personal experiences to industrialized urban areas; a decision not to employ blacks at a restaurant because of fear of violence from whites. 
These examples are different from one another. The source of the problem varies in each. But in all of them, the interest in liberty or autonomy does not call for governmental inaction, even if that were an intelligible category. Indeed, in many or perhaps all of these cases, regulation removes a kind of coercion. 
One goal of a democracy, in short, is to ensure autonomy not merely in the satisfaction of preferences, but also, and more fundamentally, in the processes of preference formation. John Stuart Mill himself was emphatic on this point, going so far as to suggest that government itself should be evaluated in large measure by its effects on the character of the citizenry.'3 The view that freedom requires an opportunity to choose among alternatives finds a natural supplement in the view that people should not face unjustifiable constraints on the free development of their preferences and beliefs. It is not altogether clear what such a view would require-a point to which I will return. At the very least, however, it would see a failure of autonomy, and a reason for collective response, in beliefs and preferences based on insufficient information or opportunities. 
Governmental action might also be justified on grounds of autonomy when the public seeks to implement, through democratic processes culminating in law, widely held social aspirations or collective desires. Individual consumption choices often diverge from collective considered judgments: people may seek, through law, to implement a democratic decision about what courses to pursue. If so, it is ordinarily no violation of autonomy to allow those considered judgments to be vindicated by governmental action. Collective aspirations or considered judgments, produced by a process of deliberation on which competing perspectives are brought to bear, reflect a conception of political freedom having deep roots in the American constitutional tradition. On this view, political autonomy can be found in collective self-determination, as citizens decide, not what they "want," but instead who they are, what their values are, and what those values require. What they "want" must be supported by reasons. 
To summarize: On the thinnest version of the account offered thus far, the mere fact that preferences are what they are is at least sometimes and perhaps generally an insufficient justification for political action. Government decisions need not be and in some cases should not be justified by reference to preferences alone. More broadly, a democratic government should sometimes take private preferences as an object of regulation and control-an inevitable task in light of the need to define initial entitlements-and precisely in the interest of welfare and autonomy. Of course, there are serious risks of overreaching here, and there must be some constraints (usually denominated "rights") on this process. Checks laid down in advance are an indispensable part of constitutional government. Those checks will include, at a minimum, basic I3. See Mill, Considerations on Representative Government. guarantees of political liberty and personal security, and such guarantees may not be comprised by processes of collective self-determination. I return to this point below. 
II. DEMOCRATIC REJECTION OF REVEALED PREFERENCES: A CATALOGUE In this section I attempt to particularize the claims made thus far by cataloguing cases in which considerations of autonomy and welfare justify governmental action that subjective welfarism would condemn. In all of these cases, I claim that participants in a liberal government ought to be concerned with whether its citizens are experiencing satisfying lives and that the salutary liberal commitment to divergent conceptions of the good ought not to be taken to disable government from expressing that concern through law. The cases fall into three basic categories. 
Citizens in a democratic polity might act to embody in law not the preferences that they hold as private consumers, but instead what might be described as collective judgments, including aspirations or considered reflections. Measures of this sort are a product of deliberative processes on the part of citizens and representatives. In that process, people do not simply determine what they "want." The resulting measures cannot be understood as an attempt to aggregate or trade off private preferences. 
I. Politics, Markets, and the Dependence of Preferences on Context. Frequently political choices cannot easily be understood as a process of aggregating prepolitical desires. Some people may, for example, support nonentertainment broadcasting on television, even though their own consumption patterns favor situation comedies; they may seek stringent laws protecting the environment or endangered species, even though they do not use the public parks or derive material benefits from protection of such species; they may approve of laws calling for social security and welfare even though they do not save or give to the poor; they may support antidiscrimination laws even though their own behavior is hardly race- or gender-neutral. The choices people make as political participants are different from those they make as consumers. Democracy thus calls for an intrusion on markets. 
The widespread disjunction between political and consumption and choices presents something of a puzzle. Indeed, it sometimes leads to the view that market ordering is undemocratic and that choices made through the political process are a preferable basis for social ordering. 
A generalization of this sort is far too broad in light of the multiple breakdowns of the political process and the advantages of market ordering in many arenas. Respect for private markets is an important way of respecting divergent conceptions of the good and is thus properly associated with individual liberty. Respect for markets is also an engine of economic productivity, an important individual and collective goal. But it would be a mistake to suggest, as some do, that markets always reflect individual choice more reliably than politics; or that democratic choices differ from consumption outcomes only because of confusion, as voters fail to realize that they must ultimately bear the costs of the programs they favor; or that voting patterns merely reflect a willingness to seek certain goods so long as other people are footing the bill. 
Undoubtedly, consumer behavior is sometimes a better or more realistic reflection of actual preferences than is political behavior. But in light of the fact that preferences depend on context, the very notion of a "better reflection" of "actual" preferences is a confusing one; there is no such thing as an "actual" (in the sense of unitary or acontextual) preference in these settings. Moreover, the difference might be explained by the fact that political behavior reflects a variety of influences that are distinctive to the context of politics, and that justify according additional weight to what emerges through the political setting. 
These influences include four closely related phenomena. First, citizens may seek to implement individual and collective aspirations in political behavior but not in private consumption. As citizens, people may seek the aid of the law to bring about a social state that they consider to be in some sense higher than what emerges from market ordering. Second, people may, in their capacity as political actors, attempt to satisfy altruistic or other-regarding desires, which diverge from the self-interested preferences sometimes characteristic of markets.'4 Third, political decisions might vindicate what might be called metapreferences or second-order preferences. People have wishes about their wishes, and some 
I4. See Howard Margolis, Selfishness, Altruism, and Rationality: A Theory of Social Choice (New York: Cambridge University Press, I982). Of course the work by Kenneth Arrow and his followers in social choice theory creates serious problems for all preferencebased theories of politics. & times they try to vindicate those second-order wishes, including considered judgments about what is best, through law. Fourth, people may precommit themselves, in democratic processes, to a course of action that they consider to be in the general interest. The adoption of a constitution is itself an example of a precommitment strategy. 
Three qualifications are necessary here. First, some of these objections might be translated into the terms of subjective welfarism. Some preferences, after all, are most effectively expressed in democratic arenas, and that expression can be supported precisely on the grounds that they are subjectively held and connected to a certain form of individual and collective welfare. My broader point, however, is that political choices will reflect a kind of deliberation and reasoning, transforming values and perceptions of interests, that is often inadequately captured in the marketplace. It is this point that amounts to a rejection or at least a renovation of subjective welfarism as a political conception. It is here that democracy becomes something other than an aggregative mechanism, that politics is seen to be irreducible to bargaining, and that prepolitical "preferences" are not taken as the bedrock of political justification. 
Second, to point to these various possibilities is not at all to deny that market or private behavior frequently reflects considered judgments, altruism, aspirations, or far more complex attitudes toward diverse goods than are captured in conventional accounts of preference structures. There are countless counterexamples to any such claim. All I mean to suggest is that divergences between market and political behavior will sometimes be attributable to phenomena of the sort I have described. 
Third, a democratic system must be built on various safeguards to ensure that its decisions are in fact a reflection of deliberative processes of the sort described here. Often, of course, such processes are distorted by the fact that some groups are more organized than others, by disparities in wealth and influence, and by public and private coercion of various kinds. I am assuming here that these problems have been sufficiently overcome to allow for a favorable characterization of the process. 
through law, to implement collective desires that diverge from market choices. Is it possible to come up with concrete explanations for the differences? There are a number of possibilities. 
First, the collective character of politics, which permits a response to and collective action problems, is critical here. People may not want to implement their considered judgments, or to be altruistic, unless there is assurance that others will be bound to do so as well. More simply, people may prefer not to contribute to a collective benefit if donations are made individually, with no guarantee that others will participate; but their most favored system, obtainable only or best through democratic forms, might be one in which they contribute if (but only if) there is assurance that others will do so as well. Perhaps people feel ashamed if others are contributing and they are not. Perhaps they feel victimized if they are contributing and others are not. In any case, the satisfaction of aspirations or altruistic goals will sometimes have the characteristics of the provision of public goods or the solution of a prisoner's dilemma. 
Second, the collective character of politics might overcome the problem, discussed below, of preferences and beliefs that have adapted, at least to some extent, to an unjust status quo or to limits in available opportunities.15 Without the possibility of collective action, the status quo may seem intractable, and private behavior, and even desires, will adapt accordingly. But if people can act in concert, preferences might take on a quite different form. Consider social movements involving the environment, labor, and race and sex discrimination. The collective action problem thus interacts with aspirations, altruistic desires, second-order preferences, and precommitment strategies. All of these are most likely to be enacted into law if an apparatus such as democratic rule is available to overcome collective action problems. 
Third, social and cultural norms might incline people to express aspirational or altruistic goals more often in political behavior than in markets. Such norms may press people, in their capacity as citizens, in the direction of a concern for others or for the public interest. 
Fourth, the deliberative aspects of politics, bringing additional information and perspectives to bear, may affect preferences as expressed through governmental processes. A principal function of a democratic system is to ensure that through representative or participatory processes, new or submerged voices, or novel depictions of where interests lie and what they in fact are, are heard and understood. If representatives or citizens are able to participate in a collective discussion of (for exam 
I 5. Cf. Mill's discussion of the ability of regimes to create active or passive characters, in Considerations on Representative Government. & ple) broadcasting or levels of risk in the workplace, they might well generate a far fuller and richer picture of diverse social goods, and of how they might be served, than can be provided through individual decisions as registered in the market. It should hardly be surprising if preferences, values, and perceptions of both individual and collective welfare are changed as a result of that process. 
Fifth, and finally, consumption decisions are a product of the criterion of private willingness to pay, which creates distortions of its own. Willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay, and it is an extremely crude proxy for utility or welfare. Political behavior removes this distortionwhich is not to say that it does not introduce distortions of new kinds. 
the measure at issue is adopted unanimously. But more serious difficulties are produced if (as is usual) the law imposes on a minority what it regards as a burden rather than a benefit. Suppose, for example, that a majority wants to require high-quality television and to ban violent and dehumanizing shows, but that a significant minority wants to see the latter. (I put the First Amendment questions to one side.) It might be thought that those who perceive a need to bind themselves, or to express an aspiration, should not be permitted to do so if the consequence is to deprive others of an opportunity to satisfy their preferences. 
The foreclosure of the preferences of the minority is unfortunate, but in general it is difficult to see what argument there might be for an across-the-board rule against collective action of this sort. If the majority is prohibited from vindicating its considered judgments through legislation, an important arena for democratic self-government will be eliminated. The choice is between the considered judgments of the majority and the preferences (and perhaps judgments as well) of the minority. On the other hand, the foreclosure of the minority should probably be permitted only when less restrictive alternatives, including private arrangements, are unavailable to serve the same end. 
Of course, the argument for democratic outcomes embodying collective judgments is not always decisive. It is easy to imagine cases in which that argument is weak. Consider a law forbidding atheism or agnosticism, or barring the expression of unpatriotic political displays. And while I cannot provide in this space a full discussion of the contexts in which the case for democratic outcomes is overcome, it might be useful to describe, in a preliminary way, three categories of cases in which constraints on collective judgments seem especially appropriate. 
First, if the particular choice foreclosed has some special character, and especially if it is a part of deliberative democracy itself, it is appropriately considered a right, and the majority has no authority to intervene. Political expression and participation are prime examples. The equal political rights of members of the minority, as citizens, should be respected even if a general aspiration, held by the majority, argues for selective exclusions. So, too, other rights fundamental to autonomy or welfare-consider consensual sexual activity-ought generally to be offlimits to government. 
Second, some collective desires might be objectionable or a product of unjust background conditions. A collective judgment that racial intermarriage is intolerable could not plausibly be justified even if it is said to reflect a collective social aspiration. To explain why, it is of course necessary to offer an argument challenging that judgment and invoking principles of justice. Such an argument might itself involve notions of autonomy or welfare. However that may be, the example suggests that the collective judgment must not be objectionable on moral grounds. 
Third, some collective desires might reflect a special weakness on the part of the majority: consider a curfew law, or perhaps prohibition. In such circumstances, a legal remedy might remove desirable incentives for private self-control, have unintended side effects resulting from the "bottling-up" of desires, or prove unnecessary in light of the existence of alternative remedies. When any one of these three concerns arises, the case for protection of collective judgments is implausible. But in many contexts, these concerns are absent, and democratic controls initiated on these grounds are justified. 
B. Excessive Limitations in Opportunities or Unjust Background Conditions Citizens in a democracy might override existing preferences in order to foster and promote diverse experiences, with a view to providing broad opportunities for the formation of preferences and beliefs and for distance on and critical scrutiny of current desires. This goal usually supports private ordering and freedom of contract as well. But it calls for collective safeguards when those forces push toward homogeneity and & uniformity, as they often do in industrialized nations. Here the argument for governmental controls finds a perhaps ironic origin in Mill. Such controls are necessary to cultivate divergent conceptions of the good and to ensure a degree of reflection on those conceptions. 
A system that took this goal seriously could start from a range of different foundations. It might find its roots in the principles that underlie a deliberative democracy itself.'6 Here the notions of autonomy and welfare would be defined by reference to the idea of free and equal persons acting as citizens in setting up the terms of democratic life. That idea will impose constraints on the sorts of preferences and beliefs that a political system would be permitted to inculcate. Perhaps more controversially, the system could be regarded as embodying a mild form of liberal perfectionism. Such a system would see the inculcation of critical and disparate attitudes toward prevailing conceptions of the good as part of the framework of a liberal democracy. Liberal education is of course the principal locus of this concern, but the principles embodied in liberal education need not be confined to the school system. Still another foundation would be Aristotelian. Here the governing goal would be to ensure that individual capacities and capabilities are promoted and not thwarted by governmental arrangements.'7 And this set of ideas, a different kind of perfectionism, is not so dramatically different from Mill's version of utilitarianism. 
If government can properly respond to preferences that are based on limitations in available opportunities, it might well undertake aggressive initiatives with respect to the arts and broadcasting: subsidizing public broadcasting, ensuring a range of disparate programming, or calling for high-quality programming not sufficiently provided by the marketplace. Indeed, the need to provide diverse opportunities for preference formation suggests reasons to be quite skeptical of unrestricted markets in i6. See Joshua Cohen, "Deliberation and Democratic Legitimacy," in The Good Polity: Normative Analysis of the State, ed. Alan Hamlin and Philip Pettit (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, I989), pp. 17-34. 
I7. See Nussbaum, "Aristotelian Social Democracy." Here, as above, I do not attempt to choose among foundations but instead suggest that those adopting a wide range of starting points should reject subjective welfarism. To say this is not of course to deny the need to rely ultimately on some conception of the good. For these purposes a wide variety of possibilities should do, including a form of liberal perfectionism, or a thin but relatively precise conception, as in Rawls's A Theory of Justice, or a thick but vague one, as in "Aristotelian Social Democracy." 2I and communication and broadcasting. There is a firm theoretical justification for governmental regulation here, including the much-criticized, and now largely abandoned, "fairness doctrine," which required broadcasters to cover controversial issues and to give equal time to competing views. In view of the inevitable effects of programming on character, beliefs, and even conduct, it is hardly clear that governmental "inaction" is always appropriate in a constitutional democracy. Indeed, the contrary seems true. I take up this issue in more detail below. 
Market behavior is sometimes based on an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance by adjusting to undue limitations in current practices and opportunities. When this is so, respect for preferences seems unjustified on grounds of autonomy and under certain conditions welfare as well. Preferences might be regarded as nonautonomous insofar as they are reflexively adaptive to unjust background conditions, and collective responses to such preferences might yield welfare gains.'8 The point has significant implications. For example, workers appear to underestimate the risks of hazardous activity partly in order to reduce the dissonance that would be produced by an accurate understanding of the dangers of the workplace.19 Democratic controls might produce gains in terms of both welfare and autonomy. 
Similar ideas help account for principles of antidiscrimination. In general, the beliefs of both beneficiaries and victims of existing injustice are affected by dissonance-reducing strategies.20 The phenomenon of blam 
I8. There is a difference between self-conscious adaptation to an intractable status quo and the sorts of processes I am describing. If a person without musical talent decides to counteract and revise a desire to be a world-famous pianist, it would be odd to find that (healthy) decision to be inconsistent with personal autonomy. The cases under discussion involve a reflexive process based on a socially produced absence of sufficient opportunities. Of course, the notion of sufficient opportunities itself requires a baseline; every system contains limited opportunities. 
I 9. See George Akerlof and William Dickens, "The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance," American Economic Review 72 (I982): 307-I8. 
(Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, I957); on some of its implications for social theory, welfare, and autonomy, see Elster, Sour Grapes. See also the discussion of endowment effects and reference states in notes 9 and io (above) and the accompanying text. 
Consider also Mary Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Women, ed. Carol Poston (I792; New York: W. W. Norton, I975), which can be seen as an extended discussion of the social formation of preferences and the phenomenon of the adaptation of preferences, beliefs, and desires to an unjust status quo. Thus Wollstonecraft writes, "I will venture to affirm, that a girl, whose spirits have not been damped by inactivity, or innocence & ing the victim has distinct cognitive and motivational foundations: the strategy of blaming the victim, or assuming that an injury or an inequality was deserved or inevitable, permits nonvictims or members of advantaged groups to reduce dissonance by enabling them to maintain that the world is just-a pervasively, insistently, and sometimes irrationally held belief.21 The reduction of cognitive dissonance is a powerful motivational force, and it operates as a significant obstacle to the recognition of social injustice or irrationality. 
Victims also participate in dissonance-reducing strategies, including the lowering of their own self-esteem to accommodate both the fact of victimization and the belief that the world is essentially just. Sometimes it is easier to assume that one's suffering is warranted than that it has been imposed cruelly or by chance. Consider here the astonishing fact that after a draft lottery, participants decided that the results of the purely random process, whether favorable or not, were deserved.22 The phenomenon of blaming the victim also reflects the "hindsight effect," through which people unjustifiably perceive events as having been more predictable than they in fact were, and therefore suggest that victims or disadvantaged groups should have been able to prevent the negative outcome. All of these phenomena make reliance on existing or revealed preferences highly problematic in certain contexts. 
There is suggestive evidence to this effect in the psychological literature in this area. Some work here reveals that people who engage in cruel behavior begin to devalue the objects of their cruelty; observers tend to do the same.23 Such evidence bears on antidiscrimination law in tainted by false shame, will always be a romp, and the doll will never excite attention unless confinement allows her no alternative" (p. 43). Similar points are made in Mill, The Subjection of Women, as against the claim that the existing desires of women are a product of consent. 
Consider finally the discussion of women's illiteracy in Bangladesh in Nussbaum, "Aristotelian Social Democracy." Drawing on Martha Chen, A Quiet Revolution: Women in Transition in Rural Bangladesh (Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman, I983), Nussbaum explores the fact that many women in Bangladesh did not demand or even want greater education or literacy, and indeed expressed satisfaction with their current educational status. Of course, desires of this sort were a product of a lack of available opportunities and of social and cultural pressures. 
2I. See Melvin Lerner, The Belief in a Just World: A Fundamental Delusion (New York: Plenum Press, I980). 
Journal of Social Issues 29 (I973): 73-93. 
general. Certain aspects of American labor and race discrimination law can be understood as a response to the basic problem of distorted beliefs and preferences. For example, the Supreme Court has emphatically rejected freedom-of-choice plans as a remedy for school segregation.24 Such plans would simply permit whites and blacks to send their children to whichever school they wished. The Court's rejection of such plans might well be puzzling to proponents of subjective welfarism, but the outcome becomes more reasonable if it is seen as based in part on the fact that, in this area, preferences and beliefs have conspicuously grown up around and adapted to the segregative status quo. Under these circumstances, freedom of choice is no solution at all; indeed, in view of the background and context the term seems an oxymoron. 
In labor law as well, American law rejects freedom of contract and freedom of choice in order to protect collective bargaining. Some of this legislation must stand on a belief that private preferences have been adaptive to a status quo skewed against unionization. Special steps are therefore necessary in order to encourage collective bargaining, which also, of course, overcomes the prisoner's dilemma faced by individual workers, and therefore facilitates collective deliberation on the conditions of the workplace. 
Poverty itself is perhaps the most severe obstacle to the free development of preferences and beliefs. Programs that attempt to respond to the deprivations faced by poor people-most obviously by eliminating poverty, but also through broad public education and regulatory efforts designed to make cultural resources generally available regardless of wealth-are fully justified in this light. They should hardly be seen as objectionable paternalism or as unsupportable redistribution. Indeed, antipoverty efforts are tightly linked with republican efforts to promote security and independence in the interest of creating the conditions for full and equal citizenship. 
Sometimes, of course, preferences are only imperfectly adapted. At some level there is a perception of injury, but a fear of social sanctions or a belief that the cause is intractable prevents people from seeking redress. Here the collective character of politics, permitting the organization of numerous people, can be exceedingly helpful. 
Standing by itself, the fact that preferences are shifting and endoge24. See Green v. County School Bd., 391 U.S. 430 (I968), and Paul Gewirtz, "Choice in the Transition," Columbia Law Review 86 (I986): 728-98. & nous is hardly a sufficient reason for the imposition of democratic controls. All preferences are to some degree dependent on existing law and current opportunities, and that fact cannot be a reason for governmental action without creating a license for tyranny. The argument for democratic controls in the face of endogenous preferences must rely on a belief that welfare or autonomy will thereby be promoted. Usually governmental interference should be avoided. But far too often, the salutary belief in respect for divergent conceptions of the good is transformed into an unwillingness to protect people from either unjust background conditions or a sheer lack of options. 
The actual content of democratic controls here will of course be controversial, and it probably should begin and usually end with efforts to provide information and to increase opportunities. Thus, for example, governmentally required disclosure of risks in the workplace is a highly laudable strategy. In a few cases, however, these milder initiatives are inadequate, and other measures are necessary. A moderately intrusive strategy could involve economic incentives, which might take the form of tax advantages or cash payments. For example, the government might give financial inducements to day-care centers as a way of relieving child-care burdens. Such a system might well be preferable to direct transfers of money to families, a policy that will predictably lead many more women to stay at home. In view of the sources and consequences of the differential distribution of child-care burdens, it is fully legitimate for the government to take steps in the direction of equalization. The most intrusive option, to be used rarely, is direct coercion, as in the case of governmentally mandated use of safety equipment. 
The category of democratic responses to endogenous preferences of this sort overlaps with that of measures that attempt to protect collective aspirations. Frequently, aspirations form the basis for laws that attempt to influence processes of preference formation. 
There is also a case for democratic controls on existing preferences when such preferences are a function of past acts of consumption and when such acts alter desires or beliefs in such a way as to cause long-term harm. In such cases, the two key facts are that preferences are endogenous to past consumption decisions and that the effect of those decisions on current preferences is pernicious. For government to act in this context, it is important that it be confident of its conclusions; in the face of uncertainty, freedom of choice is appropriate here. An absence of information on the part of the private actors is usually a necessary condition for collective controls. 
Regulations of addictive substances, myopic behavior, and habits are familiar examples. In the case of an addiction, the problem is that the costs of nonconsumption increase dramatically over time as the benefits of consumption remain constant or fall sharply. The result is that the aggregate costs, over time or over a life, of consumption exceed the aggregate benefits, even though the initial consumption choice provides benefits that exceed costs. Individual behavior that is rational for each individual consumption choice ultimately leads people into severely inferior social states. In such cases, people, if fully informed, would in all likelihood not want to choose the good in the first place. Governmental action is a possible response. 
Menahem Yaari offers the example of a group of traders attempting to induce alcoholism in an Indian tribe.25 At the outset, alcoholic beverages are not extremely valuable to consumers. The consumers are willing to buy only for a low price, which the traders accept. But as a result of consumption, the value of the beverages to the consumers steadily increases to the point where they are willing to pay enormous sums to obtain them. Thus the traders are able "to manoevre the Indian into a position where rationality conflicts with Pareto-efficiency, i.e., into a position where to be efficient is to be irrational and to be rational is to be inefficient.... [T]he disadvantage, for an economic unit, of having endogenously changing tastes is that, even with perfect information and perfect foresight, the unit may find itself forced to follow an action which, by the unit's own standards, is Pareto-dominated." 
Because of the effect over time of consumption on preferences, someone who is addicted to heroin is much worse off than he would have been had he never started, even though the original decision to consume was not irrational in terms of immediate costs and benefits. Statutes that regulate addictive substances respond to a social belief, grounded on this Decision Theory and Social Ethics: Issues in Social Choice, ed. Hans Gottinger and Werner Leinfellner (Boston: D. Reidel, I978), pp. 59-98. & consideration, that the relevant preferences should not be formed in the first place. 
We might describe this situation as involving an intrapersonal collective action problem, in which the costs and benefits, for a particular person, of engaging in an activity change dramatically over time.26 A central point here is that consumption patterns induce a significant change in preferences, and in a way that makes people worse off in the long run.27 In the case of addictions, there will also be interconnections between intrapersonal collective action problems and preferences and beliefs that are adaptive to unjust background conditions, at least as a general rule. (Yaari's own example, involving whites trading alcohol with native Americans, is a prime example.) The problem of drug addiction is hardly distributed evenly throughout the population, and the process of addiction is in large part a response to social institutions that severely limit and condition the range of options. 
While addiction is the most obvious case, it is part of a far broader category. Consider, for example, myopic behavior, defined as a refusal, because the short-term costs exceed the short-term benefits, to engage in activity having long-term benefits that dwarf long-term costs. Another kind of intrapersonal collective action problem is produced by habits, in which people engage in behavior because of the subjectively high shortterm costs of changing their behavior, regardless of the fact that the long-term benefits exceed the long-term costs. Akrasia, or weakness of the will, has a related structure, and some laws respond to its individual or collective forms. 
For the most part, problems of this sort are best addressed at the individual level or through private associations, which minimize coercion; but social regulation is a possible response. Statutes that subsidize the arts or public broadcasting, or that discourage the formation of some habits and encourage the formation of others, are illustrations. There are similar arguments for compulsory recycling programs (the costs of par26. Thomas Schelling, "Egonomics, or the Art of Self-Management," American Economic Review 68 (I978): 290-94; Jon Elster, "Weakness of Will and the Free-Rider Problem," Economics and Philosophy I (I985): 23I-65. 
classical music usually increases appreciation. But the pattern under discussion is a rare one: it is that pattern, producing miserable lives, to which a democracy might respond. To be sure, in practice the response might make things worse rather than better. ticipation in which decrease substantially over time, and often turn into benefits) and for democratic restrictions on smoking cigarettes.28 
The problem with collective controls in this context is that they are unlikely to be fine-tuned. They will often sweep up so many people and circumstances as to create serious risks of abuse. In some settings, however, citizens will be able to say with confidence that the effect of consumption on preferences will lead to severe welfare or autonomy losses. In such cases democratic controls are justified. 
A. The Frontiers of Free Speech Law: The Fairness Doctrine, Campaign Speech, Hate Speech, and Pornography The most important issues in the contemporary law of free expression have produced cleavages between groups and ideas that were previously closely allied. Thus the First Amendment has been invoked, with considerable vigor and passion, on behalf of cigarette companies seeking to advertise their products; corporations attempting to influence electoral outcomes; people engaged in racial hate speech; pornographers; and large networks objecting to a private right of access to broadcasting or to other efforts to promote quality and diversity in the media. The effort to invoke the First Amendment is increasingly resisted-often, ironically, on the theory that it runs counter to the goals of deliberative democracy and free expression itself-by individuals and groups formerly associated with an absolutist or near-absolutist position against governmental regulation of speech. 
These debates raise exceedingly complex issues, and I can only touch on them briefly here. The complexities are increased by the fact that a system dedicated to freedom of expression ought to be highly sensitive to the idea that speech alters preferences and beliefs. It should also find that process to be one to which a democracy is generally quite receptive. As Justice Louis D. Brandeis wrote in what is probably the most distinguished judicial opinion in the entire history of free expression, "the fitting remedy for evil counsels is good ones.... If there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert the evil by the Press, i1989). processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence."29 
Justice Brandeis's statement notwithstanding, I want to suggest that attention to the endogenous character of preferences and to the considerations traced thus far provides some basis for receptivity to democratic controls in this context. 
i. The Fairness Doctrine. There is a growing consensus that the government should not concern itself with the airwaves and that total reliance on private markets and consumer preferences is the appropriate strategy for government. On this view, broadcasting should be treated like soap, cereal, or any other commodity. Indeed, there is a growing consensus that this result is ordained by the First Amendment. But if the claims made here are persuasive, the consensus is misguided. The meaning of the First Amendment is a function of competing views about what sort of relation between government and markets will best promote democratic deliberation. Lawyers (and not a few nonlawyers) have an unfortunate habit of thinking that the meaning of the First Amendment precedes rather than postdates that inquiry. 
The consequence of market-based strategies in broadcasting is a system in which most viewers see shows that rarely deal with serious problems; are frequently sensationalistic, prurient, dehumanizing, or banal; reflect and perpetuate a bland, watered-down version of the most conventional views about politics and morality; are influenced excessively by the concerns of advertisers; produce an accelerating "race to the bottom" in terms of the quality and quantity of attention that they require and encourage; and are often riddled with violence, sexism, and racism. It simply defies belief to suggest that such shows do not affect the preferences and even the character of the citizenry. Is it so clear that a constitutional democracy ought to consider itself unable to respond to this situation? Is it so clear that a First Amendment enacted in order to ensure democratic self-determination bars a democratic corrective here? 
In my view, the considerations marshaled thus far suggest that citizens in a constitutional democracy ought to be conceded, and ought to exercise, the power to engage in a wide range of controls. If welfare and autonomy provide the governing criteria, large gains might be expected from such controls. All three of the categories I have described argue in and favor of some form of regulation. Democratic controls would probably reflect collective desires, which deserve respect. They would respond to the fact that in spite of the large number of channels, the current regulatory regime diminishes genuine options, to the detriment of both welfare and autonomy; they would also counteract a kind of intrapersonal collective action problem faced by many of those habituated to the broadcasting status quo. 
Such controls might permit the government to regulate advertising on television, certainly for children, but for others as well; to require broadcasters to pay attention to public affairs, as in, for example, an hour of compulsory programming per night; to ban gratuitous or prurient violence on television, especially when it is sexualized; to require, as a condition for licensing, a subsidy to public television; and to impose a broad fairness doctrine, in the form not only of an obligation of attention to important issues but also a chance to speak for divergent sides. The evident dangers notwithstanding, there would be a wide range of collective and external benefits from such controls, which would thus carry forward a strand of the liberal tradition that calls for governmental action in such cases.30 
At least in principle, rights of private access to the media for differing positions and associated kinds of controls ought to be considered congenial to the free speech guarantee. Surely this is so if that guarantee is understood as a protection of a deliberative process centered on public values rather than of a "marketplace." The First Amendment need not be seen as an obstacle to such efforts. If anything, the existing system might be thought to raise serious constitutional questions. A system in which access to the media, with its inevitable consequences for the shaping of preferences and beliefs, is made dependent on private willingness to pay raises genuine problems for free expression.31 
London and New York: Longmans, Green & Co., I929). See also Owen Fiss, "Free Speech and Social Structure," Iowa Law Review 7I (I986): 1405-25; this essay carries the argument considerably further than I do here. 
3I. The Supreme Court seemed to recognize this point in Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 (I969), but the point has dropped out of the current debate. If this analysis is correct, moreover, it is by no means clear that the print media should be more immunized from regulation than broadcasting, especially now that the original scarcity rationale seems weak. variety of regulations on the electoral process are necessary both to promote a deliberative process among political equals and to ensure that the deliberative process is a genuine one. Properly conceived, such efforts would be highly congenial to the purposes of the free speech guarantee. Both restrictions on campaign contributions-to eliminate the distorting effects of wealth32-and qualitative measures to reduce the "soundbite" phenomenon and to promote more in the way of reflective discussion hold considerable promise. 
Currently, however, there is a large if ironic obstacle to such efforts: the First Amendment. The Supreme Court has generally been unreceptive to governmental efforts to regulate electoral campaigns.33 In the key passage in Buckley v. Valeo, the Court said that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the first amendment."34 It is crucial to note here that the Court did not say that the effort to promote deliberation among political equals was insufficiently weighty or inadequately promoted by the legislation at hand. Instead the Court said, far more broadly, that the effort was constitutionally illegitimate. 
Under the approach suggested here, campaign regulation would be treated more hospitably. In view of the effects of wealth on the formation of political beliefs, and the corrosive consequences of some forms of electioneering, democratic controls on the process might be welcomed. The First Amendment might be understood not as a guarantor of unrestricted speech "markets," and much less as a vehicle for the translation of economic inequalities into political ones, but instead as an effort to ensure a process of deliberation that would, under current conditions, be promoted rather than undermined through regulatory measures. This is so especially if citizens in a democratic polity support regulation of the electoral process in order to pursue their desire for a well-functioning deliberative process. 
Of course, there are great risks here, and any regulatory efforts must Human Values, ed. Sterling McMurrin (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, i982), 3:76. 
435 U.S. 765 (1978). 
be carefully monitored to ensure that they do not act as incumbent protection bills or as serious constraints on speech that should instead be encouraged. But the issue is far more complex, from the standpoint of the First Amendment itself, than existing law allows. 
including those firmly committed to freedom of speech, regulate speech that casts contempt on identifiable social groups (hate speech). Some such democracies also control sexually explicit speech, especially when it associates sex and violence. These controls have been justified on mixed grounds of human dignity, community morality, and sexual equality. In the United States, the precise status of such restrictions remains unclear. Probably the best account of current law is that hate speech is protected, as is most speech that associates sex and violence, even if that speech is not conceivably part of a serious exchange of ideas but instead qualifies as pornography.35 
The cases of hate speech and pornography raise somewhat different problems. Hate speech is self-consciously directed toward an issue of public concern; it is conspicuously and intentionally political in nature. Violent pornography is of course political too, in the sense that it has political origins and consequences. But it cannot be thought to be a selfconscious contribution to democratic deliberation about public issues. In this way it differs from misogynist speech of a more straightforward sort, where the political content is explicit. In terms of its connection to the First Amendment, pornography should probably be thought to fall in the same category as commercial speech, libel of private persons, bribes, and conspiracies. The reason is that most pornography does not amount to an effort to contribute to deliberation on matters of public interest, even if that category is broadly conceived, as it should be. Expression that is not central to the free speech principle counts as speech, but it is entitled to a lesser degree of protection. It may be regulated, not on a whim, but on a basis of demonstration of harm that is weaker than that required for political speech. 
Should the First Amendment be taken to disable government from regulating hate speech and pornography? The affirmative answer of current law may well be unsound. Both of these forms of speech have seri35. 1 collapse some complex issues here. See Miller v. California, 4I3 U.S. I5 (I973), and my "Pornography and the First Amendment," Duke Law Journal (September i986): 589-627. ous and corrosive effects on beliefs and desires. Both have the additional and unusual characteristic of denying victimized groups the right to participate in the community as free and equal persons. With respect to certain kinds of violent pornography, there are especially severe consequences in terms of how men and women perceive sexuality, how men perceive women, and how women perceive themselves. One need not believe that the regulation of violent pornography would eliminate sexual violence or even do a great deal to produce sexual equality in order to recognize that the pervasiveness of material that associates sex with violence has a variety of harmful social consequences. 
The case for regulation of these forms of speech is strongest when the relevant speech is pervasive, when it causes tangible harm, and when it falls outside the category of speech that is guaranteed First Amendment protection unless there is a demonstration of unavoidable, imminent, and serious danger. The considerations marshaled here suggest that at least certain forms of violent pornography ought to be regulated, and that perhaps in certain restricted settings, hate speech may be an appropriate subject of democratic controls as well. 
In recent years, there has been a revival of interest in systems of proportional or group representation, both for disadvantaged groups and perhaps generally as well. There is a solid constitutional pedigree for such systems, notwithstanding the constant and emphatic rejections, by the Supreme Court, of constitutionally based arguments for representation of members of racial minority groups. Despite the rigidity of the one person-one vote formula, with its majoritarian and individualistic overtones, group representation has always been a feature of American constitutionalism.36 
Moreover, the basic constitutional institutions of federalism, bicameralism, and checks and balances share some of the appeal of proportional representation, and owe their origins in part to notions of group representation. These institutions proliferate the points of access to government, increasing the ability of diverse groups to influence policy, multi36. At the time of the framing, for example, geography was thought to define distinct communities with distinct interests; representation of the states as such seemed only natural. It would not be impossible to argue that racial and ethnic groups (among others) are the contemporary analogues to groups that were defined in geographical terms during the founding period. and plying perspectives in government, and improving deliberative capacities. In this respect, they ensure something in the way of group representation, at least when compared with unitary systems. Of course, both the separation of powers and bicameralism grew in part out of efforts to promote representation of diverse groups: bicameralism allowed representation of both the wealthy and the masses, while the notion of separation derived from (though it also repudiated) notions of mixed government, which was designed to ensure a measure of representation of groups defined in social and economic terms. 
Proportional representation might be designed, as in its Western European forms, to ensure representation in the legislature of all those groups that are able to attain more than a minimal share of the vote. In another form, the system might be an effort to ensure that members of disadvantaged groups are given the power to exert influence on political outcomes. In America, the Voting Rights Act goes far in this direction for blacks. 
There are serious problems with both of these efforts, and I do not mean to evaluate them in detail here. I do suggest that efforts to ensure proportional representation become much more acceptable if they are justified on grounds that do not take existing preferences as the basis for governmental decisions and if they emphasize the preference-shaping effects of discussion and disagreement in politics.37 The argument here is that deliberative processes will be improved, not undermined, if mechanisms are instituted to ensure that multiple groups have access to the process and are actually present when decisions are made. Proportional or group representation, precisely by having this effect, would ensure that diverse views are expressed on an ongoing basis in the representative process, where they might otherwise be excluded. 
In this respect, proportional or group representation could be regarded as a kind of second-best solution for the real-world failures of Madisonian deliberation. And the primary purpose of access is not to allow each group to have its "piece of the action"-though that is not entirely irrel37. In part this is Mill's defense of such efforts. See Considerations on Representative Government. For valuable discussions, see Charles Beitz, Political Equality: An Essay in Democratic Theory (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, I989), pp. 123-40; and Iris Young, "Polity and Group Difference: A Critique of the Ideal of Universal Citizenship," Ethics 99 (I989): 250-84. Beitz's argument that proportional representation is not a requirement of political fairness is not inconsistent with the more prudential considerations invoked here; Young's claims about the need for discussion among the differently situated are highly compatible with my account. evant-but instead to ensure that the process of deliberation is not distorted by the mistaken appearance of a common set of interests on the part of all concerned. In this incarnation, proportional representation is designed to increase the likelihood that political outcomes will incorporate some understanding of all perspectives. That process should facilitate the healthy expression of collective values or aspirations and the scrutiny of preferences adaptive to unjust background conditions or limited opportunities. 
For this reason, proportional representation may be the functional analogue of the institutions of checks and balances and federalism, recognizing the creative functions of disagreement and multiple perspectives for the governmental process. In this sense there is continuity between recent proposals for proportional representation and some of the attractive features of the original constitutional regime. Indeed, Hamilton himself emphasized that in a system of checks and balances, the "jarring of parties . . . will promote deliberation."38 If this is so, proportional representation is most understandable in a democracy that does not take existing preferences as the basis for social choice but instead sees the broadest form of deliberation, covering ends as well as means, as a central ingredient in democratic politics. 
A constitutional democracy should not be self-consciously concerned, in a general and comprehensive way, with the souls of its citizens. Under modern conditions, liberal constraints on the operation of the public sphere and a general respect for divergent conceptions of the good are indispensable. At the same time, it would be a grave mistake to characterize liberal democracy as a system that requires existing preferences to be taken as the basis for governmental decisions and that forbids citizens, operating through democratic channels, from enacting their considered judgments into law, or from counteracting, through the provision of opportunities and information, preferences and beliefs that have adjusted to an unjust status quo. Ironically, a system that forecloses these routes-and that claims to do so in the name of liberalism or democracy-will defeat many of the aspirations that gave both liberalism and democracy their original appeal, and that continue to fuel them in so many parts of the world. 

From the early 1950s until the present day, three propositions have permeated the arguments of lawyers and others interested in advancing the cause of civil rights. 
The first proposition is that the target of the civil rights movement is discrimination, which is always or usually a product of irrational hatred, fear, or prejudice. In this view, the purpose of civil rights law is to eliminate these forms of irrationality from the public and private realms. 
The second proposition is that the principal function of civil rights law is compensatory. Just as an injured person in a tort action has a right to be made whole, so victims of a history of discrimination (including slavery) are entitled to be put into the place they would have occupied if discrimination had never occurred. Restoration of the status quo ante is a substantial part of the reasoning and rhetoric of civil rights law. 
The third proposition is that the judiciary is the appropriate institution for the making and enforcement of civil rights law. Reliance on the courts, principally through interpretation of the Constitution, has been a distinctive feature of the civil rights movement since the middle of this century. 
In this essay, I argue that these three propositions, which are mutually reinforcing, are fallacies. They misconceive the nature of discrimination and offer prescriptions that are ill-adapted to its elimination. This was so even in the period in which they arose and helped to accomplish considerable good. But their fallacious character will be especially conspicuous in the last decade of the twentieth and the early decades of the twenty-first century. In this period, the consequences of the fallacies will probably be pernicious. 
I do not mean at all to deny that prejudice still plays a major role in many realms of social and economic life, that the history of discriminat Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. B.A. 1975, Harvard University; J.D. 1978, Harvard University. Mary Becker, Anne-Marie Burley, Jon Elster, and Abner Greene provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. For financial support, I am grateful to the James H. Douglas, Jr., Fund for the Study of Law and Government, the Pritzker Family Faculty Fund, and the Jerome F. Kutak Faculty Fund. 
Some of this essay unites, draws on, and redirects arguments presented elsewhere: Sunstein, ConstitutionalPoliticsand the Conservative Court,AM. PROSPECT, Spring 1990, at 51; Sunstein, The Limits of Compensatory Justice, in NOMOS XXXIII: COMPENSATORY JUSTicE (forthcoming); Sunstein, Why MarketsDon't Stop Discrimination,8 SOC. PHIL. & POL. - (forthcoming). tion is relevant to present problems, or that courts have a continuing role to play in the area of civil rights. But surely these claims are thin and unhelpful in a period when civil rights policy must concern itself with such problems as lack of opportunities for education, training, and employment; inadequate housing and health care; vulnerability to and incentives for participation in crime; and teenage pregnancy and singleparent families. For these problems, the traditional claims of the civil rights movement provide at best limited guidance. I conclude with some brief remarks on future directions for civil rights theory and practice. 
I FALLACY # 1: DISCRIMINATION Is ALWAYS A PRODUCT OF 
HOSTILITY, IRRATIONALITY, OR PREJUDICE 
In the last generation, it has frequently been suggested that discriminatory behavior is a product of irrational bigotry or hostility. In this account, people treat blacks differently from whites, or women differently from men,1 because of a form of prejudice. The term "prejudice" is, of course, not self-defining. As conventionally used, the term includes not simply hatred, but also a wide variety of negative judgments about a class of people defined by race or gender. 
For present purposes, perhaps we can understand "prejudice" to encompass three sorts of mistakes.2 The first consists of a belief that members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact they do not. Here the relevant belief has no basis in reality, and its irrationality is especially conspicuous. The second consists of a belief that many or most members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact only some or a few do. Here the error is an extremely over-broad generalization. The third mistake consists of reliance on fairly accurate groupbased generalizations when more accurate (and not especially costly) classifying devices are available. Here the members of the group actually have an undesirable characteristic in comparatively large numbers-suppose, for example, that they weigh less, or are less well educated-but it is possible and more rational to use other, more direct devices to filter out that characteristic. The failure to use those more direct devices reflects a kind of prejudice. 
In all these cases, it is reasonable to say that someone is acting on the basis of irrational prejudice. Indeed, taken together, these cases handicapped. Of course, other groups are and should be protected by antidiscrimination laws, but at least some of these groups raise distinctive considerations that I cannot discuss here. 
(1989) (discussing the various forms of prejudice that cause sex-based discrimination in the work place); K. Greenawalt, Law and Objectivity ch. 7 (unpublished manuscript) (on file with author). probably exhaust the category of prejudice as that term is generally understood.' 
The theory of civil rights law has often identified "discrimination" with prejudice, and defined an act as discriminatory when it is caused by prejudice. To understand the importance of identifying discrimination with prejudice, it is necessary to understand "discrimination," which is also, of course, a contested concept. For present purposes, I will understand discrimination to include a decision to treat a black person or a woman differently from a white person or a man, regardless of the motivation. 
An influential approach attributes the practice of discrimination to the existence of prejudice or irrationality, in the form of a "taste" for discrimination.4 In the workplace, for example, employers might discriminate because they do not like to associate with blacks, women, or others. The engine that drives discrimination is employer irrationality or prejudice-not economic self-interest, narrowly defined as monetary gain. Indeed, economic self-interest conflicts with employers' taste for discrimination. According to a traditional understanding, discriminators will ultimately be driven from the market because they indulge their prejudices at the expense of profits.' 
This idea has some truth to it; in some situations, discrimination is costly. But sometimes discrimination is caused by employer practices that stem directly from economic self-interest rather than from the employer's prejudice or irrationality.' Indeed, discrimination may be fueled by considerations unrelated to the animus of the employer or discriminator. It may, instead, reflect (1) the desires of third parties; (2) statistically accurate generalizations; or (3) the consequences of an unequal status quo for investments in human capital and for preference formation. To disregard these points is to produce understandings and (1990), suggests that there may be prejudice in the selection of the criteria used to make judgmentsthat is, the decisionmakers might not have selected the same criteria to make the contested decision had the shoe been on the other foot. This might well count as another form of prejudice, and if so, the category is broader than what I have described here. It is difficult, however, to incorporate this notion of prejudice into antidiscrimination law (as Strauss emphasizes), and Strauss' efforts go well beyond conventional understandings of "prejudice" and "discrimination." 
1971). 
Q.J. ECON. 599, 608-10 (1976) (despite its apparent inefficiency, a caste system may remain in equilibrium through the use of powerful sanctions against those who threaten the social system). 
including fellow workers and customers as well as employers. G. BECKER, supra note 4, at 14-15; see also Arrow, Models ofJob Discrimination,in RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN ECONOMIC LIFE 83, 88 (A. Pascal ed. 1972) (fellow workers and customers may also discriminate). ultimately prescriptions that are ill-suited to the problem of discrimination in the United States in the late twentieth century. 
A. 
The clearest illustration of discrimination not driven by economic irrationality occurs when third parties are in a position to impose financial punishments on nondiscriminatory employers. 7 Suppose, for example, that purchasers or fellow employees refuse to buy from or to work for a company that does not discriminate. Even if employers would themselves choose not to discriminate or have no particular view about whether or not to discriminate, third parties can pressure employers to discriminate. 
The phenomenon is hardly unusual. Consider, for example, the case of a shopkeeper whose customers do not like dealing with blacks or women, a commercial airline whose patrons react unfavorably to female pilots, a law firm whose clients prefer not to have black lawyers, or a hospital whose patients are uncomfortable with female doctors or black nurses. The persistence, for a long period, of private segregation in major league baseball is a familiar example of this basic phenomenon. 8 
In all these cases, an employer who introduces norms of equality into the work force will be punished, not rewarded. For the employer faced with consumers or employees who prefer discrimination, a decision to engage in discrimination is in an important respect neutral. He is simply maximizing his profits by respecting consumer demand. Indeed, an employer who refuses to discriminate will be engaging in what is, from his point of view, a form of affirmative action. If he must become a nondiscriminator, it will be to promote the long-range goal of race and sex equality. 9 
All this suggests that discrimination can be a product not of prejudice, but of responses to market pressures from third parties. Of course, prejudice is in some sense at work-by customers or fellow employeesbut the discriminator is not himself acting from prejudice or irrationality. 
may keep apparently inefficient caste system in equilibrium); see also id. at 610 ("those who fail to follow ... the caste customs do not gain the profits of the successful arbitrageur but instead suffer the stigma of the outcast"). 
baseball cards, which shows a 10% to 13% "racial discount" for the cards of black players. See Nardinelli & Simon, Customer Racial Discriminationin the Marketfor Memorabilia:The Case of Baseball, 105 Q.J. ECON. 575, 594 (1990). 
affirmative action. In fact, discrimination is sometimes based on rational self-interest. If this is so, the distinction between affirmative action and an antidiscrimination principle becomes much thinner. See infra text accompanying notes 16-18. It is here that the traditional understanding is misconceived. 10 
Sometimes discriminatory behavior is a result of generalizations or stereotypes that, although over-broad and perhaps invidious, provide an economically rational basis for employment decisions. 1 Stereotypes and generalizations are, of course, a common ingredient in day-to-day decisions. There are informational costs in making distinctions within categories, and sometimes people prefer to avoid the often far more costly examination of the merits of the particular employee. 
Such categorical judgments are not only pervasive, but they are also entirely legitimate in most settings. We all depend on them. Employers rely on "proxies" of many sorts, even though those proxies are overbroad generalizations and far from entirely accurate. Test scores, previous employment, college or high school education, prestige of college attended-all these are part of rational employment decisions. Emphasis on these factors is a common form of stereotyping, and at least in ordinary circumstances, it would be odd to say that such factors reflect hostility or prejudice of the invidious kind. 
At least in some contexts, race and sex operate as similar proxies. In various ways, blacks differ from whites and women from men. There are real differences between the two groups. Indeed, in light of past and present discrimination against blacks and women, it would be shocking if there were no group-based differences. Women, for example, are more likely than men to be the primary caretakers of children and more likely to leave the employment market because of that role. 2 Along every indicator of social welfare-poverty, education, employment, vulnerability to private (or public) violence, participation in violent crime-blacks are proportionally less well off than whites. In light of those differences, it is fully possible that in certain settings, race- and sex-based generalizations preferences do not count as a "bona fide occupational qualification" (BFOQ) sufficient to justify facially discriminatory hiring practices. See, eg., Diaz v. Pan Am. World Airways, 442 F.2d 385, 389 (5th Cir.) (holding that customer preference for male flight attendants was not a BFOQ), cert. denied, 404 U.S. 950 (1971); Fernandez v. Wynn Oil Co., 653 F.2d 1273, 1276-77 (9th Cir. 1981) (customer preference not BFOQ); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1604.2(a)(1)(iii) (1990) (preferences of coworkers or customers not BFOQ). 
may make discrimination economically "rational"); Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Sup. Cr. REv. 99, 108-10 (defining and illustrating concept of"rational" discrimination); see also Phelps, The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism, 62 AM. ECON. REv. 659, 660 (1972) (presenting a model for "economically rational" discrimination). 
Whether such treatment should be allowed need hardly depend solely on its being economically rational. See infra text accompanying notes 63-64. [V/ol. 79:751 are economically rational as proxies for relevant characteristics. Moreover, race or sex in some contexts may be every bit as accurate a predictor of job performance as, say, test scores, education, and previous employment. And in some cases, reliance on more direct and individualized devices might be too costly to be worthwhile. 
If race or sex can be a good predictor of performance, an employer may discriminate not because he hates or devalues blacks or women, or because he has a general desire to avoid them, or is prejudiced in any of the senses I have discussed, but because he believes (on the basis either of plausible assumption or actual experience) that the relevant stereotypes have sufficient truth to provide a rational basis for employment decisions. An employer might, for example, believe that women are more likely to leave a high-pressure job than men, or that blacks are less likely to have the necessary training. For the handicapped, the same scenario is of course readily predictable; real differences call for differential treatment. Ordinary prejudice and irrationality are thus not at work. 
It is important to be careful with this point. As I understand it, statistical discrimination occurs when the employer does not harbor irrational hatred or discriminatory feelings, but instead acts according to stereotypes of the sort market actors typically rely on, which are of course false in some or many cases, but which cannot readily be abandoned for more direct inquiries. I do not mean to deny that ordinary, irrational prejudice accounts for a significant amount of discrimination. Nor do I deny that it is hard both in practice and in principle to distinguish between ordinary prejudice and economically rational stereotyping. 
Sometimes, of course, employers who refuse to follow a stereotype may find job candidates who will move them far ahead in the marketplace. Moreover, the decision about what kinds of economically rational stereotypes to adopt might itself reflect prejudice. 3 People are highly selective in creating and using the very categories through which they view people-as college graduates? as children of successful parents? as nonreligious? as white males? as tall? as good-looking? by what criteria? 
People are also selective in deciding which categories ought to count in various sectors. Thus, for example, the use of sex as a proxy for flexibility with respect to overtime work may be fully rational; but as I have noted, selectivity in the choice of the proxy is a product of prejudice if, as is usual, other equal or better proxies are available. Indeed, like the selection of stereotypes, the selection of criteria might itself be a product ABOUT THE MIND 12-57 (1987) (discussing processes of categorization); M. MINOW, MAKING ALL THE DIFFERENCE 19-48 (1990) (discussing use of categories as lens through which difference is viewed). of a kind of prejudice.14 Finally, people tend to notice events that are consistent with previously held stereotypes and to disregard events that are inconsistent with them. 5 Here there is a built-in obstacle to changes in social norms even when those norms decreasingly mirror reality. 
One might agree with all this and still acknowledge what seems undoubtedly true, that discrimination sometimes persists because it is economically rational to rely on a race- or sex-based generalization. And because contemporary law singles out one kind of rational stereotyping to ban it, the distinction between affirmative action and antidiscrimination norms becomes extremely thin and perhaps invisible in principle. 6 The antidiscrimination principle-of course, widely accepted-forbids government from*discriminating against blacks and women, even when such discrimination is economically rational. Affirmative action-of course, a highly controversial practice-calls for employment and other preferences for members of disadvantaged groups. The two ideas are often thought to be in severe tension,1 7 and indeed, for advocates of affirmative action, the antidiscrimination principle sometimes seems an embarrassment. 
In some settings, however, an antidiscrimination norm, conceived as a barrier to economically rational behavior, has the same purposes and effects as affirmative action. Affirmative action is controversial partly because it can be economically irrational, can impose serious social costs, and harms innocent victims." But an antidiscrimination principle often does precisely the same as what affirmative action does, and also does it in the interest of long-term social goals. For example, an antidiscrimination norm may require innocent victims to sacrifice-customers may be required to pay higher prices-in order to produce long-term equality. 
A great failure of the assault on affirmative action is its inability to account for the ways in which a requirement of nondiscrimination involves very much the same considerations. Indeed, the distinction between affirmative action and antidiscrimination is sharp only to those who see discrimination as always grounded in hostility and irrationality, which it clearly is not. 
whether the choice of classification criteria reflects discriminatory intent). 
in ways that are consistent with their prejudice." Id. at 174. 
nondiscrimination and affirmative action."). 
CHI. L. REv. 775, 802-03 (1979) (equating affirmative action with discrimination); id. at 809 (referring to affirmative action as a "suggestion to relicense racial discrimination"). 
California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978), harmed innocent victims); id at 805-08 (no rational way to determine racial eligibility for affirmative action program); see also Strauss, supra note 11, at 110-11. 
Suppose that there has been widespread discrimination for any number of reasons: employers have a taste for discrimination; third parties impose pressure on employers to discriminate; employers use statistical generalizations that are rational. Once the discrimination becomes established, members of disadvantaged groups will suffer from harmful effects on investment in human capital and on preference formation. t9 L 
The productivity of participants in the labor market is endogenous to, or partly a product of, discrimination in that market. It is a mistake to take productivity within any social group as static or unaffected by employer decisions. Such decisions will have important dynamic effects on how blacks and whites, or women and men, choose to invest in human capital. Decisions about education, child care, training, drug use, employment programs, and tradeoffs between work and leisure will be affected by existing patterns of discrimination. In a market having such discrimination, members of disadvantaged groups will invest relatively less in education and training programs. Indeed, lower investments on their part are perfectly rational. As market actors, women should invest less than men in training to be (for example) pilots, economists, politicians, lawyers, or law professors if these professions discriminate against women and thus reward their investment less than that of men. 
The result will often be a vicious circle or even a spiral. Because of existing discrimination, the relevant groups will invest less in human capital; because of this lower investment, the discrimination will persist or perhaps increase as its statistical rationality itself increases; because of this effect, investments will decrease still further, and so on. 
Undoubtedly, this picture is too bleak in many situations. Other proxies, not rooted in sex and race, have frequently evolved and employers have used them. Such proxies are ordinarily far more accurate, and employers who use them sometimes prosper. More generally, the extraordinary persistence of blacks and women in attempting to enter professions dominated by white men is one of the most striking phenomena of the post-World War II period. Blacks and women frequently appear to invest huge amounts in human capital, even in sectors that treat them inhospitably.20 But there is little question that discrimination does have a large effect on investments in human capital in many con19. Arrow, supra note 6, at 88; Lundberg & Startz, Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Competitive Labor Markets, 73 AM. ECON. REv. 340, 342 (1983). 
than decreasing their investments in human capital. In Western history, some racial and ethnic texts, and that the hostile reception given to disadvantaged groups perpetuates their exclusion from certain sectors of the economy. In that case, inequality will be the result of discrimination that is itself the product not only of past irrational hostility or prejudice, but also of a far more complex system of interactions with economically rational employment decisions. 
An additional problem is that private preferences, of both discriminators and their victims, tend to adapt to the status quo, and to do so in such a way as to make significant change hard to achieve. The reduction of cognitive dissonance is a powerful motivating force: people attempt to bring their beliefs and perceptions in line with existing practice.2 1 The victims of inequality tend to reduce dissonance by adapting their preferences to the available opportunities. Consider the story of the fox who concludes that he does not want unavailable grapes because he considers them sour: he considers them sour because they are unavailable.2 2 Or people may adapt their aspirations to the persistent and often irrationally held belief that the world is in fact just.23 The beneficiaries of the status quo tend to do the same, concluding that the victims deserve their fate, that they are responsible for it, or that the current situation is part of an intractable, given, or natural order.24 
There is extremely powerful evidence in the psychological literature to support these claims. 25 For example, people who behave cruelly change their attitudes toward the objects of their cruelty and thus devalue them. Observers of cruelty and violence tend to do the same. The phenomenon of blaming the victim has clear cognitive and groups have prospered as a result of such investments, notwithstanding discriminatory tastes on the part of employers, customers, and fellow employees. 
phenomenon in this particular context, see Arrow, supra note 6, at 97. See generally J. ELsTER, SOUR GRAPES 15-26 (1983). 
(describing "sour grapes" response as a way to reduce cognitive dissonance). 
injustice stems from theology and biology); M. LERNER, THE BELIEF IN A JUST WORLD: A FUNDAMENTAL DELUSION 123-26 (1980) (because of the belief that the world is just, victims may blame themselves in order to assert control over their otherwise meaningless misfortune). 
tend to condemn an apparently blameless victim to reassert their belief in a just world and to lessen cognitive dissonance). 
(discussing numerous experiments of people trying to reduce cognitive dissonance); Furnham & Gunter, Just World Beliefs andAttitudes Towards the Poor,23 BRrr. J. Soc. PSYCHOLOGY 265, 268 (1984) (noting that observers tend to view the poor as responsible for their fate); Janoff-Bulman, Timko & Carli, Cognitive Biases in Blaming the Victim, 21 J. EXPERIMENTAL SOC. PSYCHOLOGY 161 (1985) (discussing sources of the phenomenon of "blaming the victim"). motivational foundations. The notion that the world is just, and that existing inequalities are deserved or desired, plays a large role in forming preferences and beliefs. All these phenomena have played an enormous part in the history of racial and sexual discrimination. 
The inevitable effect of a discriminatory status quo on preferences and beliefs is closely related to the phenomenon of decreased investment in human capital. In both cases, the response to discrimination is endogenous rather than exogenous and has the consequence of perpetuating existing inequalities. But with respect to preferences and beliefs, the effect is especially pernicious. And when there are harmful effects on the development of preferences and beliefs, discrimination will occur for reasons that are not directly traceable to acts of irrationality or prejudice.26 
The arguments I have offered thus far build on standard economic accounts of discrimination. It is notable that none of the various effects reflects an uncontroversial market failure in the conventional sense. The incorporation of racist or sexist preferences is efficient, if the efficiency criterion is based on private willingness to pay; 28 the same applies with profit-maximizing reactions to the desires of third parties and with statistical discrimination. In all these cases, governmental interference will probably produce an efficiency loss, at least in the short term.2 9 
The most likely exception is the effect of discrimination on human capital and preference formation. 0 In that case, it is possible that discrimination will produce a serious externality in the form of harmful effects on prospective labor market entrants, with a corresponding efficiency loss. If discrimination discourages members of disadvantaged groups from investing in human capital, it will produce large social losses by decreasing potentially large sources of productivity. Ideas of this sort may provide the basis for a fully plausible efficiency justification for antidiscrimination law. 
the conditions under which the relevant acts take place. In this sense, prejudice and irrationality are hardly irrelevant. But to say that existing distributions of benefits and burdens between blacks and whites is in significant part a legacy of prejudice is quite different from saying that particular acts of present discrimination are produced by prejudice or irrationality on the part of the discriminator. See supra text accompanying note 10. 
that title VII increases "total social welfare," apparently relying on a conception of efficiency based on a notion of social output or production). The same criterion can be found in Schwab, Is StatisticalDiscrimination Efficient?, 76 AM. ECON. REV. 228, 233 (1986) (noting that statistical discrimination may be "socially inefficient"). 

There is, however, an optimal level of investment in human capital, and it is not entirely clear why and to what extent investments that are adaptive to employer behavior in the labor market should be seen as suboptimal. Any generalization relied on in the labor market will have a signaling effect that will shift investments in human capital. It is not easy to develop a model to explain which of those signals produce suboptimal investments. Often, then, markets will perpetuate discrimination for reasons that are unrelated to the market failures that provide traditional economic grounds for legal intervention. 
More importantly, each of these effects reinforces the others in potentially powerful ways. If there is ordinary prejudice, it will interact with statistical discrimination to produce more of both. People tend to notice events consistent with their prejudice and to disregard events that are inconsistent with them, thus resulting in more prejudice and more statistical discrimination. If third parties attempt to promote discrimination, they will increase both prejudice and statistical discrimination. Employers will hire fewer members of disadvantaged groups, who will in turn appear less frequently in desirable positions, with consequent reinforcing effects on both prejudice and statistical discrimination. 
In addition, if there is prejudice and statistical discrimination, and if third parties promote discrimination, there will be decreased investments in human capital and increasing adaptation of preferences and beliefs to the status quo. These will be perfectly reasonable responses. And if there are decreased investments in human capital, the result will be increases in prejudice, statistical discrimination, and third-party effects. Statistical discrimination will become all the more rational; prejudice will continue; and consumers and employers will be more likely to discriminate. 
Of course, it would be necessary to compile detailed factual evidence to assess the magnitude of these effects. Analysis of that issue is difficult in the abstract. But the general point should be clear. Discrimination is not a simple result of prejudice or hostility, but instead reflects a far more complex interplay of past and present discrimination, social and economic factors, and economically rational decisions. If civil rights law treats decisions to discriminate as based on prejudice or irrationality, it will badly misconceive the problem and produce remedies that are illsuited to its elimination. 
II FALLACY #2: PRINCIPLES OF COMPENSATORY JUSTICE SHOULD 
PLAY A GUIDING ROLE IN CIVIL RIGHTS POLICY 
Much of the rhetoric of the civil rights movements is built on principles of compensatory justice. According to these principles, those who have caused harm to a person or group must repair the harm. For example, slavery and segregation have played a large role in producing secondclass citizenship for blacks in America. A principal purpose of civil rights law is to undo the historical wrong, thus returning to the status quo ante. 
Those who base civil rights law on principles of compensatory justice attempt to link public and private law, assimilating the problem of discrimination to the problems that arise in ordinary tort actions. And there is certainly something valuable to the effort. If a person is in a subordinate position because of wrongs done to her, or even to her parents, that person's inequality is a product of a morally irrelevant factor3 1 in the form of an injustice, and for that reason she has a legitimate claim to redress. In this way, the compensatory rhetoric of the civil rights movement properly links contemporary efforts to past injustices. 
In important respects, however, the model of compensatory justice inadequately captures the nature of the problem and is therefore a recipe for confusion. The confusion arises in the many cases in which courts approach questions of equality by way of traditional principles of compensatory justice. For example, the requirement of "discriminatory intent"3 might well be understood as an effort to adhere to compensatory principles in this setting. The question, thus conceived, is whether an identifiable actor has harmed an identifiable person in an identifiable way. To abandon the touchstone of intent would lead courts far from the compensatory model. It would lead courts to require redress of social wrongs committed by third parties in the distant past, which would involve conspicuous social reordering and harms to innocent persons, rather than a restoration of some well-defined status quo ante.3 3 
To be sure, the approach of the courts-and especially of the Supreme Court-has been based on a narrow conception of compensation. A broader compensatory principle would promote far more legal victories for members of disadvantaged groups.34 In this more expansive view, the redress of harms other than those created by the particular practice in question would be the goal of the equality principle. The notion of compensation would remain, but it would require public and private employers to ensure that the distribution of benefits and burdens note 61. 
(1977); Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976). 

The Id, the Ego, and EqualProtection:Reckoning With UnconsciousRacism, 39 STAN. L. REv. 317 (1987); Strauss, supra note 3, at 954-56. between blacks and whites would be roughly what it would have been without the legacy of discrimination. 
It is doubtful, however, that such an approach would be feasible. What would the world look like if it had been unaffected by past discrimination on the basis of race and sex? The general problem is that the compensatory model, in any form, is based on notions of causation, injury, and restoration to the status quo ante that are well adapted to tort or contract setting, but singularly ill-suited to the problem of discrimination in the United States. 
We might begin with the issue of school desegregation, where compensatory ideas play a prominent role. Suppose that a school district engaged in de jure segregation until 1954, and that in 1958, 1968, or 1978, a judge issues a finding to that effect. What remedy ought to be imposed? The Supreme Court's cases are exceptionally complex on this point.35 The Court's basic approach seems to be an attempt to restore the status quo ante. In desegregation cases, the Court asks whether the proposed remedy will restore the system to what it would have been were it not for past acts of segregation. Under this rationale, the Court has invalidated "freedom of choice" desegregation plans, emphasizing that they will bring about less desegregation than would have occurred if there had been no segregation in the first instance.3 6 
Principles of compensatory justice play a prominent, indeed central role here. They define the very nature of the inquiry. Some Justices, for example, emphasize the difficulty of finding a good causal connection between post-1970 or 1980 practices and pre-1954 discrimination.37 For them, the weak causal connection means that the law should not make people restructure present practices. By contrast, other Justices emphasize the legacy of past discrimination and what they see as its undeniable causal connection to present patterns of segregation. 38 
Both sides appear, however, to miss the fact that issues of causation, and the compensatory principles that underlie them, have little coherence in this context. An inquiry into the amount of racial integration that would have occurred in a world unaffected by racial segregation is likely to be empirically unanchored, indeed, chimerical. Social scientists, let alone judges, are simply not equipped to answer that question-not because they lack appropriate tools, but because the question itself is of uncertain epistemological status. One simply cannot sort out the connection between legal segregation in 1950 and educational patterns in 1990. The status quo ante-whatever it might have been--cannot be conceptualized. To try to resolve issues bearing on desegregation remedies in terms of compensatory principles is to ask unanswerable questions. 
The problem is far more general. What would our practices be in a world without race and sex discrimination? How would one treat (for example) veterans' preferences in the absence of sexism, or literacy tests for voting and employment in the absence of racism? In all these cases, the restoration of a status quo ante is a conceptually incoherent task. Moreover, it is not even clear whether past discrimination presents the basic reason for the legal responses to the present status of blacks. Whether such discrimination is a necessary or sufficient condition for "remedial" efforts is by no means self-evident.3 9 
Similar problems arise in cases involving affirmative action. The Supreme Court has frequently indicated that race-conscious measures are permissible only as a "remedy" for identifiable acts of purposeful discrimination undertaken within the jurisdiction of the governmental institution engaging in affirmative action. 4' Here, too, compensatory principles are in the forefront, allowing affirmative action only as a response to tort-like acts. By contrast, affirmative action grounded in an effort to overcome "societal discrimination" is generally impermissible." In so holding, the Court has emphasized that the victims of affirmative action are either employers or, much more frequently, white people or men who never engaged in discriminatory conduct. 
The problem of innocent victims4 2 appears to be a principal impetus behind the requirement of a showing of past discrimination. Under current law, affirmative action can thus be defended most easily in tort-like terms as an effort to restore a status quo ante that has been unsettled by identifiable acts producing identifiable harms to identifiable actors. The problem here, as elsewhere, is that affirmative action does not fit the tort model. Although the redress of past discrimination is an important element in the theory and practice of civil rights law, there is no welldefined status quo against which compensatory principles can operate. 
To put the point most generally: It is true that past acts of discrimination help account for the socially subordinate status of disadvantaged groups, and when this is so, some sort of remedial principle should play a that the Court could have justified "remedial" affirmative action plans by reference to exclusively forward-looking goals, such as improving education or promoting diversity in the workplace). 
and present discriminatory practices. role in civil rights theory. But to try to decide questions about the scope and nature of antidiscrimination policy by reference to compensatory notions is a recipe for confusion and for unproductive-because unresolvable--disagreements. 
III FALLACY #3: COURTS ARE THE APPROPRIATE INSTITUTION FOR BRINGING ABOUT SOCIAL CHANGE IN THE AREA OF CIVIL RIGHTS 
During and after the period of the Warren Court, it has been commonplace to suggest that federal courts should set much of civil rights policy through the process of constitutional adjudication.43 The courts' insulation-from an electoral process that is often said to have produced civil rights violations in the first place-is considered a comparative virtue, allowing the judges to implement antidiscrimination principles without being affected by political biases. There can be no question that because of their insulation, judges have often been in an unusually good position to elaborate and implement principles of antidiscrimination. But for several reasons, reliance on the judiciary may have been a mistake. It may have diverted attention from more productive alternatives and at the same time disserved the very causes at issue. In any case, such reliance seems a poor strategy for the future. Three considerations are relevant here. 
Judicial decisions are of limited efficacy in bringing about social change. Study after study has confirmed this basic conclusion. 4 Brown v. Board ofEducation15 is usually offered as a counter-example, but it is in fact the most conspicuous confirmation of the point.46 Ten years after the decision, no more than about two percent of black children in the South attended desegregated schools.47 It was not until 1964, after Congress and the executive branch became involved, that widespread desegregation actually occurred. The Court is far more effective at vetoing a decision of another government entity than it is at effecting social change on its own. Of course, it is possible that the legislative and executive actions would not have occurred without the spur of Brown, but REGULATION AND THE COURT: THE CASE OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT 110-12 (1983); G. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE: CAN COURTS BRING ABOUT SOCIAL CHANGE? (forthcoming Oct. 1991). 

(1986). even this seems uncertain.48 
The decision in Roe v. Wade 4 9 may be another illustration, though the picture here is more complex. It is undoubtedly true that the decision increased women's access to safe abortions, and to some extent it may have increased the legitimacy of abortion. By 1973, however, state legislatures were moving firmly to expand legal access to abortion,5 ° and it is likely that a broad guarantee of access would have been available even without Roe. However surprising the point may be, Roe did not dramatically increase the actual number or rate of abortions. 1 Perhaps more fundamentally, the decision may well have created the Moral Majority, helped defeat the equal rights amendment, and undermined the women's movement by spurring opposition and demobilizing potential adherents5. 2 At the same time, Roe may have taken national policy too abruptly to a point toward which it was groping more slowly, 5 3 and in the process may have prevented state legislatures from working out longlasting solutions based upon broad public consensus. 
We might in this regard contrast Roe v. Wade with the Civil Rights Act of 1964, a legislative enactment brought about through general public support. The foundational civil rights law in the United States has a kind of legitimacy and support that makes it extremely hard to amend at 
1724, 1726 (1979). 
million abortions in the United States each year. That is, at least 20% and perhaps as many as 30% of all pregnancies ended in abortion. See, eg., L. LADER, ABORTION 2 (1966) (referring to the "recent" estimate of 1.5 million); R. SCHWARTZ, SEPTIC ABORTION 7 (1968) (in the late 1960s, over 20% of pregnancies terminated in illegal abortions, resulting in approximately 1.2 million unlawful abortions per year); J. VAN DER TAK, ABORTION, FERTILITY, AND CHANGING LEGISLATION: AN INTERNATIONAL REVIEW 72-73 (1974) (referring to "the wide acceptance of a round figure of 1 million induced abortions per year (of which only an estimated 8,000 were legal), corresponding to ... an abortion ratio of almost 30 per 100 live births"); Whittemore, The Availability ofNon.Hospital Abortions, in 1ABORTION IN A CHANGING WORLD 217 (R. Hall ed. 1970) ("the oft-quoted figure of one million criminal abortions in the United States is a fairly reasonable estimate"); see also H. RODMAN, B. SARVIS, & J. BONAR, THE ABORTION QUESTION 23 (1987) (estimate of 1 million illegal abortions per year prior to Roe); Fox, Abortion Related Deaths, in 98 AM. J. OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY 645, 645-46 (1967) (estimating that between 35,000 and 100,000 women annually had unlawful abortions in California alone during this period). Police reports reveal that in 1960, illegal abortion was the third largest illegal enterprise in the United States, after gambling and narcotics. See E. SCHUR, CRIMES WITHOUT VICTIMS, DEVIANT BEHAVIOR AND PUBLIC POLICY 25 (1965). But see N. LEE, THE SEARCH FOR AN ABORTIONIST 5-15 (1969) (describing the difficulty of finding accurate data on the numbers of illegal abortions because they are carried out in a decentralized way). 
propositions). 
all except to broaden it. At least in part because of its judicial source, Roe has no such status. 
We have seen some evidence for all these propositions in the recent past, with the extraordinary public reaction to the Supreme Court's Webster decision. 4 The Court's partial retreat from Roe may well have galvanized the women's movement in a way that will have more favorable and fundamental long-term consequences for sexual equality than anything that could have come from the Court. This is not to say that Roe was necessarily wrong, either as a matter of constitutional interpretation or as a matter of principle. But its effectiveness has been limited, largely because of its judicial source. The civil rights movement has been similarly spurred by recent Supreme Court decisions, which have led in turn to an aggressive civil rights bill supported in large measure by a Republican President."5 
More generally, it is not clear that the United States has developed significantly different antidiscrimination principles from those in other liberal democracies that lack judicial review (most notably France, England, and until recently, Canada) or that have such review but have quite different constitutions (most notably, Germany). Of course, judicial review has in some settings accomplished considerable good and even introduced important changes into American society. But the evidence suggests that judges are less effective than the elected branches of the government in attempting to reform systems of discrimination. 
B. 
For achieving sensible and effective reform, political channels are often far better than the courts. The resort to politics can produce a kind of citizen mobilization that is a public and private good, and can inculcate political commitments, broader understanding, feelings of citizenship, and dedication to the community. All these may in turn spur deeper and wiser social change in the area of civil rights than reliance on the judiciary would provide. Martin Luther King, Jr., may well have been a more important catalyst for constitutional change than any or 
Representatives in February 1990. S. 2104, 101st Cong., 2d Sess., 136 CONG. REC. S1018-21 (daily ed. Feb. 7, 1990); H.R. 4000, 101st Cong., 2d Sess., 136 CONG. REc. H364 (daily ed. Feb. 7, 1990). President Bush did veto the Civil Rights Restoration Act, but his disagreement actually focused only on one part of the Act, not exactly a trivial provision, but one that should be seen as a mere piece in an extremely broad and far-ranging measure. President Bush approved ofalmost all other aspects of that measure. See President's Veto of S. 2104-Civil Rights Act of 1990, 1990 U.S. CODE CONG. & ADMIN. NEWS D36. The fight over the Act is not yet over; Congress reintroduced the Act in January 1991. H.R. 1, 102d Cong., 1st Sess., 137 CONG. REC. H53 (daily ed. Jan. 3, 1991). even all of the Warren Court's race decisions.5 6 
It is often thought that the very fact that courts are unrepresentative is one of their strengths; they serve as an available alternative to democratic channels. But reliance on the courts has large and hidden disadvantages. It may divert energy and resources from political processes, and the substitution effect imposes large costs on these processes. And if questions of morality -tend to become questions of constitutional law, their resolution before nine judges can harm the practice of citizenship. As noted, some of this effect is already visible in the abortion controversy. The same may also be true for racial discrimination, though the evidence is more ambiguous here. 
This is not to deny that judicial review can make up for systemic inequalities in majoritarian processes and impose the kind of principled deliberation that comes to such processes only with difficulty. But reliance on an aggressive Court is, from the standpoint of civil rights policy, the furthest thing from an unambiguous good; and this is so even if the Court's goals are sound. 
Despite innovative theories and practices,5 7 adjudication remains an extremely poor system for achieving social reform. Courts are rarely expert in the area before them. Moreover, the focus on the litigated case hampers judges' efforts to understand the complex systemic effects of legal intervention. A decision to require expenditures on school busing might, for example, divert resources from an area with an equal or greater claim to the public fisc. 
More fundamentally, legal thinking and legal procedures are most suited to ideas growing out of the tradition of compensatory justice, which is poorly adapted to the achievement of serious social reform. Adjudication is ill-suited to undertaking the necessary changes. Many of the most important problems in current civil rights policy are systemic and complex. The lack of adequate schools, job training, or jobs creates a cycle of poverty, vulnerability to drugs and to crime, teenage pregnancy, and single-parent households." Courts simply lack the tools to respond to these problems. Of course, they might make things better protest, or paved the way for King, has surprisingly little empirical support. See G. ROSENBERG, supra note 44, at 112-13. 
revise the subject of civil procedure through a conception that takes social reform as a central project of the judiciary. It collects a wide range of theories and practices directed to that end. 
statistics about violent crimes, family incomes, employment, and out-of-wedlock births that contribute to the problems faced by inner-city racial minorities). rather than worse. But the legislative and executive branches must provide the principal initiative for the necessary programs. 
These criticisms of the judiciary are hardly novel. Though voiced most recently by conservatives during and after the period of the Warren Court, critics voiced analogous complaints during the New Deal period, when it would have seemed extremely peculiar to suggest that courts should shape social reform for the disadvantaged. Indeed, the rise of modem regulatory agencies was largely a product of a belief that the judiciary lacked the will, the means, and the democratic pedigree to create social reform on its own.5 9 With respect to civil rights, we should see a similar constellation of ideas in the period we are now entering. 
IV 
NEW FOUNDATIONS 
Thus far, the discussion has been largely negative. I have argued that three of the major claims of the civil rights movement, from the 1950s to the present, are at best incomplete. Frequently, discrimination is not a reflection of irrationality or devaluation in the ordinary sense. It is instead rational economic behavior in light of the desires of third parties, statistical discrimination, or the effects of past and existing practices on human capital and existing preferences. Moreover, compensatory principles are poorly adapted to the civil rights setting, since they require courts and other public officials to answer impossible questions. Finally, reliance on the judiciary carries with it a host of problems. Among other things, the courts are ineffective at achieving large-scale social reform. 
The three problems are closely linked. Judicial institutions are well matched to the achievement of compensatory justice, and legal remedies are especially suitable if discrimination is a product of individual irrationality or prejudice. An understanding that discrimination is economically rational, or not readily captured in compensatory terms, would call for large institutional and substantive changes in existing civil rights law. In particular, it would emphasize the systemic or structural character of race and sex discrimination and the need for institutions to undertake systemic or structural reform. Our current understandings of the problem are extremely ill-adapted to this project. 
I have not yet proposed alternative understandings of the problem of discrimination, understandings that might lead to different remedies or institutional arrangements. Indeed, one of the largest gaps in present (New Deal reformers sought to avoid the checks and balances that limited the powers of each branch of government); id. at 437 (Progressives saw judiciary as antidemocratic and aligned with interests of powerful); id. at 443 (New Deal reformers preferred agencies over courts in part because agencies could act more swiftly). civil rights theory consists of the absence of a full-fledged explanation of just how to characterize a claim of discrimination and why we should eliminate it. In this highly tentative Section, I will say something about these inquiries. 
Provisionally, we might define discrimination to include any decision to treat an otherwise similarly qualified black person, woman, or handicapped person less favorably than a white, able-bodied male, whether the reason for the decision lies in malice, taste, selective empathy or indifference, economic self-interest, or rational stereotyping. This understanding of discrimination covers not merely covert unequal treatment but also facially neutral requirements that would not have been adopted if the group membership of the two parties had been reversed.60 It does not cover measures merely having discriminatory effects unless those effects are, in the sense I have just indicated, tied up with racial or sexual bias. 
It follows that one who claims discrimination does not seek the prevention of certain irrational acts, or of "prejudice," but asks instead for the elimination, in places large and small, of something like a caste system. Indeed, a large mistake of civil rights policy has been to treat the issue as one of discrimination at all, since the term tends to connote irrational differentiation-an unacceptable practice to be sure, but not an appropriate description of the problem at hand, which is second-class citizenship. The concept of second-class citizenship, or caste, is hard to define, and I will have to be somewhat vague about it. I do not mean to suggest that the caste-like features of current practices are the same-in nature or extent-as those features of genuine caste societies. I do mean that the similarities are what should make current practices a reason for collective concern. 
The motivating idea behind an anti-caste principle is Rawlsian in character: Without very good reason, legal and social structures should not turn differences that are irrelevant from the moral point of view into social disadvantages.6 1 They certainly should not be permitted to do so if the disadvantage is systemic. A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines, in multiple important spheres of life, and that applies in realms like education, freedom from private and public violence, wealth, political representation, and political influence, all of which go to basic participation as a citizen in a democratic society.62 Of course, past discrimination is a morally irrelevant factor, standard for discriminatory intent). 

disadvantages suffered by women); J. RAWLs, supra note 31, at 102 (discussing need to justify but it is one of a large set of such factors that play a role in the distribution of social benefits and burdens. 
In the areas of race and sex discrimination, and of disability as well, the problem is precisely this sort of systemic disadvantage. When combined with social practices, difference has the effect of systematically subordinating the relevant group and of doing so in multiple spheres and along multiple indices of social welfare: poverty, education, political power, employment, susceptibility to violence and crime, and so forth. That is the caste system to which the legal system should respond. As we have seen, among the many problems created by such a system are adverse effects on human capital and on preference formation, and general demoralization of group members.6 3 
Differences are usually invoked as the justification for disadvantage-for example, as in the claim that blacks, in important respects and as a group, are different from whites, or women are different from menand therefore properly receive different treatment. But different treatment need not follow from the fact of difference. For purposes of policy and law, the question is not whether there is a difference-often there certainly is-but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference can be adequately justified. By itself, the fact of difference does not supply an adequate justification. 
Differences that imply inequality are the result of legal and social practices, not of nature, and not of the differences themselves. The problems faced by the handicapped, for example, are a function not of handicap alone (a most ambiguous idea) but instead of the interaction between physical or mental capacities on the one hand and a set of human obstacles made by and for the able-bodied on the other. (In the pervasive use of white and male norms, there are analogies in the areas of race and gender.) It is those obstacles, rather than the capacities taken as brute facts, that create a large part of what it means to be handicapped (and unequal). For these purposes, it is not decisive whether a present disadvantage can be tightly connected to an intentionally discriminatory act by a public "tortfeasor," which antidiscrimination efforts would require. 
A few disclaimers are necessary here. The anti-caste principle, if taken seriously, would call for significant restructuring of social practices. For reasons suggested above, the principle is better elaborated and institutions that make natural differences have social consequences). An anti-caste principle is not "egalitarian." Egalitarianism calls for equality in the resources of different citizens; this principle is indeed foreign to American public law. But the desire to eliminate caste systems has played an important role in American constitutionalism from its inception. See L. HARTZ, THE LIBERAL TRADITION IN AMERICA 1-32 (1965). 
(forthcoming 1991). implemented by legislative and executive bodies, with their superior democratic pedigree and factfinding capacities, than by constitutional courts. Moreover, it is important to acknowledge that for good Rawlsian reasons a wide range of differences are morally arbitrary, and in a market economy those differences are quite frequently and for fully legitimate reasons translated into social disadvantages. Consider, in this regard, educational background, intelligence, strength, existing supply and demand curves for various products and services, height, perhaps even willingness to work hard. 
An anti-caste principle that would attempt, through law, to counteract all these factors would be difficult indeed to sustain. In general, the recognition of such factors is inseparable from the operation of a market economy, and a market economy is an important source of freedom, prosperity, and respect for different conceptions of the good. The use of such factors is at least sometimes in the interest of the less or even least well off, and in that case, an anti-caste principle that would bar their use seems perverse. Moreover, an anti-caste principle that would override all morally irrelevant factors would impose extraordinary costs on society, both in its implementation and administration and in its infliction of losses on a wide range of people. Those costs are high enough to make such a global principle immensely unappealing. 
The principle therefore has greatest weight in discrete contexts, most notably those concerning race, sex, and disability, where gains by the least well off from current practice are hard to imagine, where second-class citizenship is systemic and occurs in multiple spheres and along easily identifiable and sharply defined lines, where the consequence of current practice is to create continuous developmental harms to members of well-defined groups, where there will be no global threat to a market economy, and where the costs of implementation are not terribly high. 
If an anti-caste principle is accepted, the most general question is whether members of the disadvantaged group, or people who might find themselves in that category, could be persuaded that there are good reasons for the practice under attack." To pose that question is to place 103; see also City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Cent., 473 U.S. 432, 455 (1985) (Stevens, J., concurring) ("I cannot believe that a rational member ofthis disadvantaged class could ever approve of the discriminatory application of the city's ordinance in this case."); Okin, Reason and Feelingin Thinking About Justice, in FEMINISM AND POLrrICAL THEORY 15, 27-30 (C. Sunstein ed. 1990) (discussing original position as requiring people to "think from the point of view ofeveryone"). An excellent example of anti-caste legislation is the Violence Against Women Act, see 136 CONG. REC. S8263 (daily ed. June 19, 1990), which contains various measures designed to reduce and remedy gender-related violence. Such a measure cannot easily be understood in compensatory terms; and it could not be initiated by courts. into doubt unconscious discrimination as well as selective empathy and indifference on the part of those who created the practice; and the answer will frequently be negative. Of course, there will be severe difficulties in administering a system built on a question of that sort. But this is the best inquiry in this context. 
I do not suggest that a principle of this sort leads to a particular specification of substantive rights or institutional arrangements. It needs to be supplemented with a range of other considerations in order to become a plausible basis for civil rights policy. It does, however, have several implications by itself. It suggests that compensation for past wrongs is not the guiding principle for civil rights policy; compensation and restoration of the status quo are not the basic issues at all. It suggests that often, discrimination fueled by factors other than prejudice or irrationality is also the target of civil rights policy, because of the consequences of those forms of discrimination for the relevant group. It suggests that a system with sufficient opportunities for education, training, or employment, without race- and sex-related violence, and without incentives for teenage childbearing or participation in crime, is a principal goal of civil rights policy. It suggests, finally, that the elaboration and implementation of the relevant policies should be undertaken, at least in the first instance, by legislative and executive bodies and not by the courts. In all these respects, this principle represents a renovation of all that has guided civil rights policy over the last generation. 
CONCLUSION 
I have suggested that three of the principal claims that underlie civil rights law and policy are in important respects fallacies. Discrimination is not always the product of prejudice or irrationality. Moreover, to understand the antidiscrimination principle in compensatory terms leads to questions that are unanswerable. Finally, reliance on constitutional adjudication is a large mistake for civil rights law. 
The three fallacies fit well together. Each of them fortifies the others. The compensatory principle is well adapted to reliance on judicial institutions. The notion that discrimination is a product of prejudice or irrationality also helps to promote reliance on the courts, enabling them to build antidiscrimination principles on the foundations of tort law. But if discrimination cannot be well understood in these terms, all the fallacies must yield. They provide a poor foundation for civil rights law and practice in the coming generation. 
I have also suggested, though more tentatively, that civil rights law should be informed by a principle that forbids morally irrelevant differences from being turned, without very good reason, into a systemic source of social or legal disadvantages. Thus understood, the antidiscrimination principle becomes an anti-caste principle. To be sure, elaboration of that principle is a large task, one that leaves open a wide range of questions concerning both substance and institutional arrangements. But if I am correct, such a principle provides a better foundation for civil rights policy than the three fallacies that have burdened the law for so long. 
WHAT 
JUDGE 
BORK 
SHOULD 
HAVE 
SAID Cass R. Sunstein* I. 
INTRODUCTION 
HE recent resignation of Justice William Brennan from the United States Supreme Court is merely the most dramatic symbol of a now-familiar truth: The Warren Court is dead. Its death is of course in large part a result of political victories by conservative presidents, victories that have produced a Supreme Court whose members self-consciously reject the methods of its recent predecessors. But the death of the Warren Court also represents a victory of ideas. The aggressive role of the Supreme Court in bringing about social reform-a role without precedent in the history of the adjudicative branch of government-has been criticized as a usurpation of democratic authority; as a departure from the original understanding, the cornerstone of judicial legitimacy; and most fundamentally, as hardly law at all. This con* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This is the text of a speech delivered at the University of Connecticut Law School on September 26, 1990 as part of the Day, Berry & Howard Visiting Scholar Program. I am grateful to the students and faculty there for their extraordinary kindness and hospitality on that occasion. The reader is asked to make allowances for the informality that characterizes an essay originally written for the lecture format. Some of the ideas found in the second half of this essay also appear in Sunstein, Constitutional Polities and the Conservative Court, I THE AMERiCAN PROSPECT 51 (1990). stellation of ideas has played an important role in transforming the performance and self-conception of the federal judiciary. 
In this essay I have two.purposes. The first is to respond to a standard criticism of the sort of judicial role that was represented by the Warren Court. This form of criticism is stated most straightforwardly in Judge Robert Bork's bestseller, The Tempting of America: The Political Seduction of the Law.' Despite the Senate's rejection of President Reagan's nomination of Judge Bork for the Supreme Court, views similar to those of Judge Bork have increasing influence within the federal judiciary and perhaps the nation as well. In particular, there seems to be mounting agreement with Judge Bork's particular understanding of the distinction between the neutral, apolitical invocation of the original understanding on the one hand and the subjective, value-laden use of the judge's own preferences on the other. For Judge Bork, departure from the original understanding amounts to abandonment of the Constitution and political judging, that is, the illegitimate substitution of judicial values for democratic ones. 
I want to suggest here that this position is barely an argument at all, serving instead as a misleading, albeit popular, rallying cry. Its principal defect lies in its failure to acknowledge the need for interpretive principles for use in construing any legal (or other) text. Because it relies on some such principles without defending or even recognizing them,2 it provides no basis for its own approach. 
My second purpose is to suggest that even for those sympathetic to many of the Warren Court's decisions, there are good reasons to be ambivalent about social reform through the judiciary. Judges are likely to be ineffectual in promoting social reform; their methods and procedures are best suited to compensatory justice. Reliance on the court system may divert resources from other, better channels for reform. Moreover, judicial involvement may well undermine the very causes that it purports to help. For example, the withdrawal of the Court from areas of discrimination on the basis of disability and race, and from abortion as well, appears to be fueling democratic engagement on those questions in ways that will have more substantial and healthy long1. R. BORK, THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA: THE POLITICAL SEDUCTION OF THE LAW (1989). understanding. What he does not recognize is: (a) that the decision to make that understanding decisive is itself an interpretive principle, one that must be defended rather than identified with the Constitution; and (b) that any characterization of the original understanding requires other, supplemental interpretive principles. term implications for social reform than anything that could be expected from.'a Warren Court successor. These sorts of pragmatic, consequentialist considerations, I suggest, provide a legitimate basis for concerns about an aggressive role for the Supreme Court in promoting social reform. These concerns should in turn play a role in developing interpretive principles with which to give meaning to the Constitution. 
In any case, it is those concerns, rather than the backward-looking arguments made by Judge Bork and others, that should be foremost in the minds of those interested in the appropriate role of the Supreme Court in the constitutional order. The rhetoric of "political seduction of the law" is a misleading and unhelpful diversion. 
II. JUDGE-MADE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS 
Now that the era of the Warren Court is over, it is worthwhile to pause briefly to examine its legacy. It is surprising but true that many of the principles of constitutional liberty most prized by Americans were created, not by the founders, but by the Supreme Court during this cefitury. At the very least, the particular understandings of those principles-understandings that have given those principles their current life and content-are recent creations. Indeed, for most of the country's history the liberties for which our Bill of Rights is so widely celebrated and revered, here and abroad, were sharply circumscribed. The overriding reason for their expansion has been the interpretive practices of the modern Supreme Court.3 
If contemporary Americans looked at the charter of constitutional freedom in America as it existed in 1940, or if they could imagine an emerging democracy (say, in Eastern Europe) committing itself to that charter, they would see a system falling far short of their ideals. It is because of the Warren Court that constitutional liberty includes the right to freedom from discrimination on the basis of race, including segregation; to broad protection of political speech, subject to a sharply limited "clear and present danger" exception; to political participation, including equality in voting; to hearing rights for those receiving government benefits, including employment, licenses, and social security; to freedom from sex discrimination; and to broad protection of religious conscience. Even those who reject-as almost everyone does--some as3. To say this is not at all to say that they have reached their appropriate place. See Infra Part in. pects of the Warren Court's legacy will probably treat the bulk of its work as an indispensable part of our constitutional heritage. 
Speaking realistically, a return to a narrowly described "original understanding" would result in the elimination, in one bold stroke, of central parts of existing constitutional safeguards, producing constitutional protections that would be judged-both by Americans and by those who seek to emulate our practices-as extremely thin indeed. All this does not count by itself as a sufficient argument in favor of the role set by the Warren Court. But it is, perhaps, a useful prelude for understanding current disputes. 
The Tempting of America sets out a distinctive approach to constitutional interpretation. In its broad outlines, the argument is quite straightforward. Some judges are "neutral"; 4 they follow the law. Other judges are political; they participate in "a major heresy,"5 that is, they deny "that judges are bound by law." 8 The line between the two depends on whether a judge "is bound by the only thing that can be called law, the principles of the text, whether Constitution or statute, as generally understood at the enactment."17 No one who disagrees with this view "should be nominated or confirmed." 8 
According to Judge Bork, judges who reject this view "not only share the legislative power of Congress and the state legislatures, in violation both of the separation of powers and of federalism, but assume a legislative power that is actually superior to that of any legislature."9 The heresy is particularly indulged by "people [who] see the Constitution as a weapon in a class struggle about social and political values," 10 are "egalitarian and socially permissive,"', "hold only contempt for the limits of respectable politics, ' u 2 or invoke "a kind of restless and unprogrammatic radicalism that does not share but attacks traditional values and assumptions."1 " The "philosophy of original understanding" has the large contrasting value of "political neutrality in judging."15 
One might expect that the "fall"'u from neutrality to politics would be a recent phenomenon, but in fact Judge Bork describes it as something that immediately followed the ratification of the Constitution. Not merely Justice Brennan, and not merely the "liberals" on the Warren Court, but also-to mention simply a few-Chief Justice Marshall and Justices Holmes, Brandeis, Frankfurter, Jackson, and Harlan were seduced by the temptation to substitute politics for law. They too were tempted to abandon the Constitution. 
Judge Bork's position is thus uncomplicated. It begins with the proposition that the Constitution is law and that those who ignore the Constitution are acting lawlessly. It adds to this uncontroversial claim a thesis about interpretation, that is, an identification of "the Constitution" with the understanding about its meaning held by those who ratified it. On this view, a judge who rejects the original understanding of meaning rejects the Constitution itself, or is, in effect, in a free-fall in which meaning is supplied by his own predilections or value judgments. For such a judge, the Constitution becomes irrelevant. Only his own views count. It is here that neutrality, and hence legitimacy, is wanting on the judge's part. For Judge Bork, avoidance of value judgments is a crucial part of the task of law, and reliance on the original understanding alone serves that function. 
Substantive outcomes follow from this conclusion. There is no right of privacy. Indeed, liberty receives no substantive protection under the fourteenth amendment. Rational basis review would apply to all forms of discrimination other than those based on race and ethnicity. 7 The consequence is that discrimination on the basis of gender, or on almost any other basis, is extremely likely to be upheld (though Judge Bork is not entirely forthcoming here).28 Poll taxes are permissible,19 as are violations of the principle of one person-one vote.2 0 Besome of the rhetoric appear out-of-date. 

and so forth-runs throughout The Tempting ofAmerica and of course is recalled by its title as well. There may be a connection between the repeated notion of heresy and the failure to offer substantive arguments against the heretical position. 
cause the equal protection clause applies only to the states, the federal government can discriminate on the basis of race or indeed on any other ground. If it chose, it could segregate on the basis of race or exclude blacks from federal employment. 21 Compulsory sterilization of some criminals would be acceptable.2 2 Many federal programs of the New Deal period and after would be unconstitutional.23 Congress would have more limited authority under section five of the fourteenth amendment than it now does, and would be barred from invalidating state literacy requirements.24 Affirmative action would be banned.20 
Perhaps most dramatically, the Bill of Rights probably would not apply to the states, though here Judge Bork is unaccountably cautious. 26 Of course, flag desecration could be criminalized; 27 creches could be displayed in public buildings; 28 states could exempt profits from the sale of Bibles and religious literature from taxation. 2 One need not disagree with all of these conclusions in order to recognize that Judge Bork's Constitution would be dramatically different from the document as it is now understood. 
C. 
Arguments for Adherence to Original Understanding 
It might be tempting, or even correct, to think that the meaning of the Constitution is settled by the original understanding held by its ratifiers. But surely an argument is necessary before one should accept that position, especially, perhaps, in view of its repudiation by so many leading members of the Court,3 0 and of the extent to which that position would undermine principles of constitutional liberty that have and Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), was therefore correct. R. BORK, supra note 1, at 81-83. But his discussion of the point seems rather tortuous, and many readers will emerge from the discussion with the firm impression that on Bork's own method, neutrally applied, Brown was wrongly decided. See Posner, Bork and Beethoven, 42 STAN. L. REV. 1365 (1990). 

characterized it differently from Judge Bork-as including, for example, principles whose shape changes over time. This category includes all justices who have treated the free speech clause in roughly this way-that is, all modem justices. See, e.g., New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254 (1964). deserve widespread support. 
Those who believe that the original understanding is not decisive do not, of course, reject the Constitution.31 They do not believe that the Constitution is not binding. They do not reject the actual Constitution. Instead they suggest that the proper interpretation of the Constitution requires resort to other considerations. Often they claim that this conception of interpretation is itself historically required. In any case they propose, not to abandon the Constitution, but instead to understand its meaning by reference to something other than the original understanding conceived as Judge Bork does. 
What argument does Judge Bork offer on behalf of his view? In only one place does he squarely address the question: 
original understanding to political neutrality is a pretense since the choice of that philosophy is itself a political decision. It certainly is, but the political content of that choice is not made by the judge; it was made long ago by those who designed and enacted the Constitution. 3 
It is worthwhile to pause over this passage. In brief: The original understanding is binding because the original understanding was that the original understanding is binding. The historical claim is itself highly uncertain. 33 The text of the Constitution invites the view that its meaning is capable of change over time, and there is evidence that the framers did not believe that their original understanding would control the future. 34 But I want to put that point to one side. Judge Bork's claim is that the binding character of the original understanding is settled by the original understanding. This is not an argument at all; it is circular, or an axiom, or a rallying cry. To those who believe that it is necessary to defend the view that the original understanding is binding, it will be less than unpersuasive. 
I have searched The Tempting of America for a more substantial justification for the book's central proposition. There appear to be several different strategies, whose relationship to one another is obscure, and whose role in defense of the original understanding is never clearly articulated. 
On several occasions Judge Bork argues by shifting the burden of argumentation: 
the sole agent for overriding democratic outcomes? The man who prefers results to processes has no reason to say that the Court is more legitimate than any other institution capable of wielding power. If the Court will not agree with him, why not argue his case to some other group, say the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a body with rather better means for enforcing its decisions? No answer exists.3 5 Judge Bork seems to be arguing here that a decision deserves respect if it can be connected to a judgment by "the people"; it does not if it cannot. 
But this is a crude approach to the question of legitimacy. Obedience to the Court is not justified simply because its decisions are compelled by a judgment made in some sense by the people-especially when the relevant people died long ago. Ultimately obedience is justified, if it is, for some amalgam of substantive reasons: The Constitution is a good one; it has a fair degree of democratic pedigree, both in its original adoption and in the possibility of amendment; the consequence of a decision to abandon the Constitution would be intolerable chaos. By itself, the fact that there was agreement on some document by some people many generations ago is insufficient for "legitimacy." A decision by the Supreme Court does not warrant obedience for that reason alone. 
So too, Supreme Court decisions do not lose their rightful claim of allegiance merely because they are not connected to a particular decision of the Constitution's ratifiers. To say that only Supreme Court decisions that are justifiable by reference to the original understanding warrant allegiance is to mistake a conclusion for an argument. On this score, Judge Bork's claims about legitimacy mirror his (circular) response to the contention that it is necessary to defend adherence to the original understanding in political terms. In fact, a judicial decision deserves allegiance, if it does, for a complex mixture of reasons, roughly analogous to those that support a decision to be bound by the Constitution itself. Those reasons involve the need for stability, the justness of the system as a whole, the possibility of democratic corrections, and (to some limited extent) the substance of the decision itself. A tight connection with a previous decision of the polity is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for legitimacy. 
Judge Bork also suggests that adherence to the original understanding is justified because abandonment of that understanding will lead judges to make "moral choices" that they have not been authorized to make, and that cannot in any case be made in the face of moral disagreement among the populace. A key point, for Judge Bork, is that "revisionist" theorists require a judge "to make a major moral decision." 6 Legitimate judges, by contrast, are simply agents of the people. Because people cannot "all agree to a single moral system," 37 judges cannot properly invoke morality at all, on which the citizenry is hopelessly divided: "Why is sexual gratification more worthy than moral gratification? Why is the gratification of low-cost electricity or higher income more worthy than the pleasure of clean air?" 38 
There is, however, no way to avoid "moral decisions," even major and controversial ones. The view that the original understanding is binding requires a moral or political theory, and thus acceptance of that view rests on a (disputable and disputed) moral foundation. The very fact that Judge Bork's theory of interpretation is controversial among the citizenry attests to the fact that it rests on such a foundation. In this respect his approach, like any other, relies on moral decisions that require substantive defense. Reliance on the original understanding does not avoid recourse to a moral system at all. 
No text, constitutional or otherwise, has meaning apart from the precepts held by those who interpret it, and those precepts cannot be found in the text itself." The selection of precepts must itself be justified in moral and political terms. To say this is not at all to say that language imposes no constraints or that meaning lies solely with the interpreter. But it is to say that meaning is a function of culture, and 
construction, see C. SuNsmIN. AFTER THE RiGHTS REVOLUTIoN ch. 3 (1990). that aspects of culture are subject to evaluation. 
In addition, it is impossible to decide how to characterize the original understanding without adverting to moral considerations. History itself will not do the job. To reiterate some familiar points: It is necessary to decide whether the clause embodied a general concept capable of change over time or instead the particular understandings held by those who ratified it. It is also necessary to translate the original understanding into conditions that the ratifiers could not have anticipated. To carry out both these tasks, interpreters must invoke something other than the historical record. No final answers can be found there.40 
The claim of lack of authorization is merely another version of the claim of illegitimacy, and it is no more productive here than there. It is true that there is disagreement about morals and politics among the citizenry, but the fact of disagreement does not mean that the conflicting positions are not subject to mediation, as they in fact have been in multiple areas, including those of race and sex discrimination. The fact that a decision has moral dimensions does not imply that it is not subject to reason. As we have seen, Judge Bork's own view rests at bottom on moral and political choices, having broadly to do with the perceived value of (his conception of) democratic self-determination and fear of judicial willfulness. But The Tempting of America does not acknowledge that these are moral and political choices, and so spends almost no time in defending them.41 
Judge Bork sometimes defends his position by general references to democratic self-determination, and here he is on firm ground. Any plausible theory of constitutional interpretation must pay a great deal of attention to the democratic aspirations of the American constitutional tradition. But the principle of democracy is too vague, standing by itself, to justify any particular conception of the judicial role. For example, that principle might call for an exceptionally aggressive judicial role in protecting rights of political participation and in safeguard40. Thus, for example, Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), cannot be resolved by reference to the original understanding; it is necessary to translate the requirement of equal protection into the conditions of the 1950s, in which public education had attained a quite novel status. So too, the original understanding that the equal protection clause does riot forbid sex discrimination need not resolve the question in light of the generality of the framers' language, the difficulty of determining whether they understood by that language a general concept or their particular conceptions, and the extreme difficulty of sorting out that question without resorting to extratextual and extrahistorical considerations. 
ing the interests of groups likely to be disfavored in politics. 4 2 Without much more, the principle of democracy does not require adherence to the original understanding. 
It is, I think, no accident that the position set out in The Tempting of America is not so much defended as proclaimed. If the position were actually to be defended, its central claims would take on entirely new dimensions. The rhetoric of heresy and seduction would have to be abandoned; the line between neutrality and moral judgments would be unsettled; the defense would have itself to partake of moral and political judgments. An argument for originalism, or (what is not the same thing) for a modest judicial role, will have to speak of political theory, and not only of the framers. To make that argument would be to abandon the moral high ground on which The Tempting ofAmerica tries to stand. 
I want to conclude this section with a summary that slightly generalizes the point. Every text requires interpreters to draw on background norms or principles that they themselves must supply. To say that a text has a plain meaning, or that there is no room for interpretive doubt, is often to say something true; but when it is true, it is because there is no disagreement about the appropriate background principles. Those who deny the existence of such principles are in fact without self-consciousness. They believe that their own views are so self-evident that they do not amount to interpretive principles at all but instead are "part" of the text. Interpretive principles are, however, always operative. That is no embarrassment to constitutional law, or indeed to law itself, but instead an inevitable part of the exercise of reason in human affairs. 
The question is not whether interpretive principles exist, but whether they can be defended in substantive, value-laden terms. Many imaginable Supreme Court decisions would not be susceptible to such a defense, and surely some of Judge Bork's particular conclusions are sound. But because he never defends his own interpretive principles, asserting instead that those who do not share them would abandon "the Constitution," he offers no reason for anyone to agree with him. 
I conclude that originalism is merely the latest version of formalism in the law. It represents the pretense that one can decide hard cases in law by reference to value judgments made by someone else. Those who indulge in that pretense usually end up not by abandoning value judgments but by making them covertly. The real fault of Judge Bork's version of originalism is that it attempts to mask its own foundations.43 
I have not dealt in detail with the particular positions on constitutional questions set out by Judge Bork, but it is revealing that those positions generally line up, not with some original understanding, but with the conservative wing of the Republican party: no affirmative action, fewer restrictions on governmental power to aid religion, no abortion rights, greater constraints on national power, greater constraints on pornography, fewer intrusions on presidential power, and greater protection of property rights."" D. 
Legal Authoritarianism 
The Tempting of America is the most prominent recent illustration of what might be called "legal authoritarianism," a term that I use in a special sense. I mean the term to refer to all approaches to law that ultimately trace legal legitimacy exclusively to an exercise of power, or to the view that might makes right, or to some prior settlement among those with political power. On this view, legal legitimacy need not, and indeed must not, be justified by reference to substantive claims about the right or the good. Thus understood, the category of authoritarianism is a broad one, encompassing highly democratic approaches as well as others that are far less palatable. Authoritarianism in law has no necessary alliance with liberalism or conservatism. Indeed, democratic authoritarianism finds prominent expression in Justices Oliver Wendell Holmes and Hugo Black, both of whom emphasized, as a centerpiece of their approaches to law, the need for judges to ratify prior agreements among those with political power.45 For Black in particular, interpretive principles seemed unnecessary and indeed hubristic, since they introduced a measure of discretion and nonneutrality into law. 46 For Black, the constitutional text was usually self-interpreting.47 
If legal authoritarianism is understood in these terms, its antonym is not democracy. For this reason, the term will be misleading to those who identify authoritarianism with an absence of legitimate electoral processes. But I hope that it is not unfair to contrast authoritarianism, as understood here, with all approaches that demand of law, and of government through law, some justification that goes beyond the exercise of political power. Such approaches also span a wide range. The antonym of authoritarianism is not allied with any political program. Because such approaches require governmental action to be justified by something other than the will of the majority, and because they emphasize the need for interpretive principles, which often must be justified in substantive terms, they frequently appear, from the authoritarian perspective, to be irremediably antidemocratic. 
Legal authoritarianism has a number of characteristic features. It sees laws as deals among self-interested actors. It is commonly skeptical of normative argument altogether, or of efforts to reason about social and economic problems. It commonly disparages such efforts as a mere mask for self-interest, or as incapable of mediating social and political disputes, which it treats as based on premises too fixed and incommensurable to be a subject of deliberation. Mediation is possible only by warfare or compromise among self-interested bargainers. Disagreements about ethical and political problems are, for the legal authoritarian, not an occasion for shared reasoning but instead proof of its impossibility. Value judgments, understood as prejudices, are seen as the consequence. Authoritarianism thus tends to have a positivist understanding of law and legal authority. The source of law is an exercise of sovereign power, constituted as such by other people with sovereign power, in a chain ultimately connected to some foundational exercise of power. The disjunction between law and politics is understood in these terms., 
There is a distinctive authoritarian style in constitutional law as well. Authoritarianism provides the foundation for one conception of judicial restraint. Because ordinary legislative outcomes reflect the play of social forces, they should not be disturbed unless the interference is itself the result of some other, superior decision by such forces. Authoritarianism is also drawn to firm linguistic anchors-"the text"-and for two reasons. First, the text is the best evidence of how the social forces in the community have resolved themselves. Second, departures from the text leave interpreters in the world of unfettered value judgments, or prejudices. Moreover, the authoritarian position tends to see social outcomes expressed in authoritative texts as embodying the will of some collective "us"--even if the text were written many years ago and even if important segments of the community were excluded from the decision. 
Finally, and perhaps most important, the authoritarian position treats most of its claims as axioms, in need of no real defense. The very call for a defense is often said to mark people as heretics or as demanding their exclusion from the relevant community. When defended in substantive terms, the authoritarian claim takes on altogether new dimensions and ceases to be authoritarian at all. And for the next generation of legal studies, perhaps the most crucial task is the development of modes of analysis that resist the authoritarian temptation and do not purport to be purely deductive, but that nonetheless recognize and exemplify the possibility of mediating social disputes through good reasons rather than poor ones. 
I want now to shift gears. Judge Bork's nomination was of course defeated, but his ideas are shared, perhaps increasingly, by influential members of the legal community, and the position of the current Court has many commonalities with that of Judge Bork. We might obtain a useful angle on the problem by exploring the sort of constitutional agenda that would be set by a modern-day successor to the Warren Court. If the Supreme Court, for our time, brought to bear on current practices the kind of critical eye that the Warren Court brought to the 1950s and 1960s, what kinds of changes might be expected? I do not mean to endorse all of these proposed results, some of which strike me as inadvisable or even preposterous; I do mean to obtain a sense of what has been lost or gained by the abandonment of an aggressive role for the Supreme Court in the area of social reform. One of the unfortunate consequences of the constitutional attack on the Warren Court is that it has preoccupied its participants so much as to distract them from the task of imagining the ingredients of a different constitutional order, mandated judicially or not. The following is an admittedly hypothetical agenda. 
(1) The area of sex discrimination is probably the place to start. Under current law, principles of "formal equality" bar attack on a number of candidates for serious constitutional review. Consider the problem of reproductive freedom, which is now treated as a matter of "privacy," even though issues of sexual equality loom at the surface of the debate. Legal control of women's reproductive capacities has been central to sex discrimination, and the effort to forbid abortion is closely connected (simply as a matter of actual legislative motivation) with fears about women's rejection of their traditional role. A Warren Court successor might well have seen public and private behavior that bears on pregnancy-in the workplace and in the criminal law-as raising serious problems of sexual equality. 
There are many other examples. It is widely reported that the criminal justice system deals inadequately with domestic violence, sexual harassment, rape, and abuses in the production of pornography. Often it is alleged that the inadequate treatment is a reflection of discrimination. It would not be at all difficult to imagine a constitutional attack, rooted in principles of equality, against police practices that fail to redress domestic violence. Such attacks might be based on a prominent part of the original understanding of equal "protection" of the laws, which was designed to ensure equality in the administration of the criminal justice system. 
Another example is provided by the current rules of family law, which ensure that after divorce, the welfare of most men will increase dramatically and the welfare of most women will decrease correspondingly.4' The current rules do not reward women but indeed punish them for their contributions to childcare and housework. Because most women receive custody of children but low support payments upon divorce, a constitutional attack would be quite plausible here. 
Additional illustrations are provided by the presence, in the United States, of a social security system that benefits people the more closely they come to traditional male career paths, and that keeps weakest and most defenseless those who have assumed traditional female roles;' 0 and of workplaces that continue to be structured on the basis of male norms and expectations, captured in, for example, the exclusion of fertile women from certain jobs and halfhearted childcare policies in general.50 All of these problems could be seen as raising issues of sex discrimination. 
(2) As currently interpreted, the Constitution has little or nothing to offer the handicapped. Discrimination against the mentally retarded is subject to rational basis review. 5' Moreover, disabled people face numerous obstacles in a world made by and for the able-bodied; many of these obstacles are embodied in law. An attack on seemingly neutral standards, based on able-bodied norms that effectively exclude disabled people, could well be marshalled under principles of constitutional equality. 
(3) The sexual privacy of homosexuals is unprotected. 2 Probably the best guess is that the current Court would find discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, including wholesale exclusions from governmental employment, to raise no serious constitutional question. A different Court would have taken this issue much more seriously. 
(4) People who are homeless, poor, starving, or victims of domestic violence have no right to relief in the Constitution, which is said to be exclusively a charter of negative liberties.5" Another Court would have made at least some inroads on the positive-negative distinction, furnishing a degree of protection here. At a minimum, the Court might have said that selective exclusions from funding programs have to be persuasively justified. Such a Court would have been closely attuned to the ways in which selective funding can pressure the exercise of constitutional rights. 
(5) Under current interpretations, the Constitution has no bearing on efforts to control environmental degradation. In the 1960s and 1970s, environmental groups argued that the founding document imposes on government some obligation to protect the citizenry against the environmental damage brought about by industrial development. Although such arguments attempted to draw on common law ideas about the integrity of property and person, they were unsuccessful in the courts. Of course there would be considerable difficulties in marking out a judicial role in this setting. But -one might have expected some success from a different set of judges and justices. 
(6) In the area of race discrimination, seemingly neutral practices that have the effect of excluding blacks from important arenas of public life are subject to little scrutiny. Tests, educational qualifications, electoral systems, and other requirements are permitted so long as they are minimally rational.54 Another Court would have subjected these rules-in such areas as education, employment, and welfare-to a requirement of justification or to a showing that alternatives without discriminatory consequences would be less effective. 
Taken as a whole, an agenda of this sort would provide an impressive set of proposals for constitutional reform; this is so even if, as seems likely, some of the proposals should not be accepted by a court. Such an agenda would confront the contemporary Constitution with the same sorts of pressures, dilemmas, and opportunities that were furnished to the Warren Court in the period beginning in the 1950s. If the agenda seems overly ambitious, perhaps we might remember how much more ambitious were the changes that the Court actually brought about in the period between 1950 and 1980--changes that would indeed have seemed inconceivable to observers in, say, 1940. 
Would it be desirable for the Court to embark upon courses of this sort? Should the Supreme Court engage in social reform in such areas? If what I have said thus far is correct, the Court's unwillingness to involve itself in these issues cannot be justified by reference to "legitimacy," at least not without substantial additional arguments. A judicial role in some or many of these areas would fall within the boundaries of the text. Moreover, invocation of the Constitution in many of these settings could be connected to the general understandings for which the document stands; for at least most of them, there would be no greater strain here than in cases creating (for example) a wholesale prohibition on racial discrimination and a right to be free from discrimination on the basis of gender. 
I want to argue that judicial involvement in most of these areas would indeed have been unjustified, and that in any case the shift from constitutional adjudication to constitutional politics has a great deal to be said in its favor. I want, in short, to outline some of the considerations that Judge Bork avoided in his argument for a constrained judicial role. These arguments do not sound in neutrality; they are selfconsciously value-laden. But they suggest that an aggressive role for the Supreme Court in social reform carries with it significant disadvantages, and that a judicial withdrawal promises significant benefits as well. The relevant considerations fall into three overlapping categories: v. Lodge, 458 U.S. 613 (1982) (voting). A greater burden is, however, imposed under federal statutes. See, e.g., 42 .U.S.C. §§ 2000e to 2000e-17 (1982) (employment). efficacy, democracy and citizenship, and the narrowing focus of adjudication. 
Difficulties in Court-Led Reform 
The first point is that judicial decisions are of limited efficacy in bringing about. social change. Study after study has documented this basic conclusion.55 Brown v. Board of Educatio n56 itself is usually taken as a counterexample, but it is in fact the most conspicuous confirmation of the point.57 Ten years after the decision, no more than about two percent of black children in the South attended desegregated schools.58 It was not until 1964, after the involvement of Congress and the executive branch, that widespread desegregation actually occurred. The Court is far more effective in vetoing a decision than in attempting to bring about social change on its own.59 
The decision in Roe v. Wade6° may be another illustration, though the picture here is mixed. It is undoubtedly true that the decision increased women's access to safe abortions, 61 and to some extent increased the legitimacy of the practice of abortion. Surprisingly, however, it did not dramatically increase the actual rate of abortions. 62 It is thus inaccurate to say that there have been significantly more fetal deaths as a result of the Supreme Court's decision. Perhaps more fundamentally, the decision may well have created the "moral majority," helped defeat the Equal Rights Amendment, prevented the eventual achievement of consensual solutions to the abortion problem, and severely undermined the women's movement both by spurring and organizing opposition and by demobilizing potential adherents. 
Some evidence for all of these propositions has been provided rela55. See D. HOROWITZ. THE COURTS AND SOCIAL POLICY (1977); R.S. MELNICK, REGULATION AND THE COURTS: THE CASE OF THE CLEAN AIR ACT (1983); G. ROSENBERG. THE HOLLOW HOPE (forthcoming 1991). 

(1986). 
without the spur of Brown, but even this is uncertain. See G. ROSENBERG, supra note 55, at 

THE ABORTION QUESTION (1987). 
tively recently, with the extraordinary public reaction to the Webster v. Reproductive Health Services's decision." The Court's partial retreat from Roe may well have galvanized the women's movement in a way that will have more favorable and fundamental long-term consequences for sexual equality than anything that could have come from the Supreme Court. To say this is not to say that Roe was necessarily wrongly decided, either as a matter of constitutional interpretation or as a matter of principle. But it is to say that its effectiveness has been limited, largely because of its judicial source. 
More generally, it is not clear that in terms of civil rights and civil liberties, the United States has developed significantly differently from other liberal democracies 'that lack judicial review (most notably France, England and, until recently, Canada) or those that have such review but have quite different constitutions (most notably West Germany). Of course judicial review has, in some settings, accomplished considerable good and even introduced important changes into American society. But the post-Warren Court focus on the rulings of the Supreme Court has often been myopic. The fate of civil rights and civil liberties in a democracy depends more fundamentally on a range of cultural, social, and economic factors than on the nine justices. 
Democracy, Citizenship, Compromise, Legitimacy 
In two ways, reliance on the courts may operate as an alternative to democratic channels. It might divert energy and resources from politics, and the eventual judicial decision may foreclose a political outcome. On both counts, the substitution has large costs. The resort to politics can produce a kind of citizen mobilization that is a public and private good, inculcating political commitments, broader understanding, feelings of citizenship, and dedication to the community. An emphasis on the judiciary that compromises these values will carry with it large attendant disadvantages. In this connection it is important to recall that Martin Luther King was quite possibly a far more important source of constitutional change than any or even all of the Warren Court's decisions concerning race.6 5 
pressure was imposed by the pro-choice movement. 
protest, or to pave the way for King, appears to have strikingly little empirical support. See G. ROSENBERG, supra note 55, at 107-156. 
In any case, political channels are often a far better channel for sensible and effective reform. Individual preferences, and their intensities, can more easily be reflected in mutually advantageous accommodations.6" And if questions of morality tend to become questions of constitutional law, their resolution before nine judges can be harmful to the practice of citizenship. As noted, some of this effect is already visible in the context of the abortion controversy. 7 The same may also be true in the context of race discrimination, though the evidence is mixed here. 8 
The Court, in short, is not the only "forum of principle" in American government6. 9 On the contrary, the major reflections of principled deliberation in the history of American government have come from Congress and the President, not from the judiciary. In the last generation it has become commonplace to contrast a principled, deliberative judiciary with a reflexive, interest-ridden political process." ° But this position amounts not merely to a counsel of despair. It disregards the phenomenon, frequently observed in practice, of deliberative politics, in which existing conventions are subject to critical scrutiny. The belief in deliberative politics through institutions other than courts has, of course, been central to American constitutionalism since its inception. 1 
To say all this is not to deny that judicial review can make up for systemic inequalities in majoritarian processes or introduce principles that come to such processes only with difficulty. But it is to say that an aggressive Court is, on traditional liberal grounds, the furthest thing from an unambiguous good, and this is so even if the Court's goals are sound. 
The Narrowing Focus of Adjudication 
Adjudication is an exceptionally poor system for achieving largescale social reform. Courts are rarely expert in the area at hand, and the focus on the litigated case makes it hard for judges to understand the complex systemic effects of legal intervention. A decision to require expenditures on school busing might, for example, divert resources from an area with an equal or greater claim to the public fisc. Creation of a legal right against pollution may have a variety of harmful and unintended effects on the public and private sectors, including unemployment and higher prices--effects that are difficult, especially for courts, to anticipate. Ideas of this sort provide some support for the Court's aversion to the recognition of positive rights. 
Moreover, legal thinking and legal procedures are most comfortable with ideas, growing out of the tradition of compensatory justice, that are poorly adapted to the achievement of serious social reform.7 2 In the compensatory model, if A injures B, B must restore the status quo ante by making payment. But this model is ill-suited to many issues of social reform that might be treated as a matter of law. Consider, for example, problems of pollution, in which numerous people are harmed to a small degree. Here the purpose of legal controls is not to ensure compensation, but to manage and reduce risks. The inevitability of complex trade-offs, involving impositions on numerous other people, usually makes a rights-based approach highly unrealistic.7 3 So too, the problem of discrimination is usually not the commission of tort-like acts of discrimination by identifiable actors at identifiable times to identifiable victims. It is instead the existence of structures or systems of subordination that should be reformed. Constitutional adjudication is ill-adapted to undertaking the necessary changes. 
These criticisms of the judiciary are hardly novel. Though voiced principally by conservatives in the last decades, analogous complaints played a major role in the New Deal period, in which it would have seemed extremely peculiar to suggest that social reform on behalf of NOMOS (forthcoming 1991). 
(1988). the disadvantaged should come from the courts. 4 Indeed, the rise of modern regulatory agencies was largely a product of a belief that the judiciary lacked the will, the means, and the democratic pedigree to bring about social reform on its own. The period that we are entering will see a similar constellation of ideas. 
These considerations bear on the development of interpretive principles with which to give meaning to ambiguous constitutional provisions. They suggest that courts ought to be cautious in giving broad meaning to open-ended phrases, at least if such a meaning would require courts to undertake large-scale social reform on their own. Together with the obvious fact that interpretive principles should attempt to reduce judicial discretion, they indicate that a constitutional democracy ought not to place heavy reliance on the judiciary for such tasks. 
If all this is correct, there are significant advantages to the current institutional shift. It is important to recall here that of the three most dramatic periods of aggressive social reform in the twentieth century, two occurred during the progressive period and the New Dbeal.71 Here the Supreme Court was mostly hostile to the relevant changes, but it was unable to stop them, and its very hostility may have fueled them.70 And in the third period-the environmental, consumer, and antidiscrimination movements of the 1960s and 1970s-by far the most important changes, of both degree and kind, were driven principally by Congress. The courts played a subsidiary role. 
Other Institutional and Democratic Possibilities 
If social reform in the various areas discussed thus far is to happen outside of the courts, on what institutions might reliance be placed? There are many possibilities. States and localities have shown, in the last decade, an impressive degree of initiative and imagination, going well beyond the Supreme Court and the Congress in many areas-by, for example, enacting aggressive measures forbidding discrimination on the basis of disability, sex, and sexual orientation. At the national level, the principal civil rights gains have occurred through legislative action in the context of discrimination on the basis of sex, disability, age, and race. It is important to recognize that the Supreme Court is not the only institution in government charged with fidelity to the Constitution. 
U.S. 45 (1905). If the Court, for institutional or other reasons, interprets the Constitution narrowly, this responsibility becomes all the more insistent. 
The principal constitutional sources of national legislative power here are the commerce clause-granting Congress the authority to regulate all actions having a significant effect on interstate commerce-and, perhaps most notably, the great underused provision of the Constitution, section five of the fourteenth amendment. The fourteenth amendment has, of course, been the source of the overwhelming majority of the important Supreme Court decisions in the area of civil rights and civil liberties, including the application of the Bill of Rights to the states, Roe v. Wade,7 and all discrimination cases. It is too infrequently remarked that the last sentence of this amendment says that "[t]he Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article." Despite this injunction, Congress has taken up the invitation exceptionally rarely. Indeed, the judicial rather than legislative enforcement of the fourteenth amendment may qualify as the most profound irony in the history of American constitutionalism. 
But the Supreme Court has itself concluded that Congress's power under section five is extraordinarily broad.7 8 Indeed, the Court has permitted Congress to invoke section five to proscribe practices that the Court has itself upheld. In allowing Congress to invalidate literacy tests that the Court had permitted, the Court explicitly said that Congress could, under section five, strike down practices that the Court would allow.7 9 
This conclusion turns out to be no puzzle if it is recognized that the Court's decisions are a product not only of substantive theory but also of institutional constraint. Precisely because of its lack of democratic pedigree, the Court is sometimes unwilling to enforce the Constitution as vigorously as it would if it were not so constrained. Congress faces no such constraints.8" However ironic it might seem, there would be little reason for surprise if the Court found that Congress acted well within its constitutional authority in using its powers precisely in order to overrule the most restrictive recent decisions of the Court itself. 
of The Tempting of America. R. BORK, supra note 1, at 91-93. 

HARv. L. Rav. 1212 (1978) (discussing judicial underenforcement of the Constitution for institutional reasons). 
CONCLUSION 
The Constitution does not contain the instructions for its own interpretation. Those who see the original understanding as decisive should not claim that people who disagree are abandoning the Constitution. Instead they bring to bear on the document a different set of interpretive principles. A commitment to the original understanding reflects a commitment to a particular set of interpretive principles, and those principles, like its competitors, must be justified in substantive terms. 
Because The Tempting of America does not defend its own interpretive principles, instead treating them as self-evident, it provides no reason for anyone to accept them. In this sense, it is one version of legal authoritarianism: the view that legal outcomes are legitimate if and because they are traceable to a prior exercise of power. Because it does not acknowledge its own dependence on interpretive principles, this approach to constitutional interpretation is not an argument at all. 
These considerations do not, however, provide a reason for rejecting the original understanding or for accepting an aggressive judicial role in social reform."1 The limited efficacy of the courts, the consequences of such a role for self-government and citizenship, and the adjudicatory form all suggest that such a role is at best a mixed blessing. Concerns of this sort do not by themselves point in the direction of a particular set of interpretive principles. But they do suggest that an aggressive judicial role should not be seen as representing the natural or best form of constitutional democracy in America. A withdrawal of the federal judiciary from social reform in the name of the Constitution might ultimately amount to an important, albeit partial, step in reviving democratic forms; and it might aid in spurring passive or weak groups toward greater participation in resolving the important questions of the day. Such a step would constitute a movement-ironic, modest, ambiguous, and tentative, to be sure-in aligning constitutional practices in America with the far more conspicuous developments in self-government now occurring throughout the globe. 
on the ground that they assert rather than defend their interpretive practices; but it perhaps fails sufficiently to explain why a constitutional democracy should be committed to an aggressive judicial role, aside from reasonable but conjectural remarks about comparative competence. 
