Even when the words remain the same, they mean something very different when they are uttered by a minority struggling against repressive measures, and when expressed by a group that has attained power and then uses ideas that were once weapons of emancipation as instruments for keeping the power and wealth they have obtained. Ideas that at one time are means of producing social change have not the same meaning when they are used as means of preventing social change.2 John Dewey 
For those who believe either that the judiciary should play a limited role in American government or that the Constitution's meaning is fixed by the original understanding of its ratifiers, the First Amendment is a particular embarrassment. The current state of free speech in America owes a great deal to extremely aggressive interpretations by the Supreme Court, which has invalidated legislative outcomes on numerous occasions. These decisions cannot be justified by reference to the original understanding of the First Amendment.3 Such decisions also involve a highly intrusive judicial role in majoritarian politics. 
There is some continuity, however, between current practice and the original understanding, and between current practice and principles of democratic government. The continuity lies in the distinctive American contribution to the theory of sovereignty. In England, sovereignty lay with the King. "In the United States," as James Madison explained, "the case is altogether different. The People, not the Government, possess the absolute sovereignty."'4 2 John Dewey, The Future of Liberalism, in John Dewey, 11 Later Works 291 (Southern Illinois, 1987). 
3 Indeed, the protection of free speech originally may have been thought to confer primarily a ban against "prior restraints"-licensing systems and other means of requiring prepublication permission from government. See Leonard W. Levy, Emergence of A Free Press 272-74 (Oxford, 1985). Under this limited conception of the First Amendment, subsequent punishment for speech usually raises no constitutional problem at all. Id. 
Even if this extreme view is incorrect, it seems clear that during the founding period, much of what we now consider "speech" was thought to be unprotected, and speech could be regulated if it could be shown to cause injury or offense. Joseph Story, A FamiliarExposition of the Constitution of the United States §§ 445-47 at 316-18 (Regnery Gateway, 1986). In any case it is revealing that during the founding period many people thought that the infamous Sedition Act-making it a crime to libel "the government" and thus criminalizing a wide range of criticism of government-was constitutional. See Philip Kurland and Ralph Lerner, eds, 5 The Founder'sConstitution (Chicago, 1987). 
" James Madison, Report on the Virginia Resolution (Jan 1800), in Gaillard Hunt, ed, 6 The Writings of James Madison 386 (Putnam, 1906). The placement of sovereignty in the people rather than in the government has important implications for freedom of speech. As Madison understood it, the new conception of sovereignty entailed a judgment that any "Sedition Act" would be unconstitutional. 5 The power represented by such an Act ought, "more than any other, to produce universal alarm; because it is levelled against that right of freely examining public characters and measures, and of free communication among the people thereon, which has ever been justly deemed the only effectual guardian of every other right."6 
With Madison's pronouncements in mind, we might think of the American tradition of free expression as a series of struggles to understand the relationship between this conception of sovereignty and a system of free speech. The extraordinary protection now accorded to political speech can well be understood as an elaboration of the distinctive American understanding of sovereignty. 
My goal in this Article is to defend this basic proposition and to evaluate the current system of free expression in light of it. As we will see, an effort to root freedom of speech in a conception of popular sovereignty shows that our current understandings are off the mark. Those understandings misdirect the basic inquiry, protect speech that should not be protected, and worst of all, invalidate democratic efforts to promote the principle of popular sovereignty under current conditions. 
American children watch a good deal of television-about twenty-seven hours per week-and American television contains a good deal of advertising. For adults, every hour of television contains nearly eight minutes of commercials.8 For most of its history, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) imposed limits on the amount of advertising that broadcasters could air on shows aimed at children. In 1984, the FCC eliminated the limits.' 
In the wake of deregulation, some stations air between eleven and twelve minutes per hour of commercials during children's programming on weekends, and up to fourteen minutes on weekdays. 10 Some shows are actually full-length commercials, because the lead characters are products." 
In 1990 Congress imposed, for children's programming, a limit of ten and one half minutes of television commercials per hour on weekends, and twelve minutes on weekdays. President Bush withheld his approval, invoking the First Amendment. According to the President, the First Amendment "does not contemplate that government will dictate the quality or quantity of what Americans should hear-rather, it leaves this to be decided by free media responding to the free choices of individual consumers."' 2 The President did "not believe that quantitative restrictions on advertising should be considered permissible ....,3 
Nonetheless, the Children's Television Act of 1990 has become law. 4 It is possible that networks will challenge it on constitutional grounds. Perhaps the constitutional attack will be successful. The plausibility of the argument has affected the debate over controls on children's advertising, and may well have deterred stronger efforts to encourage high-quality broadcasting for children. 
This episode reveals that something important and strange has happened to the First Amendment. Whereas the principal First Amendment suits were brought, in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, by political protestors and dissidents, many of the current debates involve complaints by commercial advertisers, companies objecting to the securities laws, pornographers, businesses selling prerecorded statements of celebrities via "900" numbers, people seeking to spend large amounts of money on elections, industries attempting to export technology to unfriendly nations, newspapers disclosing names of rape victims, and large broadcasters resisting government efforts to promote diversity in the media. How has this happened?, 
To attempt an answer, we must step back a bit. From about 1940 to 1970, American constitutional debate over freedom of expression was divided along clear lines: On one side were those ac'0 Gamarekian, NY Times § D at 1 (cited in note 8). 
" On the development of this practice, see Engelhardt, The Shortcake Strategy at 7081 (cited in note 9). 
12 Statement on the Children's Television Act of 1990, 26 Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 42, 1611-12 (Oct 17, 1990). 
13 Id at 1612. 
" The President did not veto the bill but allowed it to become law without his signature. He did not explain why he did not veto it. Id at 1611-12. cepting what came to be the dominant position, a form of First Amendment "absolutism." On the other side were the advocates of "reasonable regulation." One could identify the two sides by their commitment to, or rejection of, four central ideas. 
The first idea is that the government is the enemy of freedom of speech. Any effort to regulate speech, by the nation or the states, is threatening to the principle of free expression. More subtly, an effort to regulate speech is defined as a governmental attempt to interfere with communicative processes, taking the existing distribution of entitlements-property rights, wealth, and so on-as a given. I will discuss this point in more detail below. 15 
The second idea is that we should understand the First Amendment as embodying a commitment to a certain form of neutrality. Government may not draw lines between speech it likes and speech it hates. All speech stands on the same footing. Thus the protection accorded to speech extends equally to Communists and Nazis, the Ku Klux Klan and the Black Panthers, Martin Luther King, Jr. and George Wallace. Government should ensure that broadcasters, newspapers, and others can say what they wish, constrained only by the impersonal pressures of the marketplace. This conception of neutrality among different points of view is the government's first commitment. 
The third idea is that we should not limit the principle of free expression to political speech, or to expression with a self-conscious political component. It is extremely difficult to distinguish between political and nonpolitical speech. Any such distinction is likely to reflect illegitimate partisan politics.' 6 Thus the free speech principle extends to more than self-conscious efforts to contribute to democratic deliberation. It extends equally to sexually explicit speech, music, art, and commercial speech. Under this view, the First Amendment sets out a principle not limited to its particular historical wellsprings. "Speech," in the First Amendment, means all speech. 
The final idea is that any restrictions on speech, once permitted, have a sinister and inevitable tendency to expand. Principled limits on government are hard to articulate; to allow one kind of restriction is in practice to allow many other kinds as well. "Slippery slope" arguments therefore deserve a prominent place in the theory of free expression. As far as possible, "balancing" ought to ,b See Section II. 
,e See Steven H. Shiffrin, The First Amendment, Democracy, and Romance 48-53 (Harvard, 1990). play no role in free speech law. Judges should not uphold restrictions on speech simply because the government seems to have good reasons for the restriction in the particular case. They must protect against the likely effect of the decision on future government action. 
In the past quarter-century these four principles have commanded enormous respect. The press insisted on them with special enthusiasm. It was joined by many teachers in law schools and political science departments, and by numerous litigators, most notably the American Civil Liberties Union. 
One can easily identify the components of the opposing position. 7 On this view, balancing is an inevitable part of a sensible system of free expression, and "reasonable regulation" should be upheld. The meaning of the First Amendment should be determined by reference to its history, in particular by reference to the relatively limited aims of the Framers and the complexities of the Supreme Court's own precedents. Certain categories of speech-advocacy of crime, especially dangerous speech, commercial speech, hate speech, sexually explicit speech, and libel-fall outside the First Amendment altogether. The government, according to this view, plays a role in maintaining a civilized society. This means that it may guard, for example, against the degradation produced by obscenity or the risks posed by speech advocating overthrow of the government. Large-scale neutrality makes no sense. 
From the perspective of the 1990s, it may be hard to remember the vigor and tenacity with which the opposing camps struggled over their respective positions. The basic commitments of the absolutist view are now cliches, even dogma. Despite that view's novelty and the lack of direct historical support on its behalf, it has won a dramatic number of victories in the Supreme Court. This is so especially with restrictions of speech on the basis of its content, where special scrutiny is now routine, except in quite narrow categories of excluded speech.18 Thus constitutional protection has been accorded to most commercial speech; to most sexually explicit speech; to many kinds of libel; to publication of the names of rape victims; to the advocacy of crime, even of violent overthrow of the government; to large expenditures on electoral campaigns; to ' Much of this is stated in Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind L J 1, 21-22 (1971). 
"sContent-neutral restrictions are of course subject to a form of balancing. See generally Geoffrey R. Stone, Content-NeutralRestrictions, 54 U Chi L Rev 46, 48-50 (1987). corporate speech; in all likelihood to hate speech; and of course to flag burning. 9 
It is not an overstatement to say that, taken all together, these developments have revolutionized the law of free expression. For many, the new law is an occasion for a sense of triumph and, perhaps, a belief that the principal difficulties with First Amendment law have been solved. The remaining problems are thought to be ones of applying hard-won doctrinal wisdom to ever-present threats of censorship. 
In the last decade, however, the commitments that emerged from the last generation of free speech law have come under extremely severe strain. Emerging controversies have appeared over such issues as campaign finance regulation, hate speech, "dial-aporn," the securities laws, scientific speech, nude dancing, commercial advertising, selective funding of expression, pornography, and regulation designed to produce quality and diversity in broadcasting. With these developments, previous alliances have come apart. Sometimes the new disputes seem to resurrect the belief in "reasonable regulation." Often they draw one or more of the four basic commitments of the absolutists into sharp question. 
The ironies in all this are abundant. The new coalitions have spurred plausible arguments of hypocrisy, with free speech advocates claiming that the new challengers abandoned the liberal commitment to free speech as soon as the commitment became inconvenient, or required protection for unpopular causes. Indeed, it has been charged that, for many, the commitment to free speech stands revealed as contingent and convenient, and not principled at all. 
On the other hand, the enthusiasm for broad application of free speech principles to the new settings is ironic as well. The constitutional protection accorded to commercial speech, for example, is relatively new. Justices Douglas and Black,20 probably the most vigorous advocates of free expression in the history of the Court, rejected protection for commercial speech, as did many others. The notion that the First Amendment protects libel of ethnic groups, or " Virginia Board of Pharmacy v Virginia Citizens Consumer Council, 425 US 748, 770 (1976) (commercial speech); New York Times Co. v Sullivan, 376 US 254, 265-66 (1964) (libel); FloridaStar v BJF,491 US 524, 533-34 (1989) (names of rape victims); Brandenburg v Ohio, 395 US 444, 447-48 (1969) (advocacy of illegality); Buckley v Valeo, 424 US 1, 22-23 (1976) (campaign expenditures); First NationalBank of Boston v Bellotti, 435 US 765, 776 (1978) (corporate speech); Miller v California,413 US 15 (1973) (obscenity); Texas v Johnson, 491 US 397 (1989) (flag-burning). 
20 See Valentine v Chrestensen, 316 US 52, 54-55 (1942). hate speech, is a quite modern development, if it is a development at all. Until recently, no one thought that the First Amendment cast any doubt on the securities laws. Until the last few decades, the states had very broad authority to regulate sexually explicit material. And the interaction of the free speech principle with campaign spending and broadcasting surely raises complex and novel issues. 
Under these circumstances, it seems peculiar to insist that any regulatory efforts in these areas will endanger "the First Amendment" or inevitably pave the way toward more general incursions on speech. Insistence on the protection of all words seems especially odd when it is urged by those who otherwise proclaim the need for judicial restraint, for the freeing up of democratic processes from constitutional compulsion, and for close attention to history. These ideas would seem to argue most powerfully against reflexive invocation of the First Amendment. 
Current law, then, faces a new set of constitutional problems, raising issues that have shattered old alliances and that promise to generate new understandings of the problem of freedom of expression. In this Article, I propose and evaluate two responses to the current state of affairs. The two responses have the same source. That source is the distinctive American contribution to the theory of sovereignty. 
The first proposal calls for a New Deal with respect to speech. It applies much of the reasoning of the New Deal attack on the common law to current questions of First Amendment law. Such an approach would produce significant changes in existing understandings of the nature of the free speech guarantee. It would call for a large-scale revision in our view of when a law "abridges" the freedom of speech. At a minimum, it would insist that many imaginable democratic interferences with the autonomy of broadcasters or newspapers are not "abridgements" at all. The New Deal for speech would also argue that such autonomy, because it is guaranteed by law, is itself sometimes an abridgement. I believe that there is much to be said in favor of this approach, and in certain, well-defined settings, it should be accepted. 
The second proposal is less dramatic. It proclaims that the First Amendment is best understood by reference to the democratic process. The overriding goal of the amendment, rightly perceived, is to protect politics from government. This view would clarify a number of current controversies without fundamentally changing existing law. I conclude that this approach should also be adopted, notwithstanding the likely apprehension from those accustomed to "slippery slope" arguments in the First Amendment context. 
Ultimately, I argue that an insistence that the First Amendment is fundamentally aimed at protecting democratic self-government, combined with modest steps in favor of a New Deal for speech, would resolve most of the current problems in free speech law without seriously compromising the First Amendment or any other important social values. But in order to reach this conclusion, it will be necessary to abandon, or at least qualify, the basic principles that have dominated judicial and academic thinking about speech in the last generation. 
A NEW 
DEAL FOR SPEECH? 
Perhaps we need a New Deal for speech, one that would parallel what the New Deal provided to property rights during the 1930s, and that would be rooted in substantially similar concerns." A brief review follows. 
2 Something of this general sort is suggested in Onora O'Neill, Practicesof Toleration, in Judith Lichtenberg, ed, Democracy and the Mass Media 155 (Cambridge, 1990); Thomas M. Scanlon, Jr., Content Regulation Reconsidered,in id at 331; Owen M. Fiss, Free Speech and Social Structure,71 Iowa L Rev 1405 (1986); Owen M. Fiss, Why the State?, 100 Harv L Rev 781 (1987); J.M. Balkin, Some Realism About Pluralism:Legal Realist Approaches to the FirstAmendment, 1990 Duke L J 375. For reasons suggested below, I do not go so far as Fiss in this direction; my treatment overlaps with the approach outlined in O'Neill, Scanlon, and Balkin. 
Many of the concerns expressed here were set out long ago in The Commission on Freedom of the Press, A Free and Responsible Press (Chicago, 1947). That Commission, headed by Robert Hutchins and Zechariah Chafee, Jr., included among its members John Dickinson, Harold Lasswell, Archibald MacLeish, Charles Merriam, Reinhold Niebuhr, and Arthur Schlesinger. It did not recommend legal remedies for the current situation, but it suggested the need for private measures to control novel problems. 
The press has been transformed into an enormous and complicated piece of machinery. As a necessary accompaniment, it has become big business.... The right of free public expression has therefore lost its earlier reality. Protection against government is now not enough to guarantee that a man who has something to say shall have a chance to say it. The owners and managers of the press determine which persons, which facts, which versions of the facts, and which ideas shall reach the public. 
Id at 15-16. For a recent statement to similar effect, see James S. Fishkin, Democracy and Deliberation:New Directionsfor DemocraticReform 33 (Yale, 1991): [T]he system of free expression cannot be evaluated merely in terms of whether some positions are forcibly suppressed. Crucial voices may fail to achieve an effective hearing without the need to silence any of them. In a modern, technologically complex society, access to the mass media is a necessary condition for a voice to contribute to the national political debate. Unless the media permit the full range of views that have a significant following in the society to get access to the media on issues of intense inter 
Before the New Deal, the Constitution was often understood as a constraint on government "regulation." In practice, this meant that the Constitution was often invoked to prohibit governmental interference with existing distributions of rights and entitlements.2 Hence minimum wage and maximum hour laws were seen as unjustifiable exactions-takings-from employers for the benefit of employees and the public at large.23 The Due Process Clause insulated private arrangements from public control, especially if the government's goals were paternalistic or redistributive. In operating under the police power, government must be neutral in general, and between employers and employees in particular. A violation of the neutrality requirement, thus understood, would count as a violation of the Constitution. 
On the pre-New Deal view, existing distributions marked the boundary not only between neutrality and partisanship, but between inaction and action as well. Government inaction consisted of respect for existing distributions. Government action was understood as interference with them. The rallying cry "laissez-faire" embodied such ideas. The fear of, and more important, the very conception of "government intervention" captured this basic approach. 
The New Deal reformers argued that this entire framework was built on fictions. Their response is captured in President Roosevelt's references to "this man-made world of ours '24 and his insistence that "we must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human beings. '25 The pre-New Deal framework treated the existing distribution of resources and opportunities as prepolitical, when in fact it was not. It saw minimum wage and maximum hour laws as introducing government into a private or voluntary sphere. But the New Dealers est to proponents of those views, then the full realization of political equality has fallen short. 
2 Two qualifications are necessary. First, redistribution through taxation-most notably by way of the poor laws and other welfare measures-was permissible. Second, some forms of regulation were permissible even if they had redistributive features. The "police power," for example, extended to protection of workers' health, although the Court was sometimes skeptical that a health justification was plausible. See, for example, Lochner v New York, 198 US 45, 57-58 (1905). 
23 See Adkins v Children'sHospital,261 US 525, 558 (1923); Lochner, 198 US at 57-58. Of course minimum wage and maximum hour legislation has complex redistributive conse-. quences; it does not simply transfer resources from employers to employees. 
2 Franklin D. Roosevelt, Message to Congress, June 8, 1934, reprinted in Robert B. Stevens, ed, Statutory History of the United States: Income Security 61 (Chelsea House, 1970). 
2 1 The PublicPapersof FranklinD. Roosevelt 657 (Russell & Russell, 1938). pointed out that this sphere was actually a creation of law. Rules of property, contract, and tort produced the set of entitlements that ultimately yielded market hours and wages.2" 
To New Deal reformers, the very categories of "regulation" and "government intervention" seemed misleading. The government did not "act" only when it disturbed existing distributions. It was responsible for those distributions in the first instance. What people owned in markets was a function of the entitlements that the law conferred on them. The notion of "laissez-faire" thus stood revealed as a conspicuous fiction. 
To the extent that property rights played a role in market arrangements-as they inevitably did-those arrangements were a creature of positive law, including, most notably, property law, which gave some people a right to exclude others from "their" land and resources. On this view, market wages were a result of legal rules conferring rights of ownership on certain groups. Rather than superimposing regulation on a realm of purely voluntary interactions, minimum wage laws substituted one form of regulation for another. 
The fact that an existing distribution is not natural or prepolitical provides no argument against it.28 When one regulatory system is superimposed on another, it is not true that all bets are off, or that we cannot evaluate them in constitutional terms, or for their ability to diminish or to increase human liberty, or other things we value. Here the New Deal reformers were often too cava20 Nothing said here denies that people often work for what they have. They acquire property independently of legal rules, in the sense that their own effort contributes to getting them whatever they have. While legal rules create preconditions for acquiring property and may help along the way, they do not operate in a vacuum from individual initiative. In this sense, the existing distribution of resources and opportunities is emphatically not simply the creation of law; it is instead a result of a complex interaction between law and many other things, including individual effort. The New Dealers did not deny these propositions. 
27 Dewey, 11 Later Works at 291 (cited in note 2). Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines, An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation (Oxford, 1981), is a striking contemporary illustration of similar ideas. Sen demonstrates that famines are not only or always a result of a decrease in the supply of food. Instead, they are a result of social choices, prominent among them legal ones, deciding who is entitled to what. Sen notes: 
Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance. 
Id at 165-66. This claim can be understood as a special case of the New Deal understanding of "laissez-faire." 
"' See John Stuart Mill, On Liberty and Other Essays 182 (MacMillan, 1926) ("conformity to nature, has no connection whatever with right and wrong"). lier.2 9 A system of private property is a construct of the state, but it is also an important individual and collective good. In general, a market system-for property or for speech-promotes both liberty and prosperity, and its inevitable origins in law do not undermine that fact. 
To their basic point, then, the New Dealers added a claim that existing distributions were sometimes inefficient or unjust.3 0 Different forms of governmental ordering had to be evaluated pragmatically and in terms of their consequences for social efficiency and social justice. The fact that markets are a creature of law meant not that they were impermissible, but that they would be assessed in terms of what they did on behalf of the human beings subject to them. Markets would not be identified with liberty in an a priori way; they would have to be evaluated through an examination of whether they served liberty or not. 
The New Dealers were not socialists; they generally appreciated the contributions of markets to prosperity and freedom.3 1 At the very least, however, a democratic judgment that markets constrained liberty-embodied in a law calling for maximum hours or minimum wages-was plausible and entitled to judicial respect. B. 
These ideas have played little role in the law of free speech. For purposes of speech, contemporary understandings of neutrality 29 There are many contemporary analogues. See, for example, Allan C. Hutchinson, The Three "R's" Reading/Rorty/Radically,103 Harv L Rev 555, 558-63 (1989) (apparently arguing that contingency is a reason for change); Anthony E. Cook, Beyond CriticalLegal Studies: The Reconstructive Theology of Dr.Martin Luther King, Jr., 103 Harv L Rev 985, 990-91 (1990) (same). 
Compare the following statement, very much in the spirit of the New Deal, in Morris R. Cohen, Propertyand Sovereignty, 13 Cornell L Q 8, 14 (1927): [T]he recognition of private property as a form of sovereignty is not itself an argument against it. Some form of government we must always have.... At any rate it is necessary to apply to the law of property all those considerations of social ethics and enlightened public policy which ought to be brought to the discussion of any just form of government. 
3 Compare Robert L. Hale, Coercion and Distributionin a Supposedly Noncoercive State, 38 Pol Sci Q 470, 471-74 (1923), who rightly draws attention to coercive characteristics in the law of property, but assumes that this insight establishes more than it does. Regulatory interference with market arrangements does not disturb an otherwise prepolitical status quo, but it may produce inefficiency and unfairness. A good deal of theoretical and empirical work is necessary to assess any particular interference. Of course many of the New Deal reforms produced unanticipated adverse consequences. 
31 Not always, though, and not enough. See especially the enthusiasm for cartels in the "first" New Deal, discussed in Ellis W. Hawley, The New Deal and the Problem of Monopoly 270-80 (Princeton, 1966). and partisanship, or government action and inaction, are identical to those that predate the New Deal.2 
One response to the recent First Amendment controversies would be to suggest that they confirm the wisdom of the New Deal reformation on this score. On this view, American constitutionalism, with respect to freedom of expression, has failed precisely to the extent that it has not taken that reformation seriously enough. I do not mean to suggest that speech rights should be freely subject to political determination, as are current issues of occupational safety and health, for example. I do not mean to suggest that markets in speech are generally abridgements of speech, or that they usually disserve the First Amendment. I do mean to say that in some circumstances, what seems to be government regulation of speech actually might promote free speech, and should not be treated as an abridgement at all. I mean also to argue, though more hesitantly, that what seems to be free speech in markets might, in some selected circumstances, amount to an abridgement of free speech. 
A general clarification is necessary at the outset. It will be tempting to think that the argument to follow amounts to a broad and puzzling plea for "more regulation" of speech. Many of the practices and conditions I will challenge are commonly taken to involve private action, and not to implicate the Constitution at all. We generally treat the practices of broadcasters and managers of newspapers as raising no constitutional question; it is "regulation" of "the market" that is'problematic. In fact there should be enthusiastic agreement-for reasons of both text and principle 33-that the First Amendment is aimed only at governmental action, and that private conduct raises no constitutional question. The behavior of private broadcasters by itself poses no legal problem. It seems clear too that to find a constitutional violation, one needs to show that governmental action has "abridged the freedom of speech." That action must take the form of a law, a regulation, or behavior by a government official. 
32The major qualification is the remarkable decision in Red Lion BroadcastingCo. v FCC, 395 US 367, 390, 393-94 (1969), in which the Court upheld the fairness doctrine against First Amendment attack. See text accompanying notes 49-53. 
33The text of course says that "Congress" shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech, and the Fourteenth Amendment, taken to incorporate the First, applies its proscriptions to "states." In principle, the limitation of the Constitution to state action has the salutary consequence of helping to constitute and free up a private sphere from legal disabilities. See text accompanying notes 33-34 (discussing what counts as the private sphere). 
But if the lesson of the New Deal is taken seriously, it follows, not that the requirement of state action is unintelligible or incoherent, but that governmental rules lie behind the exercise of rights of property, contract, and tort, especially insofar as common law rules grant people rights of exclusive ownership and use of property. From this it does not follow that private acts are subject to constitutional constraint, or even that legally-conferred rights of exclusive ownership violate any constitutional provision. To repeat: The acts of private broadcasters raise no First Amendment issue. Private acts exist; they are not subject to the First Amendment. 
To find a constitutional violation, it is necessary to identify some exercise of public power, and to show that it has compromised some constitutional principle. But property law always lies behind markets. Displacement of property law may be constitutional. New efforts to promote greater quality and diversity in broadcasting, for example, are claims for a new regulatory regime, not for "government intervention" where none existed before. And property law might itself violate the First Amendment. 
Another clarification is in order. I have suggested that legal rules lie behind private behavior, and it will be tempting to think that this suggestion dissolves the state action limitation. If private exclusion of speech is made possible by law, does it not turn out that the First Amendment invalidates private behavior after all? Is not all private action therefore state action? The answer is that it is not. A private university, expelling students for (say) racist speech, is not a state actor. The trespass law, which helps the expulsion to be effective, is indeed state action. The distinction matters a great deal. The trespass law, invoked in this context, is a content-neutral regulation of speech in a place that is not plausibly a public forum. This regulation does not violate the First Amendment. By contrast, the behavior of the university is content-based, and if engaged in by a public official, would indeed violate the First Amendment. We always need to identify the exercise of public power. Without it, there is no free speech issue, even on the New Deal view. And such power, when identified, often raises no serious constitutional issue when it takes the content-neutral form of protecting ownership rights. 
What I want to suggest here is, first and foremost, that legal rules that are designed to promote freedom of speech and that interfere with other legal rules-those of the common law-should not be invalidated if their purposes and effects are constitutionally valid. It may also follow that common law rules are themselves subject to constitutional objection if and when such rules "abridge the freedom of speech" by preventing people from speaking at certain times and in certain places. 
For the moment, these general proposals must remain abstract; I will particularize them below. And while the proposals might seem unconventional, they have a clear foundation in no lesser place than New York Times Co. v Sullivan3,4 one of the defining cases of modern free speech law. There the Court held that a public official could not bring an action for libel unless he could show "actual malice," defined as knowledge of or reckless indifference to the falsity of the statements at issue.3 5 The Sullivan case is usually taken as the symbol of broad press immunity with respect to criticism of public officials. More importantly, observers often understand Sullivan to reflect Alexander Meiklejohn's conception of freedom of expression36-a conception of self-government connected to the American conception of sovereignty and built on the need to ensure that the government does not inhibit political expression. 
It is striking that in Sullivan, the lower court held that the common law of tort, and more particularly libel, was not state action at all, and was therefore entirely immune from constitutional constraint.3 7 A civil action, on this view, involves a purely private dispute. The Supreme Court quickly disposed of this objection. The use of public tribunals to punish speech is conspicuously state action.38 What is interesting is not the Supreme Court's rejection of the argument, but the fact that the argument could even be made by a state supreme court as late as the 1960s. How could reasonable judges perceive the rules of tort law as purely private? 
The answer lies in the persistence of the pre-New Deal understanding that the common law simply implements existing rights or private desires, and does not amount to "intervention" or "action" at all. The view that the common law of property should be taken as prepolitical and just, and as a refusal to use government power-the view that the New Deal repudiated-was the same as 3' 376 US 254 (1964). "5Id at 280, 283. 
36 See Meiklejohn, Free Speech and its Relation to Self-Government at 14-19, 22-27 (cited in note 1). The link is made explicitly in William J. Brennan, Jr., The Supreme Court and the Meiklejohn Interpretationof the First Amendment, 79 Harv L Rev 1, 12-14, 19 (1965). 
" New York Times Co. v Sullivan, 144 S2d 25, 40 (Ala 1962). It is notable that in Sullivan, the government was not a party-something that distinguishes the case from most others in which First Amendment objections have been raised. But to see this as meaning that there is no state action is simply another version of the problem discussed in the text. 38 Sullivan, 376 US at 265. the view of the state supreme court in Sullivan. Reputation, after all, is a property interest. Just as in the pre-New Deal era, the state supreme court did not see the protection of that interest as involving government action at all. 
The Supreme Court's rejection of that claim seemed inevitable in Sullivan, and this aspect of the case is largely forgotten. But courts base much of current law on precisely the forgotten view of that obscure state court. We might even generalize from Sullivan the broad idea that courts must always assess the protection of property rights through the common law pragmatically, in terms of its effects on speech.3 9 
Consider, for example, the issues raised by a claimed right of access to the media. Suppose that most broadcasters deal little or not at all with issues of public importance, restricting themselves to stories about movie stars or sex scandals. Suppose too that there is no real diversity of view on the airwaves, but instead a bland, watered-down version of conventional morality. If so, a severe problem for the system of free expression is the governmental grant of legal protection-rights of exclusive use-to enormous institutions compromising Madisonian values. Courts usually do not see that grant of power-sometimes made through the common law, sometimes through statute-as a grant of power at all, but instead treat it as purely "private." Thus the exclusion of people and views from the airwaves is immunized from constitutional constraint, on the theory that the act of exclusion is purely private. By " See O'Neill, Practices of Toleration at 177-78 (cited in note 21). [N]o society can institutionalize zero-regulation of public discourse. The choice can only be between differing patterns of regulation. ... No society can guarantee that all communicators will be able to express every possible content in every possible context. Supposed attempts to do this by laissez-faire communications policies merely assign the regulation of communication to nonstate powers. They secure a particular configuration of freedom of expression, which may leave some unable to find their voices and does not guarantee the expression of diverse views. A better and less abstract aim for a democratic society is a set of practices that enables a wide range of communication, especially of public communication, for all. 
There is a difference between Sullivan and the cases that follow. In Sullivan, the property right was not asserted by someone who was simultaneously speaker and owner. In cases that involve a claimed right of access to the media, the ownership right that prevents others from speaking is held by someone who is himself expressing something. But it is unclear why this difference should be decisive. The question is whether the legal vindication of the property right is constitutionally acceptable. 
Note also that the shopping center cases, see notes 117-19, really are close to Sullivan, for they too involve the use of a property interest protected at common law to stop speech. The only differences are that (a) libel law is content-based, as property law is not, and (b) libel law is aimed particularly at speech whereas property law allows the exclusion of everyone, whether a speaker or not. contrast, rights of access to the media are thought to involve governmental intervention into the private sphere.40 
In Sullivan, the Supreme Court said, as against a similar claim, that courts should inspect common law rules for their conformity with the principle that government may not restrict freedoms of speech and press. "The test is not the form in which state ppoowweerr hhaass inbefeanct abpepelniedexebructis,edw."h'a41tever the form, whether such 
We can apply this understanding to current problems. If we regard the First Amendment as an effort to ensure that people are not prevented from speaking, especially on issues of public importance, then current free speech law seems ill-adapted to current conditions. Above all, the conception of government "regulation" misstates certain issues and sometimes disserves the goal of free expression itself. Some regulatory efforts, superimposed on the established regulation through common law rules, may promote free speech. Less frequently, the use of statutory or common law rules to foreclose efforts to speak might themselves represent impermissible content-neutral restrictions on speech. We must judge both reform efforts and the status quo by their consequences, not by question-begging characterizations of "threats from government." 
It is tempting to understand this argument as a suggestion that the New Dealers were concerned about private power over working conditions, and that modern courts should take more interest in the existence of private power over expression or over democratic processes.42 But this formulation misses the real point, and does so in a way that suggests its own dependence on pre-New Deal understandings. The problem is not that private power is an obstacle to speech; even if it is, private power is not a subject of the First Amendment. Nor would it be accurate to say that employer power was the true concern for the New Dealers. The real problem is that public authority creates legal structures that restrict speech, that new exercises of public authority can counter the existing restrictions, and that any restrictions, even those of the common law, must be assessed under constitutional principles precisely because they are restrictions. 
Consider, for example, a case in which the owners of a large shopping center exclude from their property war protestors who 40 See text accompanying notes 56-57. 4" Sullivan, 376 US at 265. 
42 It is sometimes so argued. See David Strauss, Persuasion,Autonomy, and Freedom of Expression,91 Colum L Rev 334, 361-68 (1991). believe that the center is the best place to draw attention to their cause. The Supreme Court has said that the situation does not implicate the First Amendment, since it does not involve government regulation of speech. Private property owners have simply barred people from their land.43 
In fact, this is a poor way to understand the situation; it was the state court's view in Sullivan. The owners of the shopping center may exclude the protestors only because government has conferred on them a legal right to do so. The conferral of that right is an exercise of state power. It is this action that restricts the speech of the protestors. Surely it is a real question whether the grant of exclusionary power violates the First Amendment, at least in circumstances in which it eliminates the only feasible way of making a protest visible to members of a community. 
Or consider a case in which a network decides not to sell advertising time to a group that wants to discuss some public issue or to express some dissident view. Under current law, the refusal raises no First Amendment question, in part because a number of the justices-perhaps now a majority-believe that there is no "state action."44 But government gives broadcasters property rights in their licenses, and their exercise of those rights is a function of law in no subtle sense. It is generally salutary to have a system in which government creates ownership rights or markets in speech, just as in property. The point is not that markets are bad, but that a right of exclusive ownership in a television network is governmentally conferred. The exclusion of the would-be speakers is made possible by the law of civil and criminal trespass, among other things. It is thus a product of a governmental decision. 
certain views is a creation of law. The questions are ( reform efforts eliminating adverse effects of exclusive ownership rights by conditioning the original grant are consistent with the First Amendment, or (2) whether the government grant of exclusive ownership rights itself violates the First Amendment. We cannot answer such questions by saying that ownership rights are governmental; we need to know the purposes and effects of the grant. 
" Lloyd Corp. v Tanner, 407 US 551, 570 (1972); Hudgens v NLRB, 424 US 507, 51921 (1976). 
11 CBS, Inc. v Democratic National Committee, 412 US 94 (1973). There only three Justices said that there was no state action. Id at 114-210. But those three justices may now represent the majority view. See FlaggBros., Inc. v Brooks, 436 US 149, 163 (1978). And we cannot answer that question a priori or in the abstract; we need to know a lot of details. 
One might respond that the Constitution creates "negative" rights rather than "positive" ones, or at least that the First Amendment is "negative" in character, granting a right to protection against the government, not to subsidies from the government. The claim certainly captures the conventional wisdom, and an argument for a New Deal for speech must come to terms with it. 
There are two responses. First, and most fundamentally, no one is asserting a positive right in these cases. Instead, the claim is that government sometimes cannot adopt a content-neutral rule that imposes a (negative) constraint on who can speak and where they can do so. When someone with view X cannot speak on the networks, it is because the civil and criminal law prohibits him from doing so. This is the same problem that underlies a wide range of familiar claims in content-neutral cases. Consider a ban on door-to-door soliciting. An attack on content-neutral restrictions is not an argument for "positive" government protection. It is merely a claim that courts must review legal rules stopping certain people from speaking in certain places under First Amendment principles. In fact the response that a New Deal for speech would create a "positive right" trades on untenable, Lochner era distinctions between positive and negative rights.45 
The second response is that the distinction between negative and positive rights fails to explain even current First Amendment law.46 There are two obvious counterexamples. The Supreme Court has come very close to saying that when an audience becomes hostile and threatening, the government is obligated to protect the speaker. Under current law, reasonable crowd control measures are probably constitutionally compelled, even if the result is to require '5To say this is not to say that the distinction itself is untenable. We can understand a positive right as one that requires for its existence some act by government and a negative right as one that amounts merely to an objection to some such act. There is nothing incoherent about this distinction. I argue here against the view that an objection to rights of exclusive ownership is a call for a positive right. In fact that objection is mounted against something that government is actually doing, and is therefore about a negative right. See generally, Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Issue of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295, 304-15 (1991) (arguing that property law invades negative rights of the homeless). 
46 It also fails to explain constitutional law in general. The Eminent Domain Clause creates a positive right to governmental protection of property. The Contracts Clause creates a right to governmental protection of contractual agreements. In both cases, the Constitution is violated by a governmental withdrawal from the scene. public "from time immemorial"; here the public has earned a kind of First Amendment easement. Courts will uphold reasonable regulations, but government cannot eliminate the basic right of access. The same rules apply to other areas if they have been "dedicated" to the public, that is, if the state has generally opened them for expressive activities. But still other areas-and this is a very large category-need not be open at all. Courts will uphold any restrictions so long as they are minimally rational. 
This system turns on common law rules. It gives access if the area has been "dedicated," by tradition or practice, for public access, and this determination is based on whether, at common law, the area in question was held open.'21 In a period in which streets and parks were principal places for communicative activity, this historical test was sensible functionally. It well served the goal of the public forum doctrine, which was the creation of access rights to places where such rights were most effective and crucial. 
The streets and parks no longer carry out their common law roles. Other areas-mailboxes, airports, train stations, broadcasting stations-are the modern equivalents of streets and parks. It is here that current doctrine is ill-suited to current needs. To keep the streets and parks open is surely important, but it is not enough to allow broadly diverse views to reach the public. For this reason the Court should abandon the common law test and look instead to whether the government has sufficiently strong and neutral reasons for foreclosing access to the property.'22 Certainly airports and train stations should be open to communicative efforts. 
We would also need to reassess the distinction between content-based and content-neutral restrictions on speech-the most central distinction in contemporary free speech law. 
Under current law, the Court views with considerable skepticism any law that makes the content of speech relevant to restriction. If, for example, Congress tries to prevent speech dealing with a war from appearing on billboards, it is probably acting unconstitutionally. By contrast, if Congress bars all speech on billboards, courts will subject the measure to a balancing test, because this type of restriction on speech is content-neutral. It does not skew "I See Davis v Massachusetts, 167 US 43, 47-48 (1897), where this idea is explicit. 122 Grayned v Rockford, 408 US 104, 115-18 (1972). the thinking process of the community, and it is unlikely to reflect an impermissible governmental motivation. 12 3 
There is a great deal to be said in favor of this conception of neutrality. 124 In certain respects, however, it reproduces the framework of the Lochner era. It takes the market status quo as natural and just insofar as it bears on speech. It sees partisanship in government decisions to alter that status quo, and neutrality in decisions that basically respect it. But there may be no neutrality in use of the market status quo when the available opportunities are heavily dependent on wealth, on the common law framework of entitlements, and on the sorts of outlets for speech that are made available, and to whom. In other words, the very notions "contentneutral" and "content-based" seem to depend on taking the status quo as if it were preregulatory and unobjectionable. 
At least two things follow. The first is that many content-neutral laws have content-differential effects.12 5 They do so because they operate against a backdrop that is not prepolitical or just. In light of an unjust status quo, rules that are content-neutral can have severe adverse effects on some forms of speech. Greater scrutiny of content-neutral restrictions is therefore appropriate.'26 Above all, courts should attend to the possibility that seemingly neutral restrictions will have content-based effects. The government's refusal to allow Lafayette Park (across the street from the White House) to be used as a place for dramatizing the plight of the homeless 127 is a prominent example. 
Second, we should draw into question a familiar justification for skepticism about content-based regulation of speech. That justification is that such regulation "skews" the marketplace of ideas. ' This idea has two infirmities. First, we do not know what a well-functioning marketplace of ideas would look like. The preconditions of an economic marketplace can be specified by neoclassical economics; the same is not true for the preconditions of a system of free expression. 2 9 Second, the idea depends on taking the "marketplace" as unobjectionable in its current form. If it is already skewed, content-based regulation may be a corrective. It 123 Geoffrey R. Stone, Content Regulation and the First Amendment, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev 189, 202, 208-09, 217-18, 227-28 (1983). 
124 Id. 125 Id at 217-27. '2 See Stone, 54 U Chi L Rev at 82 (cited in note 18). 127 Clark, 468 US at 289, 295-99. 128 See Stone, 54 U Chi L Rev at 55 (cited in note 18). 129 See Strauss, 91 Colum L Rev at 349 (cited in note 42). would be exceptionally surprising if there were no such skewing. The point bears especially on the debate over pornography, where critics often say that the "preregulatory" status quo is in fact a regulatory system-one that is skewed in favor of sexual inequality. 3' 
In general, the existence of an unjust status quo is not a good reason to allow content regulation. For one thing, any inquiry into the speech status quo is probably beyond governmental capacity. There is a serious risk that judicial or legislative decisions about the relative power of various groups, and about to whom redistribution is owed, will be biased or unreliable. Judgments about who is powerful and who is not must refer to some highly controversial baseline. The resulting judgments are not easily subject to governmental administration. Indeed, government will inevitably be operating with its own biases, and those biases will affect any regulatory strategy. This risk seems unacceptable when speech is at stake. 
What is distinctive about regulation of speech is that such regulation forecloses the channels of change; it prevents other views from being presented at all. Instead of allowing restrictions, we should encourage efforts to promote a better status quo. 3 ' I have discussed some of these in connection with the broadcasting market. 
Finally, it would be necessary to reemphasize that there are limits on government's power to affect deliberative processes through the use of government funds. On this point, it is exceptionally hard to unpack the Court's cases. Some of these decisions suggest that when allocating funds, government cannot discriminate on the basis of point of view. It would follow that government could not allocate funds only to people who will speak in favor of a certain cause. Other cases draw a distinction between a "subsidy" and a "penalty," permitting government to refuse to subsidize speech, but prohibiting government from penalizing it. 
The Court's most recent decision suggests that so long as the government is using its own money and is not affecting "private" " See Catharine A. MacKinnon, FrancisBiddle's Sister: Pornography,Civil Rights and Speech, in MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified: Discourses on Life and Law 163-97 (Harvard, 1987). 
'1' Of course it is necessary to defend the characterization of any change as a "restriction." See Section II.B. expression, it can channel its funds however it wishes. The problem in Rust v Sullivan"' arose when the Department of Health and Human Services issued regulations banning federally funded family planning services from engaging in (a) counseling concerning, (b) referrals for, and (c) activities advocating abortion as a method of family planning. The plaintiffs claimed that these regulations violated the First Amendment, arguing that the regulations discriminated on the basis of point of view. 
The Court disagreed. In the key passage, it said, The Government can, without violating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encourage certain activities it believes to be in the public interest, without at the same time funding an alternate program which seeks to deal with the problem in another way. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other.133 In response to the claim that the regulations conditioned the receipt of a benefit on the relinquishment of a right, the Court said that "here the government is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply insisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized.' ' 3 4 
Rust seems to establish the important principle that government can allocate funds to private people to establish "a program" that accords with the government's preferred point of view. In fact the Court seems to make a sharp distinction between government coercion-entry into the private realm of markets and private interactions-and funding decisions. So made, this distinction replicates pre-New Deal understandings. But there is no fundamental distinction among the law that underlies markets, the law that represents disruption of markets, and the law that calls for funding '3, 111 S Ct 1759 (1991). "s Id at 1772. The Court added: To hold that the Government unconstitutionally discriminates on the basis of viewpoint when it chooses to fund a program dedicated to advancing certain permissible goals, because the program in advancing those goals necessarily discourages alternate goals, would render numerous government programs constitutionally suspect. When Congress established a National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles ... it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and Fascism. 
Id at 1773. 
3I Id at 1774. decisions. Courts must assess all of them in terms of their purposes and effects for free speech. 135 
Notwithstanding the apparent implications of Rust, it would be intolerable to say that government can target funds, or jobs, or licenses, or anything else that it owns only for speech with which it agrees. Suppose, for example, that the government decides to fund only those projects that speak favorably of Democrats. However government is acting, the First Amendment constrains the purposes for which government may act, and the effects of its actions. The notion that the First Amendment is directed only at criminal punishment or civil fines depends on an outmoded notion of what government does, and on a pre-New Deal understanding of "interference" with constitutional rights. A government decision to sponsor speech favorable to one or another party platform would run afoul of a central commitment of the First Amendment. 
For this reason funding decisions that discriminate on the basis of viewpoint are at least ordinarily impermissible. 1 6 The proposition that government may allocate funds however it chooses is rooted in anachronistic ideas about the relationship between the citizen and the state. It poses a genuine threat to free speech under modern conditions. 
A reformulation of First Amendment doctrine of this general sort has much to be said in its favor. Above all, such a reformulation would reinvigorate processes of democratic deliberation, by 13This is not to say that we should treat funding decisions the same as other decisions. From first principles, the development of constitutional limits on funding that affects speech raises exceedingly complex issues, and I restrict myself to a few observations here. A key feature of funding is that government must be selective in dispensing money, and the inevitability of selection means that certain judgments will be acceptable here that would not be acceptable elsewhere. With respect to the arts, for example, judgments involving esthetics and subject matter seem unavoidable. A more detailed discussion, of government funding of speech and the arts can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Why the Unconstitutional Conditions Doctrine is An Anachronism, 70 B U L Rev 593, 610-15 (1990). 
speech"-counseling-rather than public or political speech. Private speech is subject to more deferential scrutiny. See Connick v Myers, 461 US 138 (1983). (2) It involves the abortion context, where the government has a legitimate interest in protecting fetal life. See Maher v Roe, 432 US 464 (1977). (3) The speech restriction in Rust might be seen as ancillary to the prohibition on government funding of abortion. For these reasons we may doubt whether Rust will extend to viewpoint discrimination with respect to public, political speech; instead, it involved a limitation on a governmentally funded private counseling program. ensuring greater attention to public issues and greater diversity of treatment of those issues. 
Some qualifications are necessary here. A system of markets in speech-surrounded by the law of property, contract, and tort-has major advantages over other forms of regulation. Such systems are content-neutral, at least on their face. This is an important point, above all because in markets, no government official is authorized to decide, in particular cases, who will be allowed to speak. There is no need to emphasize the risk of bias when government decides that issue. 
In addition, markets are highly decentralized. With respect to both the print and electronic media, there are numerous outlets. Someone unable to find space in the New York Times or on CBS may well be able to find space elsewhere. A great advantage of a market system is that other outlets generally remain available. At least some other forms of regulation do not have this salutary characteristic. In any case it is important to ensure that any regulation does not foreclose certain points of view. 
But our current system of free expression does not serve the Madisonian ideal. Free markets in expression are sometimes illadapted to the American revision of the principle of sovereignty. If we are to realize that principle, a New Deal for speech, of the sort outlined above, would be highly desirable.13 7 
"a There is no argument here that government may silence "the powerful" to protect "the powerless." Such a position would create a legitimate risk that judicial or legislative decisions about the relative power of various groups, and about who should receive redistribution, will be biased or unreliable. Judgments about who is powerful and who is not must refer to some baseline. That baseline will of course be politically contested. When the powerful are free to redistribute speech, it is likely they will distribute it in ways that advantage them. The resulting judgments are not easily subject to governmental administration. This risk seems unacceptable. 
Moreover, we should regard a decision to silence the views of the powerful as an objectionable interference with freedom, even if it might promote the goal of equality. Well-off people might not have any strong claim of right to distributions of wealth and property that the common law grants them; but surely they have a right to complain if they are silenced. It is obvious that what they have to say may turn out to be correct, may spur better approaches to current problems, or may add a great deal to the debate simply by virtue of the reasons offered by those who respond. 
These are the most conventional Millian arguments for the distinctiveness of speech. See Mill, On Liberty at 20-21 (cited in note 28). They do not apply to the recommendations set out here. These recommendations turn not on "power" or on "silencing the powerful," but on the application of First Amendment scrutiny to all legal rules. 
AN ALTERNATIVE PROPOSAL: THE PRIMACY OF POLITICS Instead of or in addition to renovating the free speech tradition in this way, we might offer a more cautious proposal. The most fundamental step would involve an insistence on the original idea that the First Amendment is principally about political deliberation. 3'8 The fact that words or pictures are involved is not, standing by itself, a sufficient reason for full constitutional protection. Bribery, criminal solicitation, threats, conspiracies, perjury-all these are words, but they are not by virtue of that fact entitled to the highest level of constitutional protection. They may be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing. of harm than is required for political speech.1 39 They are not entirely without constitutional protection-they count as "speech"-but they do not lie within the core of the free speech guarantee.140 
In order to defend this proposal, we must explore whether there should be a two-tier First Amendment. The view that some forms of speech are less protected than others is frequently met with alarm. Notwithstanding its controversial character, this view derives strong support from existing law. Indeed every Justice has expressed some such view within the last generation. 
' See Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government at 94 (cited in note 1): 
The guarantee given by the First Amendment is not ... assured to all speaking. It is assured only to speech which bears, directly or indirectly, upon issues with which voters have to deal-only, therefore, to the considerations of matters of public interest. Private speech, or private interest in speech, on the other hand, has no claim whatever to the protection of the First Amendment. 
139Alexander Meiklejohn, the greatest philosopher of the First Amendment, was emphatic on the point, distinguishing between "a private right of speech which may on occasion be denied or limited, though such limitations may not be imposed unnecessarily or unequally" and "the unlimited guarantee of the freedom of public discussion." Id at 39. "There are, then, in the theory of the Constitution, two radically different kinds of utterances. The constitutional status of a merchant advertising his wares, of a paid lobbyist fighting for the advantage of his client, is utterly different from that of a citizen who is planning for the general welfare." Id. 
140 Here I depart from Meiklejohn, who believed that nonpolitical speech was not covered by the First Amendment at all. Much of the analysis in this section is devoted to an exploration of how to protect nonpolitical speech in a two-tier First Amendment. 
For example, the Supreme Court accords less than complete protection to commercial speech.14' It excludes obscenity from First Amendment protection altogether.'42 It treats libel of private persons quite differently from libel of people who are public figures. 43 The fact that the First Amendment does not protect conspiracies, purely verbal workplace harassment of individuals on the basis of race and sex, bribery, and threats appears to owe something to a distinction between political and nonpolitical speech. 
The Court has yet to offer a clear principle to unify the categories of speech that it treats as "low value." Indeed the apparent absence of a unifying principle is a source of continuing frustration to scholars of free speech law. But at least it seems clear that all the categories of low-value speech are nonpolitical."" 
Thus far, then, we see that the Supreme Court understands the First Amendment to have two tiers. But is a two-tier First Amendment inevitable, or desirable? It does indeed seem that any well-functioning system of free expression must ultimately distinguish between different kinds of speech by reference to their centrality to the First Amendment guarantee.'45 
For example, courts should not test regulation of campaign speeches under the same standards applied to misleading commercial speech, child pornography, conspiracies, libel of private persons, and threats. 46 If the same standards were applied, one of two results would follow, and both are unacceptable. 4 7 
The first possible result would be to lower the burden of justification for governmental regulation as a whole, so as to allow for restrictions on misleading commercial speech, private libel, and so forth. If this were the consequence, there would be an unaccept"' CentralHudson Gas v PublicService Commission of New York, 447 US 557, 562-63 (1980); Posadasde PuertoRico Associates v Tourism Co., 478 US 328, 340 (1986). ' Miller v California,413 US 15, 23 (1973) ("categorically settled"). 
113 Gertz v Robert Welch, Inc., 418 US 323, 342-48 (1974); see also Milkovich v Lorain JournalCo., 110 S Ct 2695, 2703-04 (1990). 
.. This is so at least in the sense that I understand the term "political" here. "' See Thomas M. Scanlon, Jr., Freedom of Expression and Categoriesof Expression, 40 U Pitt L Rev 519 (1979). 
Id at 537-39. 
147 It is tempting, and possible, to classify some speech as unprotected because it is "really" action. But this is unhelpful. Conspiracies and bribes are speech, not action. If they are to be treated as action-that is, if they are not to be protected-it is because of their distinctive features. This is what must be discussed. The word "action" is simply a placeholder for that unprovided discussion. ably high threat to political expression. A generally lowered burden of justification would therefore be intolerable. 
The second possible result is that courts would apply the properly stringent standards for regulation of political speech to commercial speech, private libel, and child pornography. The central problem with this approach is that it would mean that government could not control speech that should be regulated. A system in which the most stringent standards were applied across the board would mean that government could not regulate criminal solicitation, child pornography, private libel, and false or misleading commercial speech, among others. The harms that justify such regulation are real, but they are insufficient to permit government controls under the extremely high standards applied to regulation of political speech. If courts are to be honest about the matter, an insistence that "all speech is speech" would mean that they must eliminate many currently unobjectionable and even necessary controls-or more likely that judgments about value, because unavoidable, would continue to be made, but covertly. 
If courts must draw a distinction between low- and high-value expression, the many efforts to understand the First Amendment as a protection of "autonomy" may be doomed to failure.'48 Some have suggested, for example, that the free speech principle guards the autonomy of speakers or of listeners. 14 9 I must be tentative here, but it seems likely that any autonomy-based approach would make it difficult or impossible to distinguish between different categories of speech.' 50 Autonomy, taken in the abstract, seems to argue in favor of similar protection of all, or most, forms of speech.' 5 1 148 See Thomas Scanlon, A Theory of Freedom of Expression, 1 Phil & Pub Aff 204, 214-15 (1972); Strauss, 91 Colum L Rev at 353-60 (cited in note 42); Martin H. Redish, The Value of Free Speech, 130 U Pa L Rev 591, 625 (1982). Especially notable, it is for this reason that Scanlon revised his own earlier position, see Scanlon, 40 U Pitt L Rev at 533-34 (cited in note 145); See also Charles Fried, The New First Amendment Jurisprudence:A Threat to Liberty, 59 U Chi L Rev 225, 233 (1992). 
"4 Strauss, 91 Colum L Rev at 335-36 (cited in note 42). 
180It might be tempting to ask whether the speech in question is cognitive or affective, and to accord protection only to the former. Some of the Court's opinions can be so read. See, for example, Chaplinsky v New Hampshire, 315 US 568, 573-74 (1942). But such an approach would be unacceptable. It would disregard the fragility of the distinction between the affective and the cognitive; see Martha C. Nussbaum, Love's Knowledge, Essays on Philosophy and Literature291-97 (Oxford, 1990). There are important affective components of much political speech, or speech that is high-value by any measure; and many forms of speech accorded a lower-level of protection-like commercial speech and private libel-are surely cognitive. 
1' But see note 153. 
Moreover, an approach rooted in a norm of autonomy makes it difficult to understand what is special about speech. 5 2 Many acts, like most speech, serve the goal of autonomy as it is usually understood by advocates of an autonomy-based conception of the First Amendment. 5 3 If autonomy in the abstract is the principle, there appears to be nothing distinctive about speech to explain why it has been singled out for constitutional protection. An approach to the First Amendment that does not account for the distinctiveness of speech would be untrue to constitutional text and structure. 
We must still decide by what standard courts might accomplish the task of distinguishing between low-value and high-value speech. To support an emphasis on politics, we need to define the category of political speech. For present purposes I will treat speech as political when it is both intended and received as a contribution to public deliberation about some issue. It seems implausible to think that words warrant the highest form of protection if the speaker does not even intend to communicate a message; the First Amendment does not put gibberish at the core even if it is taken, by some in the audience, to mean something. 54 By requiring intent, I do not mean to require a trial on the question of subjective motivation. Generally this issue can be resolved simply on the basis of the nature of the speech at issue. By requiring that the speech be received as a contribution to public deliberation, I do not mean that all listeners or readers must see the substantive content. It is sufficient if some do. Many people miss the political message in some forms of political speech, especially art or literature. But if no one sees the political content, it is hard to understand why the speech should so qualify. 
Finally, the requirements are in the conjunctive, though in almost all cases speech that is intended as a contribution to public deliberation will be seen by some as such. The fact that speech is "5 Bork, 47 Ind L J at 25 (cited in note 17). 
133 It would be possible, however, to have a more refined conception of autonomy. Under such a conception, autonomy is not a right to say and do what you "want," but instead, to have the social preconditions for autonomy, understood as a form of self-mastery. This notion may well allow distinctions among different forms of speech. See C. Edwin Baker, Human Liberty and Freedom of Speech 37-46 (Oxford, 1989); Cass R. Sunstein, Preferencesand Politics,20 Phil & Pub Aff 3, 11-14 (1991). But it will be very hard to make this a principle for speech. 
I" See R. George Wright, A Rationalefrom J.S. Mill for the Free Speech Clause, 1985 S Ct Rev 149. so seen by some is insufficient if it is not so intended; consider, for example, commercial speech, obscenity, or private libel. If some people understand the speech in question to be a contribution to public deliberation, it cannot follow that the speech qualifies as such for constitutional purposes, without treating almost all speech as political and therefore destroying the whole point of the two-tier model. Of course the definition I have offered leaves many questions unanswered, and there will be hard intermediate cases. I offer it simply as a starting point for analysis. 
An approach that affords special protection to political speech, thus defined, is justified on numerous grounds. Such an approach receives firm support from history-not only from the Framers' theory of free expression, but also from the development of that principle through the history of American law. There can be little doubt that suppression by the government of political ideas that it disapproved, or found threatening, was the central motivation for the clause. The worst examples of unacceptable censorship involve efforts by government to insulate itself from criticism. Judicial interpretations over the course of time also support a political conception of the First Amendment.1 55 
This approach seems likely as well to accord with our initial or considered judgments about particular free speech problems. Any approach to the First Amendment will have to take substantial account of those judgments, and adjust itself accordingly. 6' It seems clear that such forms of speech as perjury, bribery, threats, misleading or false commercial advertising, criminal solicitation, and libel of private persons-or at least most of these-are not entitled to the highest degree of constitutional protection. No other approach unifies initial or preliminary judgments about these matters as well as a political conception of the First Amendment. 
In addition, an insistence that government's burden is greatest when political speech is at issue responds well to the fact that here government is most likely to be biased. The presumption of dis15 See Levy, Emergence of a Free Press at 266-70 (cited in note 3). Original understanding and the tradition of legal interpretation, however, are not decisive. The same support could be found for an unacceptably narrow view of the Equal Protection Clause, the history of which suggests validation of much discrimination on the basis of sex and even race. But a position is surely strengthened if it can draw on a good historical pedigree. 
" Thus it is not unprincipled or merely convenient to adjust a theory when it proves to deal inadequately with particular cases. Sometimes the adequacy of the theory is itself tested by how well it conforms to initial or considered judgments about particular outcomes. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 48-51 (Harvard, 1971) (discussing reflective equilibrium). trust of government is strongest when politics are at issue.'57 It is far weaker when government is regulating (say) commercial speech, bribery, private libel, or obscenity. In such cases there is less reason to suppose that it is insulating itself from criticism. 15 8 
Finally, this approach protects speech when regulation is most likely to be harmful. Restrictions on political speech have the distinctive feature of impairing the ordinary channels for political change; such restrictions are especially dangerous.' 59 If there are controls on commercial advertising, it always remains possible to argue that such controls should be lifted. If the government bans violent pornography, citizens can continue to argue against the ban. But if the government forecloses political argument, the democratic corrective is unavailable. Controls on nonpolitical speech do not have this uniquely damaging feature. 
Taken in concert, these considerations suggest that government should be under a special burden of justification when it seeks to control speech intended and received as a contribution to public deliberation. To be sure, there are some powerful alternative approaches. Perhaps we should conclude that speech is entitled to protection if it involves rational thought. This would extend beyond the political to include not merely literary and artistic work, but commercial and scientific expression as well. But there would be serious problems with any such approach. For example, we should probably not give technological data with potential military applications the same degree of protection as political speech; nor should we give misleading commercial speech the same protection as misleading political speech. 
Alternatively, one might think that the free speech principle includes any representation that reflects deliberation or imagination in a way that is relevant to the development of individual capacities. 60 No one has fully elaborated an approach of this sort. It " See Frederick Schauer, Free Speech: a PhilosophicalEnquiry 35, 39, 45 (Cambridge, 1982). 
558 As work in public choice theory has shown, there are possible bad incentives elsewhere too. For example, restrictions on commercial advertising might be an effort by a wellorganized group to eliminate competition. But this does not distinguish regulation of speech from regulation of anything else, and so it provides no special reason to be suspicious of government regulation of speech. Regulation of political speech, by contrast, raises the specter of governmental efforts to suppress criticism of its own conduct and is therefore more likely to be biased. 
See John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust:A Theory of Judicial Review 75-77 (Harvard, 1980). 
' This idea could reflect Aristotelian ideas involving the development of individual capacities. See Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (Elsevier Science, 1985); would carry considerable promise. But such an approach would make it hard to distinguish between scientific and political speech. It also might protect such things as child pornography. 
Much work must be done to elaborate and evaluate alternatives of this sort. But a conception of free speech that centers on democratic governance appears to be the best way to organize our considered judgments about cases likely to raise hard First Amendment questions. 
If the First Amendment offers special protection to political speech, we must of course reject the proposition that all forms of speech stand on the same ground. It would be necessary to draw distinctions between obscenity and political protest, or misleading commercial speech and misleading campaign statements, or proxy statements and party platforms. We must resort far less readily to the view that a restriction on one form of speech necessarily will lead to restriction on another. 
The difficulties with a political conception of the First Amendment are not unfamiliar; they raise all of the questions that produced the current First Amendment preoccupation with line-drawing. How, for example, are we to treat the work of Robert Mapplethorpe, the music of a rock group, or nude dancing? Both commercial speech and pornography are political in the crucial sense that they reflect and promote a point of view, broadly speaking ideological in character, about how to structure important things in the world. The recent attack on pornography has drawn close attention to its political character, and thus ironically might be thought to invalidate efforts to regulate it. 161 
Is it so clear that speech that has nothing to do with politics is not entitled to First Amendment protection? Must we exclude music or art or science?' 62 Surely it is philistine'63 or worse to say that Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in R. Bruce Douglass, Gerald M. Mara, and Henry S. Richardson, eds, Liberalism and the Good 203 (Routledge, 1990). The idea has no clear defenders in current legal writing. 
1,1 See American Booksellers Association, Inc. v Hudnut, 771 F2d 323, 325 (7th Cir 1985). 
1"2 See Meiklejohn, Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government at 99-100 (cited in note 1): 
We have assumed that the studies of the "scholar" must have, in all respects, the absolute protection of the First Amendment. But with the devising of "atomic" and "bacteriological" knowledge for the use of, and under the direction of, military forces, we can now see how loose and inaccurate, at this point, our thinking has been.... It may be, the First Amendment protects only political platforms. Often the deepest political challenges to the existing order can be found in art, literature, music, or sexual expression."' Sometimes government attempts to regulate these things for precisely this reason. 
These are hard questions without simple solutions. I will venture only some brief remarks in response. The first is that we should not take the existence of hard line-drawing problems to foreclose an attempt to distinguish between political and nonpolitical speech. If the distinction is otherwise plausible, and if systems that fail to make it have severe problems, the difficulty of drawing lines is acceptable. 
Even more fundamental, there is no way to operate a system of free expression without drawing lines. Not everything that counts as words or pictures is entitled to full constitutional protection. The question is not whether to draw lines, but how to draw the right ones. 
Second, we should understand broadly the category of the political. The definition I have offered would encompass not simply political tracts, but all art and literature that has the characteristics of social commentary-which is to say, much art and literature.165 Much speech is a contribution to public deliberation despite initial appearances. In addition, it is important to create a large breathing space for political speech by protecting expression even if it does not fall unambiguously within that category. Both Ulysses and Bleak House are unquestionably political for First Amendment purposes. The same is true of Robert Mapplethorpe's work, which attempts to draw into question current sexual norms and practices, and which bears on such issues as the right of privacy and the antidiscrimination principle. 
To say this is emphatically not to say that speech that has political consequences is by virtue of that fact "political" in the constitutional sense. Obscenity is political in that it has political well-springs and effects; the same is true of commercial speech and therefore, that the time has come when the guarding of human welfare requires that we shall abridge the private desire of the scholar-or of those who subsidize him-to study whatever he may please.... As I write these words, I am not taking a final stand on the issue which is here suggested. But I am sure that the issue is coming upon us and cannot be evaded. In a rapidly changing world, another of our ancient sanctities-the holiness of research-has been brought under question. "I' See Richard A. Posner, Sex and Reason (Harvard, 1992). 
1' Sex is familiarly a metaphor for social rebellion. See, for example, George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four 126-27 (Harcourt, 1949). 
165 See generally Nussbaum, Love's Knowledge (cited in note 150). even bribery-certainly bribery of public officials. An employer's purely verbal sexual or racial harassment of an employee surely has political consequences, including the creation of a disincentive for women and blacks to go to that workplace at all. But these forms of speech are not by virtue of their effects entitled to the highest form of constitutional protection. To say that speech is political for First Amendment purposes because it has political causes and effects is to say that nearly all words or pictures are immunized from legal regulation without the gravest showing of clear and immediate harm. For reasons suggested above, that cannot be right. 
For purposes of the Constitution, the question is whether the speech is a contribution to social deliberation, not whether it has political effects or sources. Thus, for example, there is a distinction between a misogynist tract, which is entitled to full protection, and pornographic movies, some of which are in essence masturbatory aids and not entitled to such protection. Personal, face-to-face racial harassment by an employer of an employee is not entitled to full protection,16 6 while a racist speech to a crowd is. There is a distinction between a racial epithet and a tract in favor of white supremacy. An essay about the value of unregulated markets in oil production should be treated quite differently from an advertisement for Texaco-even if an oil company writes and publishes both. 
The definition I have offered would exclude a wide variety of speech from the category of high-value expression, and for this reason might be thought to pose an unacceptable danger of censorship. A more general response to the suggestion that the core of the First Amendment involves politics and democracy is that this theory would provide fragile safeguards for art, music, literature, and perhaps much of commercial entertainment. A First Amendment that offers so little protection to so much might be embarrassingly weak and thin. If the exclusion of such materials results from a theory of free speech that the Constitution's text does not compel, perhaps the Court should repudiate that theory. 
In fact, however, there would remain room for powerful First Amendment challenges to most regulatory efforts. No speech can be regulated on the basis of whim or whimsy. Something stronger than rationality review, though weaker than "strict scrutiny," is " This is a harder question if it is not personal. It could, however, still count as harassment under current law. See Balkin, 1990 Duke L J at 414-28 (cited in note 21), on "captive audience" ideas in this setting. and should be applied to low-value expression. Thus, for example, commercial speech occupies an intermediate category, regulable when government can show a good reason and a solid connection between the means of regulation and the reason in question. The same should be true for scientific speech and private libel. 
In addition, the government may not regulate speech-or anything else-on the basis of constitutionally disfavored justifications. Frequently, the reason for regulating speech will be disfavored even if the speech is low-value. Courts could not permit the regulation of pornography if the purpose of the regulation is to repress a message rather than to redress genuine harms. 167 The First Amendment makes certain reasons for regulation illegitimate, and this is so even if those reasons are invoked against low-value speech. 
Government may not regulate speech of any kind if the reason is that it disapproves of the message or disagrees with the idea that the speech expresses. Regulation can be justified only by reference to genuine harms. An effort to regulate music because it is "offensive," or because it stirs up passionate feeling, would run afoul of the Free Speech Clause. Of course there will be hard cases in which courts have to decide whether a legitimate justification is at work. The resolution of these cases cannot be purely mechanical. But even if we understand the First Amendment as centrally concerned with political speech, there is little reason to fear that this understanding would permit a large increase in official censorship. 
This approach would not entail substantial change in existing law. It would help us deal with the new controversies, but generally would not unsettle resolution of the old ones. The Court has already created categories of speech that are less protected or unprotected. But the Court has not given a sense of the unifying factors that justify the creation of these categories. It is highly revealing that political speech never falls within them, and that all speech that does so is usually not political in the sense that I understand the term. The principal difference between the approach I suggest 167 It is sometimes said that the goal of anti-pornography laws is to suppress pornography's message about women. If this were the reason for such laws, they would indeed be unconstitutional. I do not enter that debate here. See Cass Sunstein, Neutrality in Constitutional Law (With Special Reference to Pornography, Abortion, and Surrogacy), 92 Colum L Rev 1, 18-29 (1992) (discussing harm-based arguments for pornography regulations). and current law is the explicit statement that nonpolitical speech occupies a lower tier-a statement that the Court has yet to make. For reasons suggested below, it is unclear that even this would make much of a difference. 
There are several areas of controversy, however, where this approach would likely lead to different results than those reached under current law. The suggested approach would mean that libel of public figures not involved in governmental affairs-famous actors, for example-would not be subject to special constitutional disabilities. Current law sharply constrains celebrities from bringing libel actions. 16 But there is no special interest in protecting the "breathing space" of the press in discussing athletes or movie stars. On what principle must a legal system provide special "breathing space" to untruths about famous people? 6 9 The test for special protection should be whethei the matter bears on democratic governance, not whether the plaintiff is famous. 
Treatment of sexually explicit speech also would diverge from current doctrine. Under current law, such speech usually receives protection 170 if it has significant social value, even if scientific or literary rather than political. An emphasis on the political foundations of the First Amendment appears to threaten this basic protection. But under the approach I suggest, courts should invalidate regulation of sexually explicit speech in most cases. As discussed in more detail below, such regulation usually would be unsupportable by reference to a legitimate justification.' 7 1 
The securities laws would raise no serious question. Indeed, many of the controversies with which I began would be resolved fairly automatically. The only real exception is hate speech, which plausibly has political content in that it is a self-conscious statement about how to resolve current political controversies. The analysis would depend on the extent to which something labelled as "hate speech" is actually intended or received as a contribution 186 Gertz v Robert Welch, Inc., 418 US 323, 342 (1974). 
168 A possible response would be that many famous people have governmental associations of some sort, and the notion of "public figures" is designed to overcome the difficulties of case-by-case inquiries. Also, many people not involved in government are involved in activities in which the public is legitimately concerned on democratic grounds. Consider attempted bribery of public officials by corporate executives. Probably the best approach, suggested by Justice Marshall, would involve an inquiry into whether the issue is one of legitimate public interest or concern. See Rosenbloom v Metromedia,Inc., 403 US 29, 43-44 (1971) (Marshall concurring). 
"I Miller v California,413 US 15, 26 (1973). 
'7 Literature is generally protected, see text accompanying note 165. With the regulation of sexually explicit speech, illegitimate motives are likely to be at work. to thought about a public matter. This approach might deprive speech of protection if it amounts to simple epithets, showing visceral contempt. On an analogy to the obscene telephone call, a public university can prevent students and teachers from using words in a way that is not plausibly part of social deliberation about an issue. But racist, homophobic, or sexist speech, even if offensive and harmful, would not be regulable so long as it is plausibly part of the exchange of ideas. It follows that the speech codes of public universities are generally unconstitutional, except insofar as they apply to the narrow category of epithets.172 
This approach would also suggest that government may regulate some forms of scientific speech. For example, the government could regulate the export of technology with military applications. This is so even though the showing of harm is in such cases insufficient under the standards properly applied to political speech. 173 
What of art and literature? The fact that they are frequently political-combined with the severe difficulty of evaluating their political quality on an ad hoc basis-argues powerfully in favor of the view that generally art and literature should be taken as "core" speech. When government seeks to censor art or literature, it is Salmost always because of the political content, making the censorship impermissible. Even when art or literature stands outside the core, government cannot attempt to regulate speech because it disagrees with the message. The First Amendment requires a legitimate justification. A legitimate justification is almost always lacking. 
This approach would solve most of the current First Amendment problems without making it necessary to enter into complex debates about power and powerlessness, or about neutrality in constitutional law. It would also draw on history, on the best theories about the function of the free speech guarantee, and on a sensible understanding about when government is least likely to be trustworthy. 
Thus far I have not said anything general about the functions of the free speech guarantee or about the conception of democracy 72 See Cass R. Sunstein, Ideas, Yes; Assaults, No, The American Prospect 35, 37-38 (Summer 1991). 
'3 See Cass R. Sunstein, Government Control of Information, 74 Cal L Rev 889, 905-12 (1986). that we should take it to embody. A few remarks are therefore in order. 
We might understand the American constitutional system to create a deliberative democracy. 174 This is a system that combines a degree of popular accountability with a belief in deliberation among representatives and the citizenry at large. The system is not designed solely to allow the protection of private interests and private rights. Even more emphatically, its purpose is not to furnish the basis for struggle among self-interested private groups. That notion is anathema to American constitutionalism. 
Instead, the system is intended to ensure discussion and debate among people who are differently situated, in a process through which reflection will encourage the emergence of general truths.175 A distinctive feature of American republicanism is hospitality toward heterogeneity, rather than fear of it. Indeed, it was along this axis that the antifederalists and federalists most sharply divided. Thus the antifederalist Brutus insisted: "In a republic, the manners, sentiments, and interests of the people should be similar. If this be not the case, there will be a constant clashing of opinions; and the representatives of one part will be continually striving against those of the other.' 1 76 Alexander Hamilton responded that in a heterogeneous republic, discussion will be improved; "the jarring of parties" will "often promote deliberation.' ' 7 7 The Federalists did not believe that heterogeneity would be an obstacle to political discussion and debate. On the contrary, they thought that it was indispensable to it. 
In the American tradition, politics is not a process in which desires and interests remain frozen, before or during politics. Indeed, some suggested early on that national representatives should take instructions from their constituents and vote accordingly. The First Congress rejected the proposal on the ground that it would destroy the purpose of the meeting. 7 8 That purpose was to ensure an exchange of views, one that would actually change opinions. We should understand the protection accorded to free speech in this 
MJoseph M. Bessette, DeliberativeDemocracy:The MajorityPrinciplein Republican Government, in Robert A. Goldwin and William A. Schambra, eds, How Democratic is the Constitution? 102, 112-16 (American Enterprise Institute, 1980); Cass R. Sunstein, Interest Groups in American Public Law, 38 Stan L Rev 29, 45-48 (1985). 
17I This is a pragmatic conception of truth. See, for example, William James, Pragmatism and the Meaning of Truth 78-79 (Harvard, 1935). 
' Brutus in Herbert J. Storing, ed, The Complete Antifederalist 369 (Chicago, 1980). '77 Federalist 70 (Hamilton) in The FederalistPapers471, 475 (Wesleyan, 1961). '71 Joseph Gales, ed, 1 Annals of Congress 733-45 (Gales and Seaton, 1834). view. Its overriding goal is to allow judgments to emerge through general discussion and debate. 
This view does not depend on a sharp distinction between public interest and private interest, or on an insistence that private interest should not be a motivation for political action. We need only to claim that the provision of new information, or alternative perspectives, can lead to new understandings of what interests are and where they lie. 
In this sense, conceptions of politics as an aggregation of interests, or as a kind of "marketplace," inadequately capture the American system of free expression. Aggregative or marketplace notions disregard the extent to which political outcomes are supposed to depend on discussion and debate, and on the reasons offered for or against the various alternatives. The First Amendment is the central constitutional reflection of the commitment to these ideas. It is part and parcel of the constitutional commitment to citizenship. This commitment must be understood in light of the American conception of sovereignty, placing governing authority in the people themselves. 
The proposals set out above flow directly from this conception of the First Amendment. The belief that politics lies at the core of the amendment is an outgrowth of the more general structural commitment to deliberative democracy. The concern for ensuring the preconditions for deliberation among the citizenry is closely associated with this commitment. The proposals suggested here thus fit with the highest aspirations of the constitutional commitments of which the First Amendment is the most tangible expression. 
Through this route, we have come far from the basic ideas that characterize current thinking about free speech. The aversion to line-drawing with respect to speech seems to lead to insoluble conundrums. It is better to be candid about the matter and to insist that as far as the First Amendment is concerned, all speech is not the same. Threats to free speech do come from government, but the general understanding of what this means is far off the mark. Such threats do take the form of conventional, highly visible censorship. But they also take the form of what is in some respects the same thing-the allocation by government of rights of property, ownership, and exclusion that determine who can speak and who cannot, and that involve the use of civil and criminal law to protect the rights of exclusion. Government neutrality is the right aspiration, but properly understood, neutrality does not mean respect for rights of speech as these can be vindicated in light of the existing distribution of rights and entitlements. It is thus necessary to reform all of the commitments that, with respect to speech, have come to represent the conventional wisdom in many circles. 
CONCLUSION 
Over the last forty years, the American law of freedom of speech has experienced a revolution. The revolution has accomplished enormous good. A return to the pre-1950 law of free speech certainly would not provide a better understanding of the free speech principle, or sufficiently serve other valuable social goals to justify abandonment of the current approach. In the bicentennial year of the Bill of Rights-a period in which appreciation for freedom of speech is exploding throughout the world-it is more than appropriate to celebrate our tradition of liberty, and to recognize the extent to which it is an extraordinary and precious achievement. 
At the same time, a crucial part of that achievement involves the dynamic and self-revising character of the free speech tradition. Our existing liberty of expression owes much of its content to the capacity of each generation to rethink and to revise the understandings that were left to it. To the economists' plea that "the perfect is the enemy of the good," we might oppose Dewey's suggestion that "the better is too often the enemy of the still better.' 1 79 The conception of free speech in any decade of American history is often quite different from the conception twenty years before or after. 
An adherence to current understandings is inadequate to resolve current controversies, and it threatens to protect both more and less free speech than it should. It is inadequate for current controversies, because it is poorly adapted to the problems raised by campaign finance regulation, scientific speech, regulation of broadcasting, government funding, content-neutral restrictions on speech, hate speech, commercial advertising, and pornography. It protects more than it should, because it includes, within the category of protected expression, speech that serves few or none of the goals for which speech is protected, and that causes serious social harms. It protects less than it should, because current doctrine does not sufficiently serve the central goal of producing a deliberative democracy among political equals. Ironically, the existing system owes many of its failures to the supposed mandates of contemporary conceptions of the First Amendment. 
179 See John J. McDermott, ed, The Philosophyof John Dewey 652 (Chicago, 1973). 
In this Article I have suggested two changes in existing understandings; both of them derive from the American contribution to the theory of sovereignty. First, some forms of apparent government intervention into free speech processes can actually improve those processes. We should not understand these as an objectionable intrusion into an otherwise law-free social sphere. In these ways, such intervention should not always be taken as an impermissible "abridgement" of the free speech right. Efforts of this sort do not represent "positive" government action intruding on constitutionally protected "negative" liberty. s0 
Instead these proposals entail a democratic recognition of the dangers to free speech posed by content-neutral restrictions that limit access to arenas in which expression should occur. Current doctrine generally recognizes the risks posed by content-neutral restrictions. The gap lies in the unwillingness to see that the speech "market" is a product of law subject to legislative improvements and to First Amendment constraints. A salutary recognition that decentralized markets generally are indispensable to promote liberty-for products and for speech-is not inconsistent with the basic claim. Nor is that recognition inconsistent with the view that the creation of markets might, on some occasions and in some settings, itself be an abridgement of free speech. 
Second, we should understand the free speech principle to be centered above all on political thought. In this way the free speech principle should always be seen through the lens of democracy. Government may regulate other forms of speech not on a whim, and not for illegitimate reasons, but on the basis of a lesser showing of harm. 
Taken together, these principles would bring about significant changes in the legal treatment currently accorded to electoral campaigns, electronic broadcasting, and the assertion of ownership rights in order to exclude political speech. In their most modest form, the principles would provide a major step toward resolving current free speech controversies without requiring serious revisions in existing law. Rightly understood, these principles might counteract the novel, sometimes invisible, and often serious obstacles that now lie in the path of free speech in America, and that promise to do so in an increasingly threatening way in the twentyfirst century. 
IN MEMORIAM My first real glimpse into Hans Zeisel's spirit came about eleven years ago, during my initial weeks of teaching. The faculty had finished its Monday lunch at the Quadrangle Club, and it was time to go back to the law school. But a torrential rain was in progress. Hans and I-the oldest and the youngest-were the only faculty members left without cars or umbrellas. I turned to Hans and asked, "What shall we do?" Hans looked at me with a combination of bemusement, mischief, and resolve. He answered in his mild Austrian accent: "Only one thing to do. Run." I was in my twenties, Hans in his seventies, but we both ran, at an extremely rapid clip, all the way back to the law school. By the time we got there, I was winded. So far as I could tell, Hans was not. In an odd 
VOLUME 59 NUMBER 2 SPRING 1992 
Hans way, I think, the event inaugurated and even came to symbolize our friendship. 
Hans was an enormously productive and influential scholar. He pioneered a still-growing field, the empirical study of law. One of his most valuable characteristics was his skepticism about the many claims and arguments ventured by lawyers and law professors. To the view that the death penalty deterred crime, he would ask, "How do you know that's true? What is the size of the effect? What is the evidence?" The same questions would be posed to those who insisted that judicial review of administrative action would improve administrative decisions, that the law of libel imposed a "chilling effect" on speech, or that strict liability increased the number of tort suits. When the economic analysis of law bothered him, it was in part because of what he saw as its crude, undefended, and inadequately human conception of value, but above all because of what Hans regarded as its decisive defect as social science: the reluctance of too many of its proponents to investigate whether their many empirical claims were really true in the world. As an academic and a thinker, Hans was a scientist, an anticonceptualist, a positivist, self-consciously following Carnap and Popper; his real concern was how claims about the effects of law could be tested and found to be correct or not. But he was anything but dispassionate. Hans' interest in finding facts was animated by a desire to understand exactly how the legal system might contribute to the relief of human suffering. 
One of his favorite puzzles involved the criteria by which lawyers evaluated decisions and proclaimed them right or wrong. For decades, Hans said, he had observed his colleagues confidently pronounce on the merits of some or other judicial outcome; but usually the criteria behind the judgments were confusing and unspecified. Someone, he urged, should write on this topic, and separate the empirical, analogical, and philosophical components of legal judgment. Otherwise things would be a simple muddle; this, Hans suggested, was unacceptable. 
Hans' extraordinary academic contributions, his studies of the jury and of the criminal justice system, his ingenuity with statistics-all this will receive attention in the future. What I want to emphasize here is that to a rare degree, his academic and personal lives were absolutely seamless. His academic preoccupation, evident on nearly every page of his writings, was how thd law affected particular human lives, especially those of people who suffered. This gives a clue to his character as well, for Hans' greatest gift was his joy in and his capacity for human friendship, his concern 1992] for the particular lives of those he knew and loved. I recall so many scenes and impressions from my walks with Hans, as he stopped for emphasis: his irrepressible, infectious reverence for Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who "saved the country twice"; his fierce reaction to the view that poverty and racial injustice were inevitable or a product of "human nature"; his genuine distress with my interest in a social thinker that Hans thought faddish and superficial ("I dislike that this should come between us," said Hans gently at my office door; it never did, and a year later it was clear to me that on the merits he was right); his love for sports, especially tennis, his high hopes for my backhand, and his own agility and quickness on the court (continuing well into his eighties); his capacity for empathy, for really seeing his friends, for understanding so much after just a sentence or two; his refusal to flinch from confronting ideas or behavior that were wrong, selfish, or cruel (even-especially!-if these came from his colleagues); his unfailing curiosity about and interest in new developments and new ideas (also continuing to the end of his life). Above all, perhaps, I remember his tender concern during my wife's difficult pregnancy, concern that was unaffected by Hans's own health problems-and his great joy at our daughter's birth. 
Hans was completely fearless. This trait served him well, not least because to my knowledge, Hans was my only colleague who was subject to a genuine threat of criminal violence. About seven years ago two teenagers approached him and asked for money. One of them apparently had a knife. The event occurred while Hans was in the midst of writing his book on the criminal justice system; he responded with an impassioned lecture on how young his assailants were, and on what a criminal conviction could do to their lives. Both of them gave up-in part, I speculate, because of Hans's combination of undauntedness and absolutely genuine concern about what they were doing with their lives. I remember too that when my car needed repair work, Hans insisted that we go see his friends in what must have been the most dangerous area I have ever visited, where Hans was greeted as a neighbor, and permitted to shepherd his bewildered young colleague through the repair shop. (I must add that Hans's fearlessness extended to his somewhat irregular driving methods, and that driving with him was not entirely unlike a Star Wars movie. The people at the repair shop had occasion to get to know Hans very well.) 
Very little really fazed Hans. The day-to-day troubles of the law professor seemed to him trivial, almost nothing at all. Hans was truly concerned, I think, about only three things: getting the facts straight, reducing social injustice and human suffering, and improving the welfare of the people he knew and loved. In my last visit with Hans, a week before he died, he wanted to talk not about his illness or future, -but about the law school he treasured, about Eastern Europe, and most of all about my daughter. Hans was a rare and great friend. He was a profound teacher. To him life was a joy and an adventure, made up of delights and challenges and surprises. His work will endure; it exerts a continuing pull on legal scholarship and the law. But Hans's friends and colleagues will remember above all his optimistic, joyous, determined, brave, and loving spirit. 
WE are in the midst of an extraordinary period of democratization. All over the world, authoritarian regimes are being replaced with systems that aim for democratic self-governance. American aspirations, for a long time so controversial both here and abroad, appear to have emerged triumphant after an era of intense competition. But perhaps the international movement for democratization can help cast light on our own problems and dilemmas as well. Perhaps it can make us rethink some of our own basic practices. So, at least, I will be arguing. 
In the last fifty years, national government in America has taken on entirely new dimensions.' Massive bureaucracies are entrusted with basic social tasks: promoting economic efficiency, redistributing resources to the needy (and not so needy), increasing employment, reflecting public values, and reducing risks. The reduction of social risks has perhaps been the most intense preoccupation of regulatory government in the last quarter century. An extraordinarily wide range of agencies-including the Food and Drug Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Trade Commission, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Consumer Product Safety Administration-are obliged to protect Americans against the dangers they face in daily life. Here democratic aspirations loom large. Here those aspirations have often been disappointed. 
A full account of the reasons would require a long story.2 But a pervasive problem is the use of rigid, highly bureaucratized "con* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This Essay, originally delivered as the Ladd Lecture at Florida State University in March 1992, is a companion piece to Cass R. Sunstein, DemocratizingAmerica Through Law, 25 SUFFOLK U. L. REv. 949 (1991). That Essay briefly discusses economic incentives, informational strategies, and decentralization as reforms to the current regulatory state; this Essay focuses in much more detail on informational strategies. There is some overlap between the two essays. 
INVESTED, PROMSE UNFULFILLED (1985). 
RECONCEIINO THE REGUL DUKE L.J. 607. mand and control" regulation, which dictates, at the national level, risk control strategies for hundreds, thousands, or millions of companies in an exceptionally diverse nation. Such regulation is widely inefficient. It wastes billions of dollars by ignoring the enormous differences among plants and industries and among geographical areas. It is not sensible to impose the same technology on industries in diverse areas-regardless of whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean up. 
Equally fundamental, such strategies are deficient from the standpoint of a well-functioning democratic process. They ensure that outcomes will be dictated from the center. They make no effort to benefit from or to increase citizen participation in selecting social outcomes. Often they ensure that citizens and representatives will be focusing their attention not on what levels of risk reduction are appropriate, but instead on isolated extreme cases, or on the largely incidental and nearly impenetrable question of what technologies are now available. They focus on the question of regulatory "means," a focus that increases the power of well-organized private groups by allowing them to press the law in the service of their own parochial ends. In this light, it is no wonder that some observers think our current system is a kind of Madisonian nightmare in which James Madison's vision of deliberative democracy has been transformed into a system of government as a series of interest group deals.' 
I think that we should try to start over. In many areas, perhaps the first and most basic problem is that Americans lack the necessary information. With respect to social risks, perhaps the first goal ought to be to ensure genuinely informed choices, rather than to dictate outcomes from Washington. In short, our first line of defense should be educative, rather than regulatory. Thus far, we have tended to pursue the opposite strategy-regulate first, educate only in exceptional cases. Might we reverse our priorities? 
Such a reversal would steer a middle course between the 1980s enthusiasm for laissez-faire and the 1970s embrace of regulatory government. Markets do fail; markets for risk are especially unreliable. But we know enough about command-and-control government to understand that regulation is no panacea. It often interferes with individual liberty. It exacts a large toll in terms of economic efficiency, and it is a disaster from the standpoint of democracy. 
This Essay comes in four parts. Part I outlines the basic case for informational remedies. Part II describes current initiatives and empirical findings. Part III qualifies my basic argument, showing ways in which informational remedies may fail. Part IV explains how the arguments suggested here might require a large-scale revision in our understandings about the system of free expression. Through this route, I hope to suggest that the discussion of risk regulation might bear very generally on the problem of information and on the government's role in providing it. 
I. 
THE CASE FOR INFORMATIONAL REMEDIES 
Many Americans are unaware of the risks they face in day-to-day life. Workers often do not know about toxic substances in the workplaces or about the risks that these substances cause. Consumers of ordinary foods are unable to evaluate the dangers posed by fats, calcium, sugar, and salt. People in small communities do not know that toxic waste dumping has occurred. If they know the facts, they do not know the risks. From all this, we can generate a strong argument for informational remedies-on grounds of liberty, economic efficiency, and democracy. 
A. 
If people are unaware of the consequences of their choices, they are, to that extent, less free. Workers who choose a certain place of employment do not do so freely if they do not know about the level of risk of getting cancer from exposure to chemicals. Someone who buys a lawn mower has not done so freely if he or she is unaware of the risks of an accident. People who vote on policies or candidates have a lot less liberty if they lack relevant information about the consequences. There is room for disagreement about how much information is too little and about the efficacy of governmental disclosure policies. But it is hard to dispute the proposition that the disclosure of information can increase human liberty under any view of that admittedly controversial term. 
When information is lacking, there may well be a conventional case of market failure under economic criteria.4 To be sure, informationlike other goods-is a scarce commodity. Perhaps the market has pro4. See PETER ASCH, CONSUMER SAFETY REGULATION, PuTrINc A PRICE ON LIFE AND LIMB (1988); Susan Rose-Ackerman, ProgressiveLaw and Economics-and the New Administrative Law, 98 YALE L.J. 341 (1988). duced the optimal level of information. The optimal level is not complete information. If the optimal level is produced, there is no market failure, even if there might be a problem under noneconomic criteria. But there are several reasons why the market for information may indeed fail. 
First, information is sometimes a public good. Once it is available at all, or to anyone, it may be available to everyone or to many people. People can thus capture the benefits of information without having to pay for its production. Once created, a report discussing the risks posed by carcinogens in the workforce may well benefit employees a great deal-but no individual employee has the right incentives to pay his proportional share for the report. Each employee has the incentive to "free ride" on the efforts of others. The result is that too little information will be forthcoming. 
The point applies to materials about shared risks in general. Indeed, the point applies to materials about all matters of shared importance. It suggests that there is a strong case, on economic grounds, for a good deal of governmental interference in the information market. 
Second, manufacturers may have poor incentives to provide information about hazardous products. Competition over the extent of danger may decrease total purchases of the product, rather than help any particular manufacturer to obtain greater sales. The phenomenon has sometimes played a role in discouraging competition over safety among manufacturers of tobacco products.' 
Information asymmetries may produce a "lemons" problem in which dangerous products drive safe ones out of the market. 6 Imagine, for example, that producers know which products are safe but that consumers cannot tell. Safe products may not be able to compete if they sell for a higher price than dangerous ones if safe products are more expensive to produce, and if consumers are unable to tell the difference. In that case, the fact that sellers have information, while buyers do not, will ensure that "lemons"-here dangerous productswill dominate the market. All this suggests that there is frequently a market failure in the provision of information. At least as a presumptive matter, government remedies are an appropriate response. These remedies should ordinarily take the form of governmentally provided information, education campaigns, or disclosure requirements imposed on private firms. Strictly on economic grounds, there is much sense, the market often works as an effective check on dangerous products. 
Market Mechanism, 84 Q.J. EcoN. 488 (1970). to be said in favor of these remedies. They may fortify the operation of the marketplace. They may also be a precondition for free choice, the background assumption of efficient markets. 
C. 
Suppose that we wanted to increase the democratic character of contemporary government by promoting citizen participation in and control over governmental processes. A good initial step would be for government to provide enough information for people to make knowledgeable judgments. 
Government itself might supply information or require disclosure by private citizens and companies. Consider, for example, the matter of expenditures per lives saved .7There is now considerable data on the amount of money spent to save lives in various government programs. What emerges is a crazy quilt, and very few people know about it. Some programs pay for themselves in terms of health and related savings; others are extremely hard to defend. At the very least, the American public should be informed of these disparities so that it can evaluate them. Provision of information about the content and expense of regulatory programs should be high on the governmental agenda. Without such information, people cannot evaluate governmental policies. They will respond to sensationalistic anecdotes or misleading stories, rather than analyze the facts. 
Consider the question of risk regulation in general. On that question, people are poorly informed.' For example, they appear not to know that the risks of nuclear power are substantially smaller than the risks posed by other energy sources. They appear not to have a clear sense of the relationships among different risks that are confronted in everyday life. Smoking, for example, produces more than 345,000 deaths per year; 9 all occupations produce about 11,000 annual deaths, 0 although this number is disputed; and nearly 50,000 deaths come from automobile accidents."l 
RISK REGULATION various sorts. See Paul Slovic et al., Informing the PublicAbout the Risks from Ionizing Radiation, in JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING: AN INTERDISCIPLINARY READER (Hal R. Arkes & Kenneth R. Hammond eds., 1986). More information, however, could help overcome some of the relevant biases. 

3 (1992). 

Information of this sort ought to be widely available. The fact that it is not creates a significant failure in government regulation. At least equally important, it presents a large obstacle to citizenship. The problem appears in the private sector, in local government, and at the state and national levels. Workers uninformed of risks are unable to participate usefully in the process of deciding among different possible levels of workplace safety. Local communities, seeking to decide whether to allow toxic waste sites or plants that produce sulfur dioxide, need to be in a position to make informed choices. 
A large virtue of a federal system is that it permits different states, having different values, to make different choices about social arrangements. In the context at hand, many decisions about the relations among industrial development, employment, pollution, and risk must be made at the state level. An absence of information is a severe obstacle to this process. The same is true at the national level, where sensational anecdotes displace reasoned analysis of the alternatives. 
The most general way to put the point is to note that on the framers' view, America was supposed to be a deliberative democracy in which representatives, accountable to the people, would make decisions through a process of deliberation uncontrolled by private factions.' 2 Without better information, neither deliberation nor democracy is possible. Legal reforms designed to remedy the situation are a precondition for democratic politics. 
D. 
Thus far, we have seen that provision of information may well be an improvement over a system of laissez-faire. We can simultaneously promote liberty, efficiency, and democracy with informational remedies, even though these goals are sometimes thought to conflict. Such remedies would also make for large gains as compared with existing regulatory measures, at least in many contexts. As noted, those structures consist of massive command-and-control structures, dictating individual outcomes for hundreds, thousands, and even millions of individuals and groups. How would informational strategies compare with current approaches? 
From the standpoint of liberty, those approaches have large drawbacks. Most important, they do not allow individuals to make informed choices among possible options. There are two problems here. 
DeliberateDemocracy: The Majority Principle,in AaERICA GOVERNxENT, How DEMOCRATIC IS THE CONSTITUTION? 102 (Robert A. Goldwin & William A. Schambra eds., 1983); Cass R. Sunstein, Interest Groups in American PublicLaw, 38 STAN. L. REv. 29 (1985). The first is that inadequate information is a serious obstacle to liberty. To the extent that current approaches do not provide information, they disserve this goal. 
The second problem is that governmentally prescribed outcomes unnecessarily diminish the role of individual decisions and choices in forming individual lives. At least across a broad range of possibilities, people should be allowed to select their preferred mixes of risk, employment, salary, medical care, and so forth. If their choice is irrational, or if it has large consequences for others, the government is entitled to intervene. But the presumption should be in favor of private choice. Because current regulatory law forecloses private choice in favor of nationally mandated outcomes, it disserves liberty, certainly in comparison to a system in which information is provided. 
It is no answer to say that private choices are often constrained by lack of sufficient opportunities or by unjust background conditions. Mandated regulatory systems often seem best because without them, people in difficult conditions may be forced to take risky (but relatively remunerative) jobs, or to purchase less safe but inexpensive products. This is often true; people in difficult conditions will trade off greater risk for other goods they favor, and sometimes the risks will be serious. We should do everything we can to increase opportunities, to prevent or ease difficult conditions, and to diminish injustice. But a regulatory requirement that forecloses the best of a set of bad options is a singularly poor strategy for accomplishing any of these goals. If people are forced to accept higher risks for more money, that is their choice. At least as a general rule, we do them no favors if we require them to have less money and lower risks, if they want (as we are assuming) more money and higher risks. Thus far, then, the provision of information seems far preferable to governmentally mandated outcomes, at least on grounds of liberty. 
What of economic efficiency? The sad truth is that existing programs are often extremely inefficient. 3 They cost far more than is necessary to accomplish their salutary goals. They waste billions of dollars. They penalize investment, both in general and (especially perverse) in newer, safer technologies. Precisely because of their uniformity, they force a wide range of actors into the same mold. In this way, too, they diminish economic efficiency, which calls for the investment of social resources in places where they will do the most good. Existing programs are extremely expensive to enforce both be13. Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, Reforming EnvironmentalLaw: The DemocraticCaseforMarket Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENvrt. L. 171 (1988). cause of the burden they impose on government and because of the high cost of private resources that must be spent on compliance. 
On all of these scores, informational approaches have large advantages. They are much more flexible. Because they leave considerable room for freedom of choice, they avoid the inefficiencies of centralized dictation of outcomes. They are generally far less expensive to implement for private industry and to enforce for government. They impose much less of a disincentive to productive investment. Indeed, precisely because they call attention to social risks, they create a good incentive for technological advances in the area of safety. This is a huge advantage over existing systems, where the incentive often runs in the opposite direction. 
Along the dimension of democracy, informational strategies have equivalent strengths. Command-and-control regulation has especially serious democratic drawbacks. Usually centralized in Washington, it is far too remote to encourage or benefit from widespread citizen participation. A national decision about the appropriate technological controls on a toxic air pollutant will have only an attenuated connection to democratic processes. 
In addition, the current system strongly encourages interest group maneuvering. If Congress is attempting to specify the particular means by which to decrease the pollution brought about by gasoline, it will be especially vulnerable to well-organized private groups. Such groups will attempt, and have often attempted, to promote their own welfare through obtaining pollution control technologies that benefit them. The creation of such incentives is poorly suited to democratically controlled risk reduction. It is highly likely that Congress will end up pleasing the relevant groups with a mechanism that helps the most powerful and well-organized lobbyists. 
Finally, and perhaps most important, a command-and-control strategy will have democratic defects precisely to the extent the citizenry is poorly informed. We cannot expect people to participate well, or to participate at all, if they lack information about the relevant problems. 
In these circumstances, the provision of information seems to have large democratic advantages over the regulatory status quo. It should promote decentralization, not only by allowing markets to function, but also by eliminating nationally mandated solutions and increasing the power of states and local communities. It should diminish the power of well-organized private groups; interest group maneuvering is certainly possible, but probably less likely, when the government is simply providing or requiring provision of information. And it should help democratic self-governance precisely to the extent that it ensures that people will be more informed. 
II. 
EMPIucAL EVIDENCE: WHAT WE'VE DONE, WHAT WE KNow Thus far, we have seen that informational strategies have important advantages over both laissez-faire and the current system of regulating social risks. But the discussion has been relatively abstract and a bit speculative. In this section, I turn to some details. Part A discusses current initiatives. Part B outlines the current record. 
The national government has started a series of steps in the direction of information disclosure. Mandatory messages about risks from cigarette smoking, first set out in 1965 and modified in 1969 and 1984, are, of course, the most familiar example.' 4 The FDA has long maintained a policy of requiring risk labels for pharmaceutical products." The EPA has done the same for pesticides and asbestos. 6 Congress requires warnings on products with saccharin. There are numerous other illustrations. Indeed, the effort to provide information counts as one of the most striking, if still incipient, developments in modern regulatory law. Three recent initiatives are especially notable. 
In 1983 the Occupational Safety and Health Administration issued a Hazard Communication Standard (HCS) that applied to the manufacturing sector. In 1986 the HCS was made generally applicable.' Under the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the hazards of the chemicals they produce or import; develop technical hazard information for materials safety data sheets and for hazardous substances labels; and, most importantly, transmit this information to users of the relevant substances. All employers must adopt a hazard communication program-including individual training-and inform workers of the relevant risks. 
In 1986 Congress enacted an ambitious new statute, the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA). 8 Under this statute, firms and individuals must report to state and local government the quantities of potentially hazardous chemicals that have been stored or released into the environment. Users of such chemicals must DEcISIoN (1992). 
report to their local fire departments about the location, types, and quantities of stored chemicals. They must also give information about potential adverse health effects. A detailed report suggests that EPCRA has had important beneficial effects, spurring innovative, costeffective programs from the EPA and from state and local government. 9 
The Food and Drug Administration has also adopted informational strategies. In its most ambitious set of proposals,20 the FDA seeks (a) to compel nutritional labeling on nearly all processed foods, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (b) to require compliance with government specified serving sizes; (c) to compel companies to conform to government definitions of standardized terms, including "reduced," "fresh," "free," and "low"; and (d) to allow health claims only if these (1) are supported by scientific evidence and (2) communicate clear and complete information about such matters as fat and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blood pressure, and calcium and osteoporosis. 
B. 
We now have some empirical information about disclosure of risks. In general, the information suggests that disclosure can be a helpful and cost-effective strategy. 2' Workers appear to respond to new information about risks by quitting or demanding higher salaries. Consumers often react well to the disclosure about danger levels. There is every reason to think that governmentally-mandated disclosure, if suitably designed, is an effective mechanism for promoting economic efficiency and other regulatory goals. 
requires a "toxic release inventory" requiring reports on toxic emissions. 22 A 1991 government report shows that the statute has had substantial good effects. 2 The inventory played a l role in the 1990 to legislative efforts in many states, including Oregon and Massachusetts. It has greatly assisted the EPA in its pollution prevention strategy, a leading new weapon in risk regulation, and it has also contributed to the development of cross-environmental media approaches. 2 Environmental groups and the media have made good use of the inventory, listing the highest polluting companies. 26 Best of all, the inventory has led major companies to reduce pollution even without legislation. 27 It appears that more than half of all reporting facilities have made changes as a result of the inventory requirement.2 
Evidence of this sort is highly suggestive, but it does not show whether consumers and citizens react rationally to new information. We know disclosure has had some political consequences. It is important also to know how such information is received by ordinary people. Here too, however, we are beginning to accumulate valuable data. 
A study of consumer reactions to hazard warnings contains interesting lessons.29 In this study, two products were tested: a liquid bleach and a liquid drain opener. Both of these posed short-term risks. People who drink bleach (usually children) experience vomiting and stomach aches, a risk that can be avoided by keeping the products away from children. Bleach mixed with ammonia can produce chloramine gas poisoning, which involves headaches and possible hospitalization. The risk can be avoided by not mixing bleach with ammonia. Drain opener, if accidentally ingested, can lead to severe mouth burns and possibly loss of the esophagus. Spilling the product can produce painful burns and swollen blisters. Rubber gloves can prevent these effects. 
In the study, there was a comparison between "no warning" labels and different labels with different warnings. All but one of the latter labels informed consumers of the relevant risks, but some were larger and highlighted the relevant precautions.30 One label, called "Test," was designed by labeling experts. The study showed that the regular warning labels generally had significant effects on consumer behavior, but that the "Test" labels produced by far the most substantial consequences. Statistically significant results were shown in almost all groups of people seeing the "Test" label. For example, consumers' willingness to store bleach in childproof locations was increased by thirty-three percent over the "no warning" labels. Once informed of the risks, moreover, consumers showed a desire to pay more to avoid the need for precautions. In general, the relevant information was processed reliably. Thus the authors of the study concluded that the "results presented here provide a more optimistic view of the potential efficacy of informational approaches .... Households facing particularly large risks were more likely to undertake protective actions, and differences in the information provided produced the expected effects." 3 
Another study attempted to test workers' responses to labels of potentially hazardous chemicals.3 2 There was evidence-suggestive by itself-that workers in dangerous occupations received risk premiums for the dangers they faced. Workers who perceived their jobs as quite dangerous received an annual risk premium of $700 to $800, while workers who thought their jobs were only somewhat risky received a premium of about $100 less. I say that this evidence is suggestive by itself because it shows that workers will demand a higher salary or other compensating benefits when they know that they face workplace dangers. 
The study presented each worker with a hazard warning label for a chemical that was not a current part of his job. When presented with the labels, workers generally adjusted their perception of the risk assessment in their jobs. Thus the adjustment shows a rational learning process. Moreover, and crucially, the workers indicated they would require a higher salary, calibrated to the degree of risk that was disclosed. Many workers also indicated they would refuse to continue to work in the now-riskier job. The greater the information, the better the reaction. 
There is also a valuable study of the effects of warning labels on diet soft drinks containing saccharin.33 The data show that after the warning labels were required, there were significant adverse effects on sales. The initial effects were produced primarily by well-educated and high-income households. Soon thereafter there were similar effects on households with young children. Interestingly, there was no such effect on the soft drink purchase habits of the elderly. - Consumer behavior was also significantly modified by a Stanford study designed to promote heart disease education.Y Three California communities were selected; two of them were saturated with information about lifestyle changes that would reduce heart disease. A "control town" was not affected. Knowledge increases were significant in the two saturated communities; there were no real changes in the control town. Intriguingly, there were large gains in knowledge in the lessadvantaged Spanish-speaking community. Behavioral changes were also shown with respect to reported changes in diets, exercise, and smoking, and also with weight and plasma cholesterol levels. Plasma cholesterol levels changed significantly during the course of the campaign. 
Less encouraging is the evidence from educational campaigns designed to increase seat belt use. It seems clear that if everyone used seat belts, motor vehicle deaths could be halved, and billions of dollars could be saved.3" But efforts to promote seat belt use have produced little results, at least in the United States. (Campaigns in Great Britain and Sweden produced increased usage rates of twenty percent to thirty-five percent.) In its most recent, more sophisticated efforts, the government's campaign showed a negligible 2.6% increase, ranging from 11.301o to 13.9%.36 
California's Proposition 65, requiring cancer warnings, appears to have been only a mixed success. One study shows that it has actually decreased information by making people think certain products are much more dangerous than they are in fact.37 Similarly, one study shows that widely used chemical labels had minimal effects because the relevant information was not provided in an effective manner.8 
On balance, the existing evidence gives reason for cautious optimism at the very least. Certainly much more research is necessary; here the obligatory call for further empirical work is especially important. But what we know is sufficient to suggest that it is fully appropriate to continue to work with information strategies and that such strategies can accomplish their intended purposes in many settings. I discuss possible lessons for reform in Part III. 
III. 
THE LIMITS OF INFORMATION 
The picture thus far has been quite optimistic, and I do believe that optimism is on the whole quite warranted. But the case for informational remedies is not unqualified. There are three major problems 
Consumers, 43 FooD DRUG Cosm. L.J. 283 (1988). 
with such strategies. First, the provision of information can be expensive. Second, the provision of information is sometimes ineffectual or even counterproductive. Third, informational strategies deal inadequately with some external effects of risk. 
Consider, for example, the fact that the government estimates the cost of the new FDA rules as no less than $1.7 billion over twenty years. The President of the National Food Processors Association claims that the first-year costs alone will exceed $2 billion. 9 In either case, the cost is high. OSHA's hazard communication policy is estimated to save 200 lives per year-a lot-but at an annual cost of $360 million. 40 The expenditure per life saved is therefore $1.8 million. This is far better than a large number of regulations, and probably an amount well worth spending, but it is more than many agencies spend for life-saving regulations. It is therefore not the case that the OSHA rule stands out as a means of saving lives especially cheaply. There are many life-saving programs that achieve the same goal-saved lives-at lower cost. 
When informational strategies are costly, there are two possible responses. The first is to do nothing. If the savings-in terms of health, life, informed choice-are relatively low, costly strategies, even informational ones, make little sense. There will, therefore, be circumstances in which a government remedy for an absence of information is unwarranted. Sometimes laissez-faire is indeed preferable. 
When the costs are high, the second possibility is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure. By a regulatory strategy, I mean a mandatory outcome, such as a flat ban on the materials in question, or governmental specification of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum level of carcinogens in the workplace. It is surprising but true that sometimes the regulatory strategy will be cheaper because the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is so high. This is likely to be the right response when most or all people would respond to the information in the same way. In that case, it is unnecessary to provide information. It is better simply to dictate an outcome that, by hypothesis, is generally preferred. A flat ban is generally appropriate for an especially dangerous Cmi. Tram., Nov. 7, 1991, § 1, at 2. 
45 (1986). substance, one that reasonable people would not choose to encounter and that has safer substitutes. 
Even when informational strategies are not prohibitively expensive, they may be ineffectual and thus have low benefits. There are many possible problems here. (a) Information Processing 
A central difficulty is that people have limited ability to process information. 4' They have a notoriously difficult time in thinking about low-probability events. Sometimes they discount such events to zero; sometimes they treat them as much more dangerous than they actually are. If people are told, for example, that a certain substance causes cancer, they may think it is far more dangerous than it is in fact. But some carcinogenic substances pose little risk. 
For example, California's Proposition 65, an initiative designed to promote citizen awareness of risk levels, requires warnings for exposure to carcinogens. At first glance, the requirement seems unexceptionable, indeed an important advance. It seems to have all of the advantages discussed in the first sections of this Essay. But Proposition 65 has in some cases been counterproductive or even worse. Consumers appear to think that twelve of every 100 users of a product with the required warning will die from cancer. This estimate exceeds reality by a factor of 1000 or more.42 The presence of the warning makes people more confused rather than more aware. 
We can generalize from the example. With respect to information, less may be more. If information is not provided in a clear and usable form, it may actually make people less knowledgeable than they were before. (b) Heuristics That Produce Errors 
The problem is aggravated by the fact that in evaluating social risks, people tend to use heuristic devices that produce systemic errors. A particular problem here is the "availability heuristic," through which people tend to think an event is probable if they can note 8; Viscusi, supra note 10. 
readily bring to mind memories of its occurrence. Thus, for example, an airplane disaster will sometimes be thought relatively probable, whereas a death from diabetes usually will not be. There is a good deal of evidence that people overestimate risks from highly visible or sensational causes but underestimate risks from less dramatic, but more serious, ones.13 The availability heuristic may distort informational remedies since people may fit the information to assumptions that are false or skewed. (c) 
There is evidence as well of another problem with informational strategies: People often believe themselves to be immune from risks that they acknowledge are significant and real with respect to others." In one study, for example, ninety-seven percent of those surveyed ranked themselves as average or above average in their ability to avoid both bicycle and power mower accidents. 45 Disclosure of information ,may be an unhelpful tool when people do not internalize the new data, thinking that it is really relevant only to other people. 
There is also evidence that people feel frustrated and frightened by probabilistic information and greatly prefer a certain answer. The desire to reduce cognitive dissonance-to prevent the world from being confusing and frightening-may prevent people from recognizing that risks are real, even when information is provided.4 The same desire may undermine efforts to provide risk information when the truth is that people must inevitably operate under conditions of uncertainty. For similar reasons, people may fail to recognize that conditions are dangerous even in the face of solid information to this effect. Finally, initially held beliefs are not easy to modify, even when new information that undermines those beliefs has been presented.47 
There is also a pervasive risk of information overload, causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as equivalent to no information at all. 4 If employers are forced to list all risks and to 
Cognitive Dissonance,72 Am. ECON. REv. 307 (1982). 
LAW: How NEIGHBORS SETTLE DISPUTES (1991). 
TheirPotentialfor Confusingand Misleadingthe Consumer, 46 J. MKTO. 61, 70 (1982). explain them in detail, people may absorb little or nothing. If advertisers are required to have detailed disclosure labels, consumers may obtain relatively little information. 
Yet another problem is that companies may respond to disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at all (if this is an available option). If industry responds to a requirement of evidentiary support for scientific claims with mere "puffing," consumers may have less information than they did to begin with. If advertisers must conduct extensive tests before they are permitted to make claims, they will be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at all.4 9 The result will be the removal from the market of information that is useful overall. 
Disclosure strategies may also have disproportionately little effect on people who are undereducated, elderly, or poor. 0 This is to be expected, for information remedies require an ability to read and process. This ability is most pronounced among the well-educated and the wealthy. 
Finally, information may be an inadequate strategy when greater safety is a public good." Imagine, for example, that the replacement of carcinogen X with safe product Y would benefit all workers simultaneously because all of them would simultaneously be exposed to Y rather than X. Imagine too that each worker is bargaining separately with the employer. In that case, no individual employee may have a sufficient incentive to decrease his demand for wages and other benefits to obtain increased safety. Because the benefits of the new substance are provided to everyone, no individual employee will "pay" enough to obtain them, preferring instead to take a free ride on others. The result will be too little safety on conventional economic criteria. Here a regulatory response is appropriate. 
(1985). 

transactions cost barriers to free mobility of labor. If labor were completely mobile, the problem should disappear. C. 
I can be brief on this point. Sometimes risks are regulated because, when they come to fruition, many people are harmed. When there are adverse "external" effects from risk-generating activity, the solution is not merely the provision of information. If people are told that companies are producing pollution, that is all to the good. But it is often not enough. Regulation should require the company to reduce pollution levels to reduce external harms, either by taking additional care or by reducing the level of polluting activity. 
When the risk-generating activity creates harms to people not likely to be in a contractual relation with those who engage in that activity, it is desirable to supplement information strategies with economic incentives designed to produce the optimal activity level. If a company is emitting carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, it is not enough for everyone to know about this fact. Instead the government should impose a tax or emissions fee designed to require the company to "internalize" the cost of its activity. Economic incentives are in this sense a necessary supplement to informational strategies. 2 
All this suggests that there are real limitations to informational strategies. The limitations should, however, be taken merely as qualifications of the broader point, or as providing helpful guidance to those seeking to design effective information requirements. They do not argue fundamentally against reform efforts. While informational strategies are no panacea, they would accomplish considerable good, at least if the possible obstacles are kept firmly in mind. 
The first and most important point is that some of these very limitations can be overcome through more and better information. An awareness of the distorting effects of current heuristics can help overcome those effects. General publicity about those effects might therefore supply a corrective. The "availability" heuristic in particular would be overcome through making public and private sector changes in what risks come readily to mind. 
Existing studies also suggest that some disclosure remedies will work better than others. Well-tailored programs would minimize the relevant risks by putting the information in its most understandable form. Instead of labeling a substance a "carcinogen," a uniform system of risk regulation could give better awareness of risk levels. 3 Ex52. 
See Sunstein, supra note *. 
See Viscusi et al., supranote 21, at 365. cessive detail should be avoided; the relevant information should be crisp and simple. Any disclosure requirements should attend to difficulties in processing information. 
In this light, the current initiatives are simply a beginning. Broader and more ambitious programs, coordinating the general communication of social risks, are very much in order. It has been suggested that government might eventually develop a "national warnings system" containing a systematized terminology for warnings.14 Such a system could apply to all contexts and risks and give a uniform sense of risk levels. The existence of a uniform language would make it possible to assess risks across a wide range of social spheres. This step would introduce a healthy degree of coordination and priority-setting in regulation. 
Most important of all, such a system would perform a vital educative function, one that could complement the functioning of markets and provide a necessary precondition for democratic choice. We should ultimately aspire to go far beyond risk regulation, to introduce information bearing on democratic affairs in general. The First Amendment is a good place to start. 
RECONCEIVING THE FIRST AMENDMENT: A NOTE 
We have become accustomed to the view that the First Amendment is a barrier against content-based restrictions on the autonomy of speakers. Our core conception of a free speech violation is a case in which the government silences a speaker because it objects to what the speaker is saying. This conception has accomplished enormous good; it has served as the basic model for a series of dramatic victories for free expression. 
Under current conditions, however, this conception may well be inadequate." A system of free expression will be in great jeopardy when there is insufficient information about public affairs. An absence of information may be a product not of direct government controls, but of free markets5 6 in information. If so, the purposes of the First Amendment might be promoted, not undermined, by content-based regulatory initiatives. 
Let me be more concrete. Imagine that the consequence of the current system of free speech is a regime in which most Americans do not read or see much in the way of substantive argument about what government is doing or ought to be doing. Imagine too that there is little diversity of view. In such a system, the system of free expression might be dominated by situation comedies, or sensationalistic stories about celebrities, or material that combines sex with violence. Even news programming might feature misleading anecdotes or "horse race" stories rather than substance. Imagine too that access to the media is largely a product of how much other people are willing to pay to hear the relevant voice-and that this system is importantly affected by the desires of advertisers who indirectly, sometimes directly, exercise some control over programming content. 
Is it so clear that the First Amendment would be violated by regulatory initiatives designed to increase attention to public affairs and diversity of view? If the arguments set out thus far are persuasive, a democratic correction may well be desirable. If we understood the system of free expression to be concerned with the dissemination of information, especially about public affairs, then such a corrective may well be compatible with, even required by, our First Amendment principles. 
At this point it might be suggested that in an era of cable television, the relevant problems disappear. People can always change the channel. Some stations even provide public affairs broadcasting around the clock. Both quality and diversity can be found in light of the dazzling array of options made available by modern technology. Viewers can now choose from a wide range of options. In this light, a concern about the market status quo might seem to amount to a puzzling, even bizarre rejection of freedom of choice. Ought not a foreclosure of expressive options be thought to infringe on freedom of speech? 
There are several answers. The first point would reemphasize my earlier suggestion that information has many characteristics of a public good, like national defense or clean air." It is well-known that if markets are created by law and impose legal constraints on who may do what. In the context at hand, for example, people are deprived of access to the media, not by voluntary private acts, but by the civil and criminal law, which prohibit one person from (for example) getting on CBS or ABC to state a particular view. 
we rely entirely on markets, we will have insufficient national defense and excessively dirty air. The reason is that both defense and clean air cannot be feasibly provided to one person without simultaneously being provided to many or all. In these circumstances, each person has inadequate incentives to seek, or to pay for, the right level of national defense or clean air. Acting individually, each person will "free ride" on the efforts of others. No producer will have the appropriate incentive for production. The result will be unacceptably low levels of the relevant goods. 
Much the same is true of information, especially with respect to public affairs. The benefits of a broad public debate, yielding large quantities of information-through coverage of public issues, disclosure of new facts and perspectives, and diversity of view-accrue simultaneously to many or all people. Once information is provided to one person, or to some of them, it is also provided to many others too, or it can be provided at minimal cost. The production of information for one or some person thus yields large external benefits for other people as well. But-and this is the key point-the market provides no mechanism to ensure that these benefits will be adequately taken into account by those who produce the information, in this case the newspaper and broadcasting industries. 
At the same time, the benefits of informing one person-making him or her an effective citizen-are likely to accrue to many other people as well through that person's contribution to multiple conversations and to political processes in general. But the external benefits for each person will not be taken into account in individual consumption choices.5" 
Because of the "public good" features of information, no single person has sufficient incentive to "pay" for the benefits he receives. The result will be that the market will produce too little information. Reliance on media markets will therefore have some of the same difficulties as reliance on markets for national defense or environmental protection. For this reason, a regulatory solution, solving the collective action problem, is justified. 9 Amendment, 105 HiAsv. L. REv. 554 (1991). Information is not a pure public good because it is often feasible to provide it to those who pay for it. Copyright and patent laws can guarantee appropriate incentives for its production. But information does have much in common with pure public goods. 
and Rights to Public Goods, 38 U. TORONTo L.J. 1 (1988). 
provide at least a partial solution. Because advertisers attempt to ensure large audiences, viewers are commodities as well as or instead of consumers. In these circumstances, it is not as if individuals 
So much for the public good issue. The second point is that the absence of scarcity of outlets does not explain why there is a constitutional objection to democratic efforts to increase quality and diversity by ensuring better programming on individual stations. Even with a large number of stations, there is far less quality and diversity than there might be. Perhaps people can generate at least a partial solution by changing the channel. But why should the Constitution be thought to foreclose a collective decision to experiment with new methods for achieving the goals of a system of free expression? 
Third, it is important to be extremely cautious about the use, for constitutional and political purposes, of the notion of "consumer sovereignty." Consumer sovereignty is the conventional economic term for the virtues of a free market, in which commodities are allocated through consumer choices and valued through the criterion of private willingness to pay. Those who invoke the notion of free choice in markets are really insisting on consumer sovereignty. But the constitutional conception of "sovereignty"-rooted in the writings of James Madison-is the relevant one. 6 That conception has an altogether different character. 
On the Madisonian view, sovereignty entails respect not for private consumption choices but for the considered judgments of a democratic polity. In a democracy, laws frequently reflect those judgments or what might be described as the aspirations of the public as a whole. 61 Those aspirations can and often do call for markets themselves. But they might also diverge from consumption choices-a familiar phenomenon in such areas as environmental law, protection of endangered species, social security, and antidiscrimination law. For present purposes, the most notable point is that information is crucial for the development and expression of democratic aspirations. These are purchasing individual pieces of information. Instead, advertisers are aggregating individual preferences in seeking popular programming and, in that sense, helping to overcome the collective action problem. 
The problem with this response is that the advertisers' desire to attract large audiences does not adequately serve the goal of overcoming the public good problem with respect to information about public affairs. A program with a large audience may not be providing information at all; consider most of network television. Advertisers may even be hostile to the provision of the relevant information. Their economic interests often argue against sponsorship of public service or controversial programming, especially if the audience is relatively small, but sometimes even if it is large. The external benefits of widely-diffused information about politics are thus not captured in a broadcasting market. The peculiarities of the broadcasting market overcome a kind of collective action problem by providing a system for aggregating preferences, but they do not overcome the crucial problem. 

(1979); HowARsD MARGOLIS, SELnsmNESS, ALTRUiSm, AND RATIONALITY (1982). aspirations ought not to be disparaged. Democratic liberty should not be identified with "consumer sovereignty." And in the context at hand, the people, acting through their elected representatives, might well decide that democratic liberty, producing greater information, is more valuable than consumer sovereignty. 
Finally, private broadcasting selections are a product of preferences that are a result of the broadcasting status quo and are not independent of it. In a world that provides the existing fare, it would be unsurprising if people generally preferred to see what they are accustomed to seeing. They have not been provided with the opportunities of a better system. When this is so, the broadcasting status quo cannot, without circularity, be justified by reference to the preferences.6 1 Preferences that have adapted to an objectionable system cannot justify that system. If better options are put more regularly in view, it might well be expected that at least some people would be educated as a result and be more favorably disposed toward programming dealing with public issues in a serious way. 
It is tempting but inadequate to object that this is a form of "paternalism" unjustifiably overriding private choice. If private choice is a product of existing options, then the inclusion of better options, through new law, does not displace a freely produced desire. At least this is so if the new law has a democratic pedigree. In such a case, the people, in their capacity as citizens, are attempting to implement aspirations that diverge from their consumption choices. 
What strategies might emerge from considerations of this sort? Recall that the overriding goal is to increase public information about public affairs-a goal that calls for substantive attention to public issues and an opportunity to speak for divergent views. There is thus a strong case for public provision of high-quality programming for children or for obligations, imposed by government on broadcasters, to provide such programming. The provision of free media time to candidates would be especially helpful. Such a route would simultaneously provide attention to public affairs and diversity of view and overcome the distorting effects of "soundbites" and financial pressures. 
applicants who promise to deal with serious questions or provide public affairs broadcasting even if unsupported by market demand. Or government might require purely commercial stations to provide financial subsidies to public television or to commercial stations that agree to 1984) provide less profitable but higher quality programming. Government itself should surely subsidize such programming or use its ownership rights (over, for example, airports and subways) so as to encourage attention to public issues. It is worthwhile to consider more dramatic approaches as well-such as reductions in advertising on children's television, content review of such television by nonpartisan experts, or guidelines to encourage attention to public issues and diversity of view. 
Views of this sort would reconceive the responsibilities of the mass media. They would call for both public and private action, and precisely in the name of the First Amendment. Under this approach, the free speech principle would bear on much more than governmental interferences with the autonomy of speakers with current ownership rights. It would also make it necessary for us to assess the connection between the existing free speech "market" and the informational and citizenship goals of a system of free expression. It would draw on existing knowledge of the limits of current "markets" in information to support new free speech initiatives. Above all, it would refuse to identity laissez-faire in speech with the dictates of the First Amendment. 
CONCLUSION 
Our current regulatory system is too rigid and too centralized; it provides too little basis for improving either private decisions in the marketplace or public decisions in the ballot box. Instead of mandating particular solutions or leaving people to the vicissitudes of the market, government should, as its first line of defense, require disclosure of information or provide information on its own. A step of this sort could revolutionize the activities of many government agencies, including the EPA, the FDA, the CPSC, and OSHA. Eventually it could help produce a "national warnings system" that provides clear and concise information about the risks faced in day-to-day life. 
I have spent most of my time on informational strategies with respect to social risks, but the analysis may extend much further. It suggests reasons to question some of the received wisdom with respect to free speech. The defects in information markets may well call for governmental improvements designed to promote attention to public issues and to generate a diversity of views. 
The broader point is that the movements for democratization throughout the world-in South Africa and Russia, Romania and China, Israel and Kuwait, Bulgaria and Ukraine-are far from irrelevant to current reform efforts in the United States. The massive regulatory state, an outgrowth of the twentieth century, has accomplished considerable good, but it has also severely compromised the American commitment to democratic self-governance. There could be no better first step, by way of reform, than to embark on the project of substituting, for our inflexible and interest-prone current controls, a system designed to ensure that in their capacity as consumers, workers, and voters, Americans are well-informed. 
HeinOnline -- 20 Fla. St. U. L. Rev. 677 1992-1993 
The University of Chicago 
Law Review 0 1992 by The University of Chicago VOLUME 59 NUMBER 2 SPRING 1992 
Cass R. Sunsteint 
My first real glimpse into Hans Zeisel's spirit came about eleven years ago, during my initial weeks of teaching. The faculty had finished its Monday lunch at the Quadrangle Club, and it was time to go back to the law school. But a torrential rain was in progress. Hans and I-the oldest and the youngest-were the only faculty members left without cars or umbrellas. I turned to Hans and asked, "What shall we do?" Hans looked at me with a combination of bemusement, mischief, and resolve. He answered in his mild Austrian accent: "Only one thing to do. Run." I was in my twenties, Hans in his seventies, but we both ran, at an extremely rapid clip, all the way back to the law school. By the time we got there, I was winded. So far as I could tell, Hans was not. In an odd t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. way, I think, the event inaugurated and even came to symbolize our friendship. 
Hans was an enormously productive and influential scholar. He pioneered a still-growing field, the empirical study of law. One of his most valuable characteristics was his skepticism about the many claims and arguments ventured by lawyers and law professors. To the view that the death penalty deterred crime, he would ask, "How do you know that's true? What is the size of the effect? What is the evidence?" The same questions would be posed to those who insisted that judicial review of administrative action would improve administrative decisions, that the law of libel imposed a "chilling effect" on speech, or that strict liability increased the number of tort suits. When the economic analysis of law bothered him, it was in part because of what he saw as its crude, undefended, and inadequately human conception of value, but above all because of what Hans regarded as its decisive defect as social science: the reluctance of too many of its proponents to investigate whether their many empirical claims were really true in the world. As an academic and a thinker, Hans was a scientist, an anticonceptualist, a positivist, self-consciously following Carnap and Popper; his real concern was how claims about the effects of law could be tested and found to be correct or not. But he was anything but dispassionate. Hans' interest in finding facts was animated by a desire to understand exactly how the legal system might contribute to the relief of human suffering. 
One of his favorite puzzles involved the criteria by which lawyers evaluated decisions and proclaimed them right or wrong. For decades, Hans said, he had observed his colleagues confidently pronounce on the merits of some or other judicial outcome; but usually the criteria behind the judgments were confusing and unspecified. Someone, he urged, should write on this topic, and separate the empirical, analogical, and philosophical components of legal judgment. Otherwise things would be a simple muddle; this, Hans suggested, was unacceptable. 
Hans' extraordinary academic contributions, his studies of the jury and of the criminal justice system, his ingenuity with statistics-all this will receive attention in the future. What I want to emphasize here is that to a rare degree, his academic and personal lives were absolutely seamless. His academic preoccupation, evident on nearly every page of his writings, was how thd law affected particular human lives, especially those of people who suffered. This gives a clue to his character as well, for Hans' greatest gift was his joy in and his capacity for human friendship, his concern for the particular lives of those he knew and loved. I recall so many scenes and impressions from my walks with Hans, as he stopped for emphasis: his irrepressible, infectious reverence for Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who "saved the country twice"; his fierce reaction to the view that poverty and racial injustice were inevitable or a product of "human nature"; his genuine distress with my interest in a social thinker that Hans thought faddish and superficial ("I dislike that this should come between us," said Hans gently at my office door; it never did, and a year later it was clear to me that on the merits he was right); his love for sports, especially tennis, his high hopes for my backhand, and his own agility and quickness on the court (continuing well into his eighties); his capacity for empathy, for really seeing his friends, for understanding so much after just a sentence or two; his refusal to flinch from confronting ideas or behavior that were wrong, selfish, or cruel (even-especially!-if these came from his colleagues); his unfailing curiosity about and interest in new developments and new ideas (also continuing to the end of his life). Above all, perhaps, I remember his tender concern during my wife's difficult pregnancy, concern that was unaffected by Hans's own health problems-and his great joy at our daughter's birth. 
Hans was completely fearless. This trait served him well, not least because to my knowledge, Hans was my only colleague who was subject to a genuine threat of criminal violence. About seven years ago two teenagers approached him and asked for money. One of them apparently had a knife. The event occurred while Hans was in the midst of writing his book on the criminal justice system; he responded with an impassioned lecture on how young his assailants were, and on what a criminal conviction could do to their lives. Both of them gave up-in part, I speculate, because of Hans's combination of undauntedness and absolutely genuine concern about what they were doing with their lives. I remember too that when my car needed repair work, Hans insisted that we go see his friends in what must have been the most dangerous area I have ever visited, where Hans was greeted as a neighbor, and permitted to shepherd his bewildered young colleague through the repair shop. (I must add that Hans's fearlessness extended to his somewhat irregular driving methods, and that driving with him was not entirely unlike a Star Wars movie. The people at the repair shop had occasion to get to know Hans very well.) 
Very little really fazed Hans. The day-to-day troubles of the law professor seemed to him trivial, almost nothing at all. Hans was truly concerned, I think, about only three things: getting the facts straight, reducing social injustice and human suffering, and improving the welfare of the people he knew and loved. In my last visit with Hans, a week before he died, he wanted to talk not about his illness or future, -but about the law school he treasured, about Eastern Europe, and most of all about my daughter. Hans was a rare and great friend. He was a profound teacher. To him life was a joy and an adventure, made up of delights and challenges and surprises. His work will endure; it exerts a continuing pull on legal scholarship and the law. But Hans's friends and colleagues will remember above all his optimistic, joyous, determined, brave, and loving spirit. 
NO. 1 
Much of modem constitutional law and theory is organized around two ideas. Both of them are associated with prominent strands in contemporary legal and political thought. 
The first idea is a general principle of neutrality. On that principle, government may not play favorites; it must be impartial. It may not, for example, take resources or opportunities from one person solely for the benefit of another. Nor may it make social outcomes depend entirely on the exercise of political influence. 
The second idea refines this principle by distinguishing between neutrality and partisanship.' It does so by treating existing distributions of wealth, opportunities, preferences, and natural endowments as the baseline against which assessments of neutrality and partisanship * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University ofChicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This Article was originally prepared for a panel on The Future of Liberal Constitutionalism, at the annual meeting of the American Political Science Association, held in September 1990. I am grateful to my copanelists, Don Herzog, Michael Sandel, and Rogers Smith, for their helpful comments on that occasion. Stephen Holmes, a copanelist on that occasion as well, has been an invaluable source of ideas, criticism, and encouragement. 
For helpful comments on an earlier draft, I am also grateful to Bruce A. Ackerman, Albert Alschuler, Mary E. Becker, Anne-Marie Burley, Jean Cohen, Sean Donahue, Rochelle Dreyfuss, Abner Greene, Larry Lessig, William Miller, Martha Nussbaum, Richard A. Posner, Margaret Jane Radin, Eric Rakowski, Simon Steel, Katherine van Wetzel Stone, Kathleen Sullivan, Mark Tushnet, Robin West, and Elisabeth Wood; to participants in workshops at the University of Chicago, Columbia University, and the University of Toronto; to those who attended and commented on my lectures on this subject at the Notre Dame Law School and the University of Cincinnati, where this Article was presented as the Marx Lecture; and to Mr. Steel for research assistance as well. 
Parts of this essay also appear in a forthcoming book, Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (forthcoming 1992). 
"liberalism." Indeed, the most prominent exposition of liberalism in the 20th century is a sustained rejection of this second idea. See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971), which, time and again, argues against conceptions of government that treat the existing distribution of resources, entitlements, natural endowments, and preferences as the basis for social choice. Bruce A. Ackerman, Social Justice in the Liberal State (1980), is another contemporary illustration. Indeed, I would go so far as to suggest that rejection of a conception of neutrality founded on existing distributions is compelled by a proper understanding of liberalism; but a justification of that proposition would take me far beyond the scope of the present discussion. 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 1 1992 will be made. On this view, government decisions that disturb existing distributions raise the spectre of constitutionally questionable partisanship. Decisions that respect existing distributions are neutral and constitutionally unobjectionable. A close examination of those distributions-or of what may be the same thing, the context and history of the practice in question-is thought likely to produce impermissible partiality. 
According to this view, existing distributions serve as the baseline against which to measure not only partisanship and neutrality, but also the very categories of government "action" and "inaction." Decisions that upset existing distributions are treated as "action"; decisions that do not are thought to stay close to nature and thus to amount to no action at all. We might therefore understand the prevailing conceptions of neutrality and government action to be ones that treat as legally uncontroversial any decision to respect the existing set of distributions and preferences, and as legally suspect any decision that disrupts them. 
All this is very abstract. But this conception of neutrality plays itself out quite concretely in legal understandings. Consider, for example, the idea that the democratic process should be seen as a process of aggregating private interests; 2 the opposition to paternalism in public and private law;3 the view that the purpose of law is to facilitate and never to constitute private arrangements; 4 and even notions of formal equality in the area of race and sex discrimination. These notions see discrimination only in explicit legal distinctions based on race and sex, and never in legal rules that operate to disadvantage blacks and women because they are rooted in white or male norms. 5 
All of these positions tend to depend on a conception of neutrality rooted in existing distributions. Both aggregative conceptions of politics and opposition to paternalism are usually rooted in the idea that current preferences should be taken as prepolitical or as defining individual welfare, and therefore used as the basis for social choice. Purely Problems, 47 Ind. L.J. 1, 10 (1971). 
Rev. 947, 954-55 (1984). 
Analysis of Law (3d ed. 1986), which relies on a facilitative conception oflaw, that is, one that sees the purpose of legal rules as the satisfaction of private desires. This understanding is often extremely fruitful. But sometimes private desires might themselves be a function of legal rules, in which case the legal rules cannot be chosen by reference to the desires. 
201, 207-08, 211, 223, 229, 238; infra text accompanying note 63. Of course, to say a practice is rooted in white or male norms is not to make a decisive argument against it. The question remains whether the use of those norms can bejustified on nondiscriminatory grounds. 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 2 1992 facilitative conceptions of law attempt to build on existing distributions and preferences; 6 such approaches disregard the multiple ways in which legal rules help constitute the very distributions and preferences under which "facilitation" takes place. Of course, notions of formal equality are based on norms that are usually unarticulated and indeed reflexive but that are part and parcel of existing distributions-as in, for example, the use of the physical capacities of men as the baseline from which to decide whether women have been treated unequally. 
Still more concretely, the prevailing conception of neutrality helps to shape many of the particular debates in contemporary constitutional law: the role of government in redistributing wealth by interfering with private property and freedom of contract, the problem of affirmative action, and government regulation of campaign finance. These problems, and many more, revolve around competing ideas about neutrality and the line between state action and inaction. 
In this Article, I have two goals. The first is simply to show how a conception of neutrality rooted in existing distributions helps structure discussion in a wide range of constitutional disputes. The second goal is to explain why the prevailing conception of neutrality is often a poor foundation for constitutional theory and practice. 
In Part I, I describe the general conception of neutrality, famously set out by Herbert Wechsler in Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 7 and reflected in many areas of constitutional law. My principal claim is that neutrality, understood in the way that has become prominent, depends on a belief that existing distributions are prepolitical and just, a belief that is sometimes unsound.8 It also depends on a closely 
existing distributions as the baseline stems from the perception that alterations in market outcomes will be counterproductive-as in, for example, the view that the minimum wage increases unemployment. These more pragmatic concerns, see Richard A. Posner, The Problems ofJurisprudence (1990), do not posit a natural orjust private sphere, but instead claim that efforts to change existing distributions will hurt the very people one wants to help or will have ancillary adverse effects. In some contexts, this view does indeed argue in favor of respect for existing distributions. I do not deal with these concerns here. 
Second, nothing I say in this Article is intended to deny that some constitutional provisions-the Takings Clause being the most obvious example-are best interpreted as using existing distributions as the baseline for deciding cases. (The Equal Protection Clause, challenging those distributions, is a sharp contrast.) 
Third, a system that keeps constant institutions and distributions is likely, other things being equal, to create far more stability than a system that does not. That kind of stability is an important individual and collective good. A system in which existing distributions are continually reexamined is likely to break down along factional lines and also to undermine both security and planning. Coherent reform requires selectivity; most things (at any single time) must be left unreformed. Moreover, the status quo, whether or not natural, may well be a basis for legitimate expectations. See Jon Elster, 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 3 1992 
related belief in the need for a certain kind of abstraction and generality, a belief that turns out to produce a set of biases of its own. 
In Part II, I devote special attention to the questions raised by pornography, abortion, and surrogacy-disputes that have perhaps surprising linkages. The legal treatment of all of these problems, I argue, is dominated by a conception that posits a natural, just, and prepolitical sphere of sexuality and reproduction, a sphere that is used as the baseline for distinguishing between partisanship and neutrality, or action and inaction. Indeed, that baseline is present in both the most prominent version of the view that the law should limit access to pornography, surrogacy, and abortion, and the most prominent version of the view that it should not. 
Thus, for example, those who oppose government regulation in these areas often argue that such regulation would illegitimately interfere with natural drives as expressed in the private realm;9 and those proposing regulation often contend that government must protect natural drives from artificial external influences that debase and diminish them.' 0 In either case, the use of the baseline rules out an alternative view. That alternative view sees the problem in all three areas not only or principally in the interference with a private sphere, but in the decision to turn women's sexuality and reproductive capacities into objects for the control and use of others." 
I suggest that this view supplies a secure justification for the abortion right. It also provides worthy competition to the now dominant positions on pornography and surrogacy, although I do not attempt to resolve these issues here. 
My goal is emphatically not to mount a general challenge to neuIntroduction, in Constitutionalism and Democracy 1, 14-17 Uon Elster &Rune Slagstad eds., 1988). 
Finally, I do not deal here with the view that existing distributions contain a kind of rich complexity and rationality that no critic of those distributions is likely to be in a position to appreciate. See, e.g., Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France 348 (Gateway Editions 1962) (1790);Robert C. Clark, Contracts, Elites, and Traditions in the Making of Corporate Law, 89 Colum. L. Rev. 1703, 1729-31 (1989). It is implicit in what follows that this view, while providing a valuable cautionary note, is too broad and general, or undifferentiated, to generate a useful approach to constitutional law. Under the Constitution, it is always necessary to have reasons for practices, rather than practices themselves. Cf. Posner, supra, at 286-312 (criticizing "neotraditionalism" on similar grounds). 

slavery and in its emphasis on freedom generally. See especially Locke's denial that "we were made for one another's uses," in John Locke, Two Treatises of Government 311 (Cambridge University Press 1988) (1689). The denial carries particular force in a context in which legal and social control of women's sexual and reproductive capacities has been and remains a means ofproducing a system with caste-like features, although those features of contemporary sex discrimination are of course far less severe than in traditional caste societies. 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 4 1992 trality as an important aspiration in constitutional decisions. On the contrary, a large part of my effort is to identify a different and stronger conception of neutrality. In Part III, I conclude with some brief remarks about the appropriate content of an ideal of neutrality in constitutional law. 
Before getting down to cases, it will be useful to say something general about neutrality as a constitutional imperative.12 The most celebrated essay in all of constitutional law is probably the place to begin. In TowardNeutralPrinciplesof ConstitutionalLaw, 13 Herbert Wechsler criticized the Supreme Court's opinion in Brown v. Board of Education14 on the ground that the Court had not supplied a "neutral" justification for its decision. For Wechsler, the problem of segregation involved a conflict between two sorts of associational preferences: the desire of blacks to attend school with whites and the desire of whites to attend school without blacks. As far as Wechsler was concerned, the Court had established no neutral principle to permit a choice between these two sets of desires. Wechsler was unable to come up with any such principle on his own. The decision was therefore not shown to be permissibly neutral.15 
For current observers, Wechsler's demand for neutrality, as he understood that concept, seems to have an otherworldly quality. 16 The notion that the associational desires of whites and blacks should be put on the same plane, and given the same status, appears exceedingly peculiar. Those desires have entirely different origins and consequences. The idea that neutrality demands that the desires be "equally" respected disregards the historical context of inequality, that is, the system of racial segregation that reflected and helped create and perpetuate those desires. 
Wechsler's principle of neutrality was thus built on a substantive conception of the baseline from which partisanship would be measured: the racial status quo. His conception of neutrality depended on a form of abstraction that would prohibit legal actors from examining the particular setting-the purposes and the effects-of the practices in question. The decision to take the racial status quo as the baseline was a consequence of that abstraction, which treated an exploration of history and context as impermissibly partisan. It is for this reason that much of the entire article seems to be playing out, on a grand scale, 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 5 1992 Wechsler's claim-in a brief digression from his criticism of Brownthat as a result of the racially based exclusion of the famous black lawyer Charles Hamilton Houston from the restaurants of the District of Columbia, Houston "did not suffer more than" Wechsler himself.17 
The problem is a general one. In a nutshell, it is this: For purposes of constitutional law, the question whether there is partisanship always depends on the baseline from which measurements are made. In the cases, and in ordinary legal or political discussion, the baseline frequently consists of existing distributions of wealth and entitlements. Existing distributions are treated as natural and exogenous to the legal system, and the normal role of government is thus seen as the ratification and protection of these distributions, based in part on existing preferences. These preferences are in turn at least to some extent a function of existing distributions and hence of law; but they are also treated as entirely independent of law. 
Take, for example, the problem of state action. It is often said, and rightly so, that the Constitution operates only against government, and not against private actors. But by itself, the point is uninformative. To give content to the state action requirement, one needs to know what, as a matter of substantive constitutional law, the state is required to do. The question whether the government is "acting" can be answered only by reference to (frequently tacit and unarticulated) substantive ideas about what it is that government normally or naturally does.', 
Nothing else explains the fact that governmental repeal of a trespass law, or refusal to enforce a contract, counts as state action 19whereas a repeal of an antidiscrimination law probably does not. 20 Or consider the fact that enforcement of an antidiscrimination law is Lectures, Lecture 3: It Has Nothing to Do with the Law 36-37 (1991) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Columbia Law Review) (comparing the Aristotelian view of neutrality with that used by Wechsler). 
but that would be too broad. State officials are always implicated in property and contract law, and it would be odd to say that the enforcement or backdrop of contract and property for that reason makes all agreements or exercises of powers of ownership subject to the Constitution. Such a conclusion would mean that every assertion of property and contract rights-including a decision, for example, to contract only with Republicans-would be potentially unconstitutional. 
Here and elsewhere, I am not challenging the distinction between action and inaction, or suggesting that the distinction has no moral or legal weight. Instead, I am arguing that whether there is action or inaction is often decided by reference to a baseline rooted in existing distributions, even though existing distributions are a function of what is, on inspection, action. It need not follow that genuine inaction is an unintelligible or irrelevant category. 
(limitation of the right to exclude others from private shopping center constitutes state action); Allied Structural Steel Co. v. Spannaus, 438 U.S. 234, 240 (1978) (state law preempting existing contractual relation constitutes state action). 

HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 6 1992 clearly state action (although, of course, lawful on the merits) while, in general, enforcement of a trespass law or invocation of the courts to enforce a contract is not.2 1 Results of this sort can be attributed not to the requirement of state action, but to a substantive theory that defines (constitutionally troublesome) action and partisanship, and their (constitutionally invulnerable) corollaries, inaction and neutrality, by reference to existing practices and distributions. 
Governmental enforcement of trespass laws and contractual arrangements is frequently thought simply to ratify existing distributions. Rather than interfering with them, legal enforcement of property and contract rights is built into and indistinguishable from existing distributions. By contrast, government enforcement of antidiscrimination law is thought to disrupt existing distributions-that is one of its principal purposes-and to amount to government intervention into an otherwise well-defined, regulation-free, and voluntary private sphere. 
These ideas, and not the requirement of state action itself, account for the results in the cases. And of course these ideas, based on reflexive use of the common law, are misconceived. Trespass law intrudes no less than antidiscrimination law. To say this is not at all to say that the state action requirement should be abandoned. Indeed, I have said that it is unexceptionable. It is not even to say that repeal or nonenforcement of a trespass law should be treated the same as repeal or nonenforcement of an antidiscrimination law.2 2 But it is to say that whether the state is acting cannot be decided without a theory of what government normally does, or should do. 
Another example is affirmative action. Without purporting to settle that difficult issue, we might observe that the constitutional assault on the practice of affirmative action often rests on the claim that whether discrimination is permissible should not be made to turn on which claimants are claiming discrimination, or on "whose ox is gored." 28 Discrimination is discrimination. To allow government to 387 U.S. 369, 376 (1967) (suggesting that a "mere" repeal of an antidiscrimination statute is not state action). 
racially restrictive covenant is state action. But the decision remains extremely controversial, and it has not been understood to mean that the invocation of trespass law raises constitutional doubts. See Hudgens v. NLRB, 424 U.S. 507 (1976); Lloyd Corp. v. Tanner, 407 U.S. 551 (1972). 
plausibly require trespass law but not antidiscrimination law. Perhaps the takings clause requires the government to protect against private invasion of property but not private discrimination. This is a question on the merits, not one of state action. 
William Van Alstyne, Rites of Passage: Race, the Supreme Court, and the Constitution, 46 U. Chi. L. Rev. 775, 808-10 (1979). Some such idea is very much at work in Charles Fried, Comment: Metro Broadcasting,Inc. v. FCC: Two Concepts of Equality, 104 Harv. L. Rev. 107, 111-12 (1990). Fried relies heavily on an opposition between collectivism and individualism; but the opposition seems misplaced in the context ofan argument for 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 7 1992 discriminate against whites but not blacks represents impermissible partisanship. It reveals the commitment to the antidiscrimination principle to be merely contingent and strategic, even hypocritical and cynical-no principle at all. 
When phrased in these terms, however, the attack on affirmative action is identical to Wechsler's attack on Brown, and it suffers from the same infirmity. It takes as given and exogenous, or as uncontroversial, existing distributions of benefits and burdens between blacks and whites. The attack rips the notion of discrimination out of the context that gave that word its social meaning and made it a term of opprobrium. The attack treats attention to context and history as unprincipled; it identifies racial differentiation with invidious treatment, and does so not byjustifying the identification, but by playing on an ambiguity in the word "discrimination." 24 It sees efforts to benefit blacks at the expense of whites as a kind of "taking"; and the notion of taking depends on acceptance of existing distributions, which, in this context, seem anything but prepolitical and just. 
Even more than all this, the prevailing conception of neutrality defines the presence of government action by reference to existing distributions. The very term "affirmative action" suggests that reliance on market measures, operating against the backdrop set by existing distributions, is inaction, or negative, or part of the, state of nature, and is therefore permissibly neutral. But if existing distributions are a product of law, and hardly neutral, market measures are in turn a mechanism, actually chosen publicly and made possible only through law, for giving those distributions certain predictable effects. Strategies having the purpose and effect of combatting the social subordination of blacks need hardly be treated the same as strategies designed to perpetuate it. 
There are many legitimate reasons for serious concerns about affirmative action programs. But in its most prominent form, the objection from neutrality seems misplaced. That objection is the contemporary version of Wechsler's challenge to Brown. 
Consider, as a final example, the frequently repeated view that the Constitution protects only negative rights and not positive ones.2 5 centralized judicial invalidation of an important aspect of employment policy for thousands and perhaps millions of employers, schools, and others. It seems quite "collectivist" to advocate centralized judicial preclusion ofprograms set out by widely divergent individuals and groups. In fact Fried's argument, treating all forms of discrimination "the same," depends not on "individualism" but on a claim from neutrality. 
Rights 108, 112-13 (Ellen Frankel Paul et al. eds., 1991). 
998, 1003 (1989); see also Rust v. Sullivan, 111 S. Ct. 1759, 1772-75 (1991) (using this idea to give government broad power to fund speech as it chooses). The approach in Rust similarly depends on a sharp split between government "intervention" into common-law rights (treated as prepolitical and therefore protected) and governmental "re 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 8 1992 Under this rubric, the Constitution affords no right to welfare, medical care, or protection against violence. 26 As it operates in the cases, however, the description of a right as positive or negative depends on the baseline. The right to private property and protection of contractual freedom are uncontroversial, and properly so;27 but they are fully positive. Their existence depends on the willingness of state officials to enforce trespass laws and contractual arrangements. 28 
These relatively uncontroversial constitutional rights are thus positive in character. The rejection of a right to welfare or to freedom from private discrimination cannot rest on a claim that all constitutional rights are "negative" in the sense that they do not require governmental involvement. The line between constitutionally protected rights and unprotected interests depends not on the distinction between negative and positive rights, but on substantive ideas about what government normally or naturally does. It remains entirely possible that existing law is sound. The point is that its soundness must depend on something other than the claim that the Constitution protects only negative rights. 
Disagreements about the relationship between law and preferences raise an identical issue. Neutrality is often said to require respect for subjectively held views;2 9 but those views will often be in part a function of existing practice, including, most notably, the legal rules initially allocating entitlements. Whether people have a preference for something often depends at least in part on the legal rules of initial allocation.3 0 If subjective conceptions of welfare are in part a product of legal rules, and are not exogenous to them, it is hard to see how government could even try to remain neutral or fail to act-unless, again, respect for existing practice, and its accompanying legal rules, is defined as neutrality and inaction. But there is no neutrality in respect for existing desires as subjectively perceived when those desires are in part 
HeinOnline -- 92 Colum. L. Rev. 9 1992 a function of law and existing social institutions.3 1 And it is hardly clear that notions of freedom and autonomy, rightly understood, argue in favor of respect for existing preferences, whatever their context, origins, and consequences, and whatever the reasons that might be offered in their support.3 2 
These ideas come together in one of the most important general questions in free speech law, which involves the power of government to regulate the speech "market" in the interest of a well-functioning deliberative democracy. The issue has arisen frequently during discussions of campaign finance legislation and efforts to regulate television and radio.3 3 According to one view, any government regulation of speech is impermissible partisanship.3 4 If government removes speech power from some people because, for example, they are rich, it takes from them for the benefit of others. 
The Supreme Court invalidated campaign finance regulation in Buckley v. Valeo under precisely this rationale.3 5 In its key passage, the Court said that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment." 36 It is critical that the Court did not say that the effort to promote deliberation among political equals was insufficiently weighty or inadequately promoted by the legislation at hand. Instead, the Court said, far more broadly, that the effort itself was constitutionally illegitimate. 
The Buckley outcome turned on a particular conception of constitutional neutrality. On this view, existing distributions of wealth, at least insofar as they create speech, are off-limits to government. Efforts to liberalism in the 19th and 20th centuries are insistent on the point. See, e.g., John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women 4-6 (Susan M. Okin ed., 1988) (1869) (refusing to view the subjugation of women as a natural institution simply because of existing desires and its long existence); Rawls, supra note 1, at 260-63. 
State chs. 1 & 2 (1990) and Preferences and Politics, 20 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 3 (1991). See also Elster, supra note 30, at 125-33 (discussing adaptation of preferences to the status quo). 
The arguments I am now making, and the general claims to follow about pornography, abortion, and surrogacy, do not turn on any commitment to priority of the good over the right, or vice-versa. All of these arguments and claims can be justified by reference to a particular conception of the right, which could be thought prior to any kinds of consequential considerations. 
1991). 
commonly used in these discussions, the term does not include market arrangements. Of course, this usage replicates the baseline problem discussed throughout this Article. 
U.S. 765, 788-92 (1978) (invalidating Massachusetts statute as a legislative suppression of corporate participation in discussion of referendum issue). 
redistribute speech are impermissibly partisan. But if existing distributions were seen as neither prepolitical nor just-at least as a basis for the power to speak-the First Amendment would not be understood as a guarantor of unrestricted speech "markets," and much less as a vehicle for the translation of economic into political inequalities. Instead, the free speech guarantee would be treated as an effort to ensure a process of deliberation that might well, under current conditions, be promoted rather than undermined through regulatory measures. 37 
The same ideas are played out in the debate over the increasingly prominent view that the government should not concern itself with the airwaves and that total reliance on private markets and consumer preferences is the appropriate strategy for government with respect to broadcasting.38 Despite the emerging consensus, it is hardly clear that neutrality lies in respect for a system in which access to the media is a product of private willingness to pay. At least in principle, rights of private access to the media for differing positions, and other regulatory controls, might be thought congenial to the free speech guarantee. Especially in light of the consequences of broadcasting for beliefs and preferences, it is far from clear that government acts properly when it allows existing distributions of wealth to be translated into access to the media. Here, as in many other cases, a conception of neutrality that begins with existing distributions, and denominates disturbance of those distributions as "action" and "partisanship," plays a large role. 
It is important to understand, however, the many complexities in the use of "nature" or "the natural" as the basis for evaluating social practices. In classical philosophy, nature was a normative notion; it connoted human flourishing in connection with a certain kind of activity, and the lack of obstacles to that flourishing. 39 Nature did not refer to the absence of social or legal intervention. In modern political and legal theory, this normative notion of nature is sometimes conflated with an altogether different conception of the natural, one that is based on an inquiry into what would happen without social or legal action. 
Law: Selected Tanner Lectures on Moral Philosophy 76 (Sterling M. McMurrin ed., 1987). As Rawls states: 
The Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair value of the political liberties is required for a just political procedure, and that to insure their fair-value it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage. 
Id. 
This conflation creates serious confusion. It would be hard indeed to defend a normative conception of the natural rooted in an absence of social or legal action. Practices that are natural in the prepolitical sense do not warrant approval for that reason. For many people poor eyesight is natural, but this is not a reason to refuse to wear eyeglasses. Criminal violence may well be natural, but this is not an argument against the criminal law. So too, the fact that a practice or distribution is not prepolitical or natural in the descriptive sense does not count as an argument against it. A system of racial equality, or one of private property and freedom of contract, requires for its existence a large role for law; but this does not mean that such a system is a bad idea. 
Naturalness is, then, neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for approval or disapproval of any particular system of social ordering; and a demonstration that a practice requires a political structure is not an argument against that practice. 40 On the other hand, a perception of naturalness sometimes makes a system seem strongly resistant to change; an effort to reveal the presence of government in practices often taken as prepolitical can help dislodge a belief that those prac40. Both Mill and Rousseau disposed of claims of justificatory power for nature, notwithstanding the persistence of those claims in some surprising places: If the artificial is not better than the natural, to what end are all the arts of life? To dig, to plough, to build, to wear clothes, are direct infringements on the injunction to follow nature. 
... All praise of Civilization, or Art, or Contrivance, is so much dispraise of Nature; an admission of imperfection, which it is man's business, and merit, to be always endeavouring to correct or mitigate. 
In sober truth, nearly all the things which men are hanged or imprisoned for doing to one another, are nature's every day performances. 
[I]t remains true that nearly every respectable attribute of humanity is the result not of instinct, but of a victory over instinct; and that there is hardly anything valuable in the natural man except capacities-a whole world of possibilities, all of them dependent upon eminently artificial discipline for being realized. [T]he duty of man is the same in respect to his own nature as in respect to the nature of all other things, namely not to follow but to amend it. 
Conformity to nature, has no connection whatever with right and wrong.... That a thing is unnatural, in any precise meaning which can be attached to the word, is no argument for its being blamable.... 
John Stuart Mill, Nature, in 10 Collected Works ofJohn Stuart Mill 373, 381-401 (J.M. Robson ed., 1969); see also Jean-Jacques Rousseau, On the Social Contract 56 (Roger D. Masters ed., 1978) (when society passes from state of nature to civil state, man is transformed "from a stupid limited animal to an intelligent being and a man"). 
In several recent essays, an emphasis on the situated or contingent character of legal rules has been taken to be a reason for large-scale social change. See, e.g., Anthony E. Cook, Beyond Critical Legal Studies: The Reconstructive Theology of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., 103 Harv. L. Rev. 985, 1042-44 (1990); Allan C. Hutchinson, Reading Rorty Radically, 103 Harv. L. Rev. 555, 569-73 (1989) (book review). In fact, however, to say that existing baselines are postpolitical, or that legal rules help construct the social world, argues in no direction at all. By itself, it is hardly a reason for change. tices must be taken as the baseline for decision. To replace the baseline, however, it is necessary to make a substantive argument rather than to inquire into nature. 
PORNOGRAPHY, ABORTION, AND SURROGACY 
I now turn to the three areas that will receive principal attention in this essay. As we will see, there are strong parallels in the debates over pornography, abortion, and surrogacy. In these three debates, the prevailing conception of neutrality rules out of bounds, as partisan, an argument that is at least highly plausible and that might indeed have a claim to ultimate support. In these three debates, an exploration of the context of the history and practice under attack is often identified with impermissible partisanship.4 1 
It will be useful to summarize the general argument before applying it to each area. Much of the debate in all of these contexts consists of a conflict between two well-known positions. According to one view, the government should not repress or interfere with natural drives, especially as these are expressed through sexual and reproductive processes. These drives have special claims, arising out of the need to permit intimacy with respect to practices that are central both to individual development and mutual recognition. 42 The law should respect the privacy of those who wish to see or read'sexually explicit material,43 terminate pregnancies, 44 or enter into surrogacy arrangements; 45 and all these for essentially the same reason, having to do with the individual's right to self-determination in matters of sexuality and reproduction. 46 
Under the second view, the law properly controls sexual and reproductive behavior in order to ensure that sexuality and reproduction, in their natural or best forms, are not polluted or altered through artificial external influences. 47 The profane should not intrude on the sacred. The law properly ensures the separation of the private sphere of sexuality from the public sphere of the marketplace, by controlling obscenity;4 8 properly protects against abortion, most fundamentally to protect the interest in fetal life, but also to ensure that sexuality is for purposes of reproduction; 49 and properly protects reproduction and sexuality from the commodification produced by surrogacy. 50 
For all their differences, these positions share important premises. Both of them posit a currently just private sphere of reproduction and sexuality. 5 1 Sometimes, though not always, advocates of both of them posit a natural or prepolitical sexual and reproductive sphere.5 2 The first position, with its neo-Freudian foundations, tends to stress the need to free up drives from the repressive arm of the state. The second position, with its neo-religious roots, usually relies on the need to protect drives, also in their natural form, from harmful external influences. 53 
Because of this commonality, advocates of both positions are critical of a third, which they deem impermissibly partisan or selective.5 4 ("Civil society cannot afford to be neutral toward the various forms and degrees of human sensuality which may emerge within it."). 

logically separable from it. See Kristin Luker, Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood 163-68 (1984). 
214-16 (Ky. 1986) (Wintersheimer, J., dissenting). 
See infra note 81 and accompanying text. 

"selfexpression" in the political and economic spheres: 
The theory assigns a certain intrinsic rightness in this original structure, rightness in the sense of conferring upon them a title to pass into direct action, except when they directly and evidently interfere with similar self-manifestation in others. The idea thus overlooks the part played by interaction with the surrounding medium, especially the social, in generating impulses and desires. They are supposed to inhere in the "nature" of the individual when that is taken in a primal state, uninfluenced by interaction with an environment. The latter is thus thought of as purely external to an individual, and as irrelevant to freedom except when it interferes with the operation of native instincts and impulses. A study of history would reveal that this notion.., is a "faint rumor" left on the air of morals and politics by disappearing theological dogmas, which held that "nature" is thoroughly good as it comes from the creative hand of God, and that evil is due to corruption through artificial interference and oppression exercised by external or "social" conditions. 
John Dewey, Philosophies of Freedom, in Freedom in the Modem World 236, 246 (Horace M. Kallen ed., 1928). Much of this Article might be seen as an application of this argument. John Stuart Mill makes a quite similar claim. See Mill, supra note 40, at 381-82. 
mem., 475 U.S. 1001 (1986). For a discussion of Hudnut, see infra text accompanying notes 102-103. This third position does not stress privacy, a broad or acontextual "right to choose," or the general need to maintain control over one's body. Even less does it rest on the state interest in promoting traditional or conventional morality. Instead, it invokes the interest in ensuring that women's sexuality and reproductive functions are not turned into something for the use and control of others. 55 
This principle is grounded in a familiar conception of equality. 56 At a minimum, this principle means that a legislature may take steps to ensure that morally irrelevant characteristics-most conspicuously race and sex-are not translated into systemic sources of social disadvantage. A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines, in multiple important spheres of social life, and that applies in such crucial realms as education, freedom from violence, wealth, political representation, and political influence. The claim that women's sexual and reproductive capacities may not be turned into objects for the control and use of third parties is simply a particular application of this general idea. 
It follows, for example, that a legislature may properly attempt to counteract the subjection of blacks and women to private violence. Restrictions on rape, sexual assault, sexual harassment, and pornography containing violence against women (assuming tfiat the First Amendment objection has been overcome) can be justified on this general ground. 57 Legislative regulation of surrogacy arrangements may be supported on the related idea that such arrangements contribute, even if mildly, to discrimination against women, by allowing women's reproductive capacities to be objects owned and used by others. 58 This general conception of equality has strong roots in the history (1989). 
[T]he principle which regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes-the legal subordination of one sex to the other-is wrong in itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and.., it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality, admitting no power of privilege on the one side, nor disability on the other. 
Mill, supra note 31, at 2. This is an anticaste principle, defended as such in Cass Sunstein, Three Civil Rights Fallacies, 79 Cal. L. Rev. 751, 770-73 (1990). Mill's comments on his own argument remain relevant: 
And there are so many causes tending to make the feelings connected with this subject the most intense and most deeply-rooted of all those which gather round and protect old institutions and customs, that we need not wonder to find them as yet undermined and loosened than any of the rest by the progress of the great modem spiritual and social transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms to which men cling longest must be less barbarisms than those which they earlier shake off. 
See Mill, supra, note 31, at 2. 
Cong. Rec. S8263-69 (daily ed. June 19, 1990). 
of the Fourteenth Amendment,5 9 For the most part, however, the principle is for legislative and executive enforcement. Courts are quite illsuited to respond to any general attack on the translation of morally irrelevant characteristics into systemic sources of social disadvantage. 60 But the equality principle, thus understood, will on occasion call for a judicial role under the Equal Protection Clause. At a minimum, it requires a powerful sex-neutral justification for laws that are aimed, on their face or in their motivation, at women.6 1 For this reason laws restricting abortion, which contain a sex-based classification, 62 raise a serious equal protection problem. 
On this third view, the sexual and reproductive status quo is, sometimes, a locus of inequality; it is for this reason that the practices at issue are troublesome. Indeed, legal and social control of women's sexual and reproductive capacities has been a principal historical source of sexual inequality. 63 It remains a critical vehicle for creating inequality, even under contemporary conditions. 
Now, as before, the inequality is often justified as a response to real differences or to nature. 64 In fact, however, legal practices often help create the very differences that supposedly justify those practices. Consider laws ensuring that women will not be rewarded as well as men in the workplace, 65 and that encourage women to engage in the care of children, and discourage men from doing so. Even when the differences are not a function of law, legal-practices can turn biological differences, which need have no social consequences, into a source of social disadvantage. Here an objection from equality is perfectly plausible. It should not be obscured by references to "nature.'! 
In the context at hand, a restriction on access to abortion turns women's reproductive capacities into something to be used by fetuses. Surrogacy arrangements do the same, but here the users are strangers seeking a child, and the vehicle is the market rather than the government.66 Finally, the production and consumption of pornography are troublesome because and to the extent that they allow women's sexuality to be used by strangers, often through violence. 
The third view should not be understood as an effort to oppose equality to liberty and to declare that the former has precedence over the latter. Indeed, those who accept the third view will probably reject the conception of liberty spoken for by those who think that the liberty principle, rightly understood and standing by itself, entails free availability of pornography, abortion, and surrogacy. For those with sympathy for this third view, liberty does not entail respect for all "choices" viewed acontextually and made pursuant to existing distributions of wealth and entitlements. 6 7 Choices might be a function of those distributions and of unjust background conditions. 68 If choices are constrained by injustice, their protection need not represent liberty at all. For present purposes, however, it is neither necessary nor useful to attempt a broad new conception of liberty. Instead, an approach defined in terms of sex equality better captures central aspects of the social dynamics of all three issues. 
Nor does this third view rest on a distinction between "negative" and "positive" liberty.69 If the first section of this essay is persuasive, the distinction is highly misleading as usually understood. 70 There is nothing "negative" about negative liberty, whose existence depends on a state apparatus willing to become actively involved in some matters and not others. Instead of distinguishing negative from positive liberty, constitutional law might focus more directly on what sorts of liberties are protected by particular constitutional provisions. Of course, it might well be that the class of constitutionally protected liberty, properly conceived, overlaps a good deal with what is conventionally described as negative liberty, and little or not at all with what is conventionally described as positive liberty. 
I do not mean to resolve the question whether the third view must ultimately be found persuasive. Whether or not this view is entitled to support depends on a range of considerations that its mere statement inadequately addresses. 7 1 Instead, I suggest that in all three areas, the prevailing conception of neutrality, which makes these claims seem impermissibly partisan, depends on an unarticulated and unjustifiable baseline, that is, the sexual and reproductive status quo. In all three areas, the prevailing conception of neutrality forbids attention to his67. This third view might be thought to embody an anticaste principle, one that insists that existing choices are sometimes an outgrowth of unjust background conditions. See Sunstein, supra note 56, at 770-73. 
Capabilities 69-70 (1985). 
122-34 (1969). 

111, text following note 161. tory and context; which is necessary to make sense of the relevant legal claims. In all three instances, it is the objection from neutrality that is now dominant. It is this objection, I contend, that cannot be sustained. 
With respect to pornography, two positions, mirroring the first two views outlined above, have captured the current constitutional landscape, at least in the courts. According to the first, some categories of expression are simply excluded from the category of protected "speech." In the well-known formulation, "obscenity" is defined to include materials that appeal to the prurient interest, are patently offensive by contemporary community standards, and lack serious social value. 72 Obscenity does not count as speech; the Supreme Court treats it as sex rather than expression. 
The exclusion of obscenity from the category of protected expression is often associated with the idea that sexuality is private or sacred. For this reason, sexuality ought not to be permitted to intrude into the public space, and the public space should not intrude into it. 3 Separated, sexuality and the public space are unobjectionable in their current or traditional forms. The problem is their intermingling, which debases both. On this view, sexuality and reproduction should be immunized from the effects of commercialization and in particular from the exploitative and degrading depictions of the marketplace, which can easily spill into and adversely affect the private realm. In a democratic society, the public should be permitted to police this process. 
Legal enforcement of the division between public and private spheres, aiming to protect the current or traditional versions of the two, is on this view hardly problematic. Indeed, it represents a form of impartiality. To be sure, a decision to regulate obscenity is not entirely neutral, since it makes regulation turn on the content of the speech and even on existing social norms. But as long as contemporary community standards serve as the basis for regulation, controls on obscenity may be seen as neutral at least with respect to point of view, and are therefore nonpartisan in the crucial sense that the views of the speaker are not the trigger for the imposition of governmental controls.74 
The alternative view is that all speech stands on the same ground and that government has no business censoring speech merely because some people, or some officials, are puritanical or offended by it.75 According to this view, obscenity is speech, not sex-just as a movie filled with violence is a representation rather than the thing itself. And on this view, government must remain neutral among different conceptions of the good, above all, among those conceptions as they are expressed through words and pictures. A decision to single out obscenity for special treatment is a conspicuous violation of the neutrality requirement of the First Amendment. It might be stressed here that sexuality, as described in obscene speech, is part of existing social practice. Surely existing practice ought to be protected insofar as it is merely depicted, however offensive it may be to some. 
In some of its incarnations, this position has relatively straightforward neo-Freudian roots.76 It rests on the perceived naturalness of sexual drives, and it emphasizes the need to liberate those drives from the constraining arm of the state. This position could and sometimes does have different foundations. It need not rest on any form of naturalism, but might instead invoke the need to respect divergent conceptions of the good, whatever the source of those conceptions. 77 Alternatively, it might recognize that sexuality, like speech, is partly or even largely a social construct,78 but still insist that sexuality is an important human good entitled to immunity from government. 
The foundations of the first position, in many of its incarnations, can be found in some religious teaching. 7 9 It also tends to depend on a belief in the naturalness of sexual drives, here understood as unpolluted by obscenity, which, on this account, depicts sexuality in a debased and unnatural way. The link between the two positions lies in their shared reliance on a private sphere of sexuality, usually taken as natural or neutral. That private sphere is to be the starting point for assessing proposed legal controls. 
In some contexts, much can be said on behalf of both of these positions. For both men and women, suppression or channeling of sexual drives and sexuality through law or social norms has sometimes been a vehicle for injustice and for the infliction of extremely serious personal harms.8 0 The liberation of such drives from law or social constraint is in some contexts an important individual and collective good. There is, Both views reflect a "prochoice" position. Both views stem from the belief that government ought not to be able to interfere with private liberty. Both views posit a private, natural, and largely unproblematic sphere of sexual and reproductive autonomy.1 1 7 Both views suggest that the private realm of sexuality and reproduction ought to be placed off limits to the State. Rights of access to pornography and abortion are protected for closely analogous reasons. 
There are serious difficulties, however, in treating the abortion right as one of privacy, not least because the Constitution does not refer to privacy and because the abortion decision does not involve conventional privacy at all.1 18 In any case, the two views on the subject seem to have reached stalemate, with no possibility of developing criteria for mediating between them that might be acceptable to both sides. 
We might therefore explore another argument on behalf of the relevant right, one that sounds in principles of equal protection. 19 This argument sees a prohibition on abortion as invalid because it involves a cooptation of women's bodies for the protection of fetuses.120 It claims that abortion restrictions selectively turn women's reproductive capacities into something for the use and control of others.' 2 1 No parallel to be based on this ground. See supra text accompanying notes 77-81. 
Yale L.J. 920, 932 (1973). Perhaps the right should be understood as involving liberty or autonomy. Liberty is of course protected by the Due Process Clause, and the notion that that Clause has a substantive component, though textually and historically controversial, is well-engrained in American law. But if the argument that follows in the text is correct, that understanding inadequately captures the dynamics of the abortion question. To say this is not to say that the fact that a form of liberty is involved is irrelevant, nor is it to deny the possibility of developing an argument that would rely on liberty rather than equality. See infra note 143 and accompanying text. 
than liberty arguments with respect to abortion generally. See MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 93-102; Tribe, supra note 104, at 1353-56; Ruth B. Ginsburg, Some Thoughts on Autonomy and Equality in Relation to Roe v. Wade, 63 N.C. L. Rev. 375, 382-83 (1985); Kenneth L. Karst, Foreword: Equal Citizenship Under the Fourteenth Amendment, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1, 57-59 (1977); Catharine A. Mackinnon, Reflections on Sex Equality Under Law, 100 Yale L.J. 1281, 1307-24 (1991); Frances Olsen, Unraveling Compromise, 103 Harv. L. Rev. 105, 117-26 (1989); Frederick Schauer, Easy Cases, 58 S. Cal. L. Rev. 399, 431 n.83 (1985); David A. Strauss, Discriminatory Intent and the Taming of Brown, 56 U. Chi. L. Rev. 935, 990-92 (1989). An especially helpful recent treatment, overlapping with that presented here, is Guido Calabresi, Foreword: Antidiscrimination and Constitutional Accountability (What the Bork-Brennan Debate Ignores), 105 Harv. L. Rev. 80, 146-49 (1991). 
Wade, 77 Mich. L. Rev. 1569 (1979) andJudithJarvis Thomson, A Defense of Abortion, 1 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 47 (1971). I am much indebted to these treatments; but they do not sufficiently emphasize issues of sexual inequality. 
capacities are just that-women's. If this argument depends on a belief in a natural or prepolitical right of ownership, it may well run afoul of the considerations introduced disability is imposed on men. Unlike the privacy view, this argument does not and need not take a position on the status of the fetus. It acknowledges the, possibility that fetuses are in important respects human beings. It is entirely comfortable with the claim that the destruction of a fetus is at least a morally problematic act. But it asserts that under current conditions, the government cannot impose on women alone the obligation to protect fetuses through a legal act of bodily cooptation. 
On this view, abortion should be seen not as murder of the fetus but instead as a refusal to continue to permit one's body to be used to provide assistance to it. The failure to see it in this way is simply a product of the perceived naturalness of the role of women as childbearers-whether they want to assume that role or not. And even if a general legal obligation of bodily assistance to the vulnerable might be constitutionally acceptable, such an obligation cannot be permitted if it is imposed solely on women. This is so especially because of the close real-world connection between selectivity of this sort and constitutionally illegitimate stereotypes about the appropriate role of women. 
In its fullest form, the argument from equality is supported by four different points: (1) prohibiting abortion is a form of prima facie or de jure sex discrimination; (2) it is impermissibly selective; (3) it results from constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes; and (4) it fails sufficiently to protect fetal lives. Standing alone, any one of these points is probably insufficient. They derive force by their cumulative effect. 
The first point is that restrictions on abortion should be seen as a form of sex discrimination. The proper analogy here is to a law that is targeted solely at women, and thus contains a de jure distinction on the basis of sex. A statute that is explicitly addressed to women is of course a form of sex discrimination. A statute that involves a defining characteristic or a biological correlate of being female should be treated in precisely the same way.' 22 If a law said that "no woman" may obtain an supra text accompanying notes 17-23. The argument should be seen instead as rooted most straightforwardly in a norm of equality on the basis of sex: a right on the part of women not to have their bodies used by others when men's bodies are not similarly used. It would be most surprising if a general right of bodily ownership could not also be justified for both men and women, see infra note 143, but I need not explore that question here. 
held otherwise in Geduldig v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484 (1974), but the context involved a disability insurance program from which pregnancy was excluded. It is by no means clear that Geduldig would be extended to a case in which pregnant people were (for example) forced to stay indoors in certain periods, or subjected to some other unique criminal or civil disability. 
An argument that discrimination on the basis of pregnancy should not be treated the same as discrimination on the basis of sex might stress that statutes directed at biological correlates of sex are less likely to reflect prejudice and stereotyping. There is, after all, a real difference here, and the legislation might be responding sensibly to it. But it is doubtful whether an approach to sex discrimination should be based on an abortion, it should readily be seen as a sex-based classification. A law saying that "no person" may obtain an abortion has the same meaning. 
The fact that some men may also be punished by abortion lawsfor example, male doctors-does not mean that restrictions on abortion are sex-neutral. Laws calling for racial segregation make it impermissible for whites as well as blacks to desegregate, and this does not make such laws race-neutral. Nor would it be correct to say12 3 that restrictions on abortion merely have a discriminatory impact on women, and that they should therefore be treated in the same way as neutral weight and height requirements having disproportionate effects on women. With such requirements, men and women are on both sides of the legal line; but abortion restrictions exclusively target women. A law that prohibited pregnant women, or pregnant people, from appearing on the streets during daylight would readily be seen as a form of dejure sex discrimination. A restriction on abortion has the same sex-based features. 
It may well be a sufficient response that what is plausibly another life-that of the fetus, who is defenseless, politically and otherwise-is involved. But that fact goes to the issue ofjustification, not to the question whether there is discrimination in the first instance. 
It is important to recall here that the biological capacity to bear children, frequently taken as the basis for women's natural role, has the social consequence of involuntary childbearing only as a result of governmental decisions, significant among them the legal prohibition of abortion. The question at hand is whether government has the power to turn that capacity or difference, limited as it is to one gender, into a source of social disadvantage. The recognition of the abortion right might be rooted in a belief that the biological capacity has no necessary social consequences, and that the role of motherhood for women should be chosen rather than given.124 
If we suppose that a restriction on the abortion right is a form of sex discrimination, the problem is hardly resolved. The question remains whether the interest in protecting the life of the fetus allows the state to compel women to bring the fetus to term. The second point in defense of an equality right to abortion would not devalue that interest, or refer generally to the right to control one's body, but would stress instead the selectivity of the compulsion. The basic problem is that an inquiry into whether there are real differences. Whether a "real difference" justifies social disadvantage is the question to be decided. See UAW v. Johnson Controls, Inc., 111 S. Ct. 1196, 1204 (1991); MacKinnon, supra note 82, at 32-45. And even if it does, pregnancy is a particular kind of real difference, one whose exclusive targeting is in fact likely to reflect prejudice. 
Deliberation About Abortion, 58 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1181, 1187 (1991) (reviewing Laurence H. Tribe, Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes (1990)). 
decision to give birth should be seen as a choice). act of abortion is not an ordinary killing, but instead a refusal to allow one's body to be devoted to the protection of another. Government never imposes an obligation of this sort on its citizens-even when human life is uncontroversially at stake. 12 5 Parents are not compelled to devote their bodies to the protection of children, even if, for example, a risk-free kidney transplant is necessary to prevent the death of their child-and even though it could be said in such cases that the parents "assumed the risk" of the bodily imposition by conceiving the child in the first instance.126 
Indeed, it seems clear that a proposal to impose duties of bodily imposition on parents or others would be treated as a frightening and unacceptable intrusion on personal autonomy-even when life is at stake, even when death would result from refusal to carry out the relevant duty, and even when the people to be protected owe their existence and vulnerability to the people on whom the imposition would be placed. It is striking that no American legislature has imposed such a duty and that courts have refused to do so as well. 12 7 The fact that similar impositions are not made in cases in which men are involvedthe existence of facial discrimination in the imposition of the burdensuggests that the prohibition of abortion is a form of impermissible selectivity. It indicates that a discriminatory purpose is ultimately at work. 
To be sure, nothing is quite like pregnancy. It is plausible that there are relevant differences between a prohibition on abortion and other forms of legally compelled use of bodies for the protection of others. 128 But the fact that the burden of bodily cooptation is imposed 
Pa. D. & C.3d 90 (1978). 
analogous to murder rather than refusal to aid; but the brute facts cannot settle the moral question. An abortion is indeed different from a refusal to aid in the sense that it involves a physical operation as a result of which a living being will be removed from its habitat in a way that will produce its death. In this sense, abortion really is not like anything else. But it is also true that the person seeking abortion is refusing to allow her body to be conscripted for the use ofanother; here the parallel to refusal to aid becomes very close, and the assimilation of abortion to murder becomes puzzling. 
The argument in the text works most simply with pregnancies produced by rape and incest. It is more complex with pregnancies resulting from sexual relations that are voluntary. But consent to intercourse is not consent to pregnancy, and the question is therefore not whether intercourse is voluntary, but whether the decision to engage in intercourse, even if voluntary, is a sufficient reason to allow governmental cooptation of bodies during any resulting pregnancy. Cf. Thomson, supra note 120, at 57-59 (arguing that voluntary exposure to risks need not be a basis for imposing burdens when risks come to fruition). Note also that the conditions under which pregnancies occur frequently involve coercion ofvarious sorts, though this is of course a disputed question of both fact and theory. For more discussion of these points, see infra text accompanying note 146. in this setting alone at least suggests that the interest in protection of human life is found adequate only as a result of impermissible sex role stereotypes.' 2 9 The fact that an abortion is treated as a killing, whereas other refusals to allow one's body to be used are treated as mere refusals to protect, suggests precisely the same thing. 
More particularly, we may speculate that an abortion is seen as a killing rather than a failure to allow conscription only because of the perceived naturalness of the role of women as child-bearers, whether they seek that role or not. The distinction between murder and failure to aid is a special case of the general distinction between acts and omissions, a distinction that usually turns on the identification of a baseline, that is, the natural or ordinary state of affairs. 3 0° The carrying of a child to term is, for those who consider abortion to be murder, the implicit (but undefended and reflexive) baseline. An abortion is thus seen as a murder for the same reason that a trespass law is seen as government inaction.13 1 The advantage of the analogies-compulsory blood transfusions or bone marrow transplants-is that they reveal that abortion is viewed as a killing, rather than a failure to assist, largely because of constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes about women's natural or appropriate role. 
There is a plausible counterexample here: the military draft, from which women have traditionally been excluded. The male-only draft seems to suggest that the state does indeed impose on the bodies of both men and women when necessary, and even that there is a kind of equality in the imposition of the relevant burden. Women's compulsory role in the protection of unborn children might be thought to find a parallel in men's compulsory role in the protection of the nation. 
In fact, the male-only draft does require a more precise statement of my basic claim, but when so restated the example turns out not to be (company's fetal protection policy not neutral because it does not apply to reproductive capacity of male employees; Title VII prohibits sex-specific fetal protection policies). 
The equality argument in the text does not depend on the counterfactual question: How would abortion be treated if men could become pregnant? The question has the usual problem of counterfactuals: It can work only if one isolated part of current reality is changed and the rest held constant-an extremely artificial strategy, since the change of that one isolated part of reality changes the rest of it as well. See David K. Lewis, Counterfactuals 9 (1973). It is tempting to think that abortion would be freely available if men could become pregnant, because mostly male legislatures would be unlikely to support a law that would so severely constrain them in the event that sexual intercourse produced an unwanted child. But if men could become pregnant, they would not be men (indeed no one would be a man as we understand that term), and to ask how abortion would be treated in so fundamentally different a world is to ask a question that is not subject to meaningful evaluation. Cf. Strauss, supra note 119, at 992-95 (discussing conceptual incoherence of "reverse the groups" test). 
a counterexample but instead a confirmation of that claim.1 3 2 The central point is that legal provisions ensuring that only men are drafted are part of a system of sex role stereotyping characterized by a sharp, legally produced split between the domestic and public spheres-with women occupying the first and men occupying the second. In this light, legal restrictions on abortion are an element in the legal creation of a domestic sphere in which women occupy their traditional role, and principally or exclusively that role. Male-only drafts are part of the legal creation of a public sphere in which men occupy their traditional role, and principally or exclusively that role. 
The point suggests that from the standpoint of equal protection, the problem with restrictions on abortion is not merely that they impose on women's bodies but also that they do so in a way that is inextricably intertwined with the prescription, by the law and thus the state, of different roles for men and women, different roles that are part of second-class citizenship for women. Far from undermining it, the fact that only men are drafted helps to confirm the claim that abortion laws represent a form of unacceptable selectivity.1 3 3 
The third point, buttressing the second, is that the notion that women should be compelled in this way is a product of constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes about the proper role of women in society. The connection is not a matter of logic but of past and current practice; it is fully possible to reject these stereotypes and the practice of abortion. But the history of abortion restrictions unambiguously supports the claim that in fact, such restrictions are closely tied up with, indeed in practice driven by, traditional ideas about women's proper role.' 3 4 invasive than a prohibition on abortion, because the imposition on the body is wholly external. During wartime the draft may subject a conscript to a serious and potentially fatal bodily invasion, but internal bodily cooptation is not a requirement of the draft. 
necessarily violates the Equal Protection Clause, a question that turns on issues ofjustification that I cannot discuss here. 
James C. Mohr, Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of National Policy, 1800-1900 (1978), demonstrating that the physicians largely responsible for bringing about abortion restrictions were among the most defensive groups in the country on the subject of changing traditional sex roles.... To many doctors the chief purpose of women was to produce children; anything that interfered with that purpose, or allowed women to "indulge" themselves in less important activities, threatened ... the future of society itself. Abortion was a supreme example of such an interference for these physicians. 
Id. at 168-69; accord id. at 105 (quoting a 19th century doctor complaining that "the tendency to force women into men's places" was creating insidious "new ideas of women's duties," and including among such ideas the view "that her ministrations.., as a mother should be abandoned for the sterner rights of voting and law making."). 
See also Gordon, supra note 63 at 3-25 (showing sex-discriminatory roots of abortion restrictions); Smith-Rosenberg, supra note 63 at 236-37 (same). Smith-Rosenberg To be sure, some people oppose with equal fervor both abortion and those traditional ideas. But the restrictions that do or could exist in this world would in all probability have failed to pass without the involvement and support of people holding and relying on unacceptable stereotypes. 
There is in this sense an analogy between restrictions on abortion and seemingly neutral tests for police officers, the existence of which is partly attributable to a racially discriminatory motive, 135 or seemingly neutral height and weight requirements that would not have existed without sex discrimination.' 3 6 The evidence strongly suggests that a discriminatory purpose lies behind abortion restrictions, even though they, like neutral tests, can be justified on nondiscriminatory grounds. The analogy lies in the fact that prohibitions on abortion would not be enacted if not for their connection with, and their role in perpetuating, constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes. 
The fourth and final factor is that in the real world, the consequence of a restriction on abortion is not materially to save fetal lives, but instead to force women to seek dangerous abortions, with increased risks to women themselves. Indeed, some estimates suggest that before Roe, 5,000 to 10,000 women died per year as a result of incompetently performed abortions, and thousands more were admitted to hospitals for the same reason.13 7 Since Roe, abortion-related maternal deaths have dropped by no less than 90%, falling by 40% in the year after Roe 1 38 alone. quotes an 1871 statement of the influential Committee on Criminal Abortion of the American Medical Association, describing the woman seeking an abortion: "She becomes unmindful of the course marked out for her by Providence, she overlooks the duties imposed on her by the marriage contract.... Let not the husband of such a wife flatter himself that he possesses her affection. Nor can she in turn ever merit even the respect of a virtuous husband." Id. 
The best recent sources are Luker, supra note 49, at 192-215, and Kristin Luker, Abortion and the Meaning of Life, in Abortion: Understanding Differences 25, 31-33 (Sidney Callahan & Daniel Callahan eds., 1984), which deal with abortion laws passed within the last generation and bear on abortion laws likely within the next generation. Luker shows that those involved in antiabortion activities "concur that men and women, as a result of... intrinsic differences, have different roles to play: Men are best suited to the public world of work, whereas women are best suited to rearing children, managing homes, and loving and caring for husbands.... Mothering, in their view, is itself a fulltime job, and any woman who cannot commit herself fully to mothering should eschew it entirely. In short, working and mothering are either-or choices; one can do one or the other, but not both." Id. at 31. 
would be invalidated). 
veterans' preference would be invalidated if and only if motivated by sex discrimination). 
7 (1968). 
Support of Appellees at 9, Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 109 S. Ct. 3040 (No. 
Moreover, the abortion rate appears not to have increased dramatically as a result of the decision in Roe. Even the rate of legal abortions increased more in the three years before Roe than in the three years after that decision.' 3 9 Indeed, some studies show that nearly as many abortions were performed before Roe as now. 140 The abortion rate has increased from between 20% and 25%o to about 28%; the total annual number has gone from between 1 million and 1.5 million to between 1.5 and 1.6 million. 14 1 
Even if these statistics are overstated, and even if the number and rate of abortions has increased more substantially as a result of Roe, at least it seems clear that the principal effect of the decision was not to increase fetal deaths, but instead to produce a shift from dangerous to safe abortions. If this is so, restrictions on abortion do not materially advance the goal of protecting life at all. Instead, they increase maternal deaths while decreasing the termination of fetal lives much less than might be expected or hoped. 142 
The evidence on the futility of antiabortion restrictions also suggests, though it certainly does not demonstrate, the presence of a dis88-605) (1989), reprinted in 11 Women's Rts. L. Rep. 443, 454 (1989); Abortion Related Deaths Down 40 Percent Since 1973 Supreme Court Rulings Overturning Restrictive State Abortion Laws, 7 Family Planning Perspectives 54 (1975). 

Tak, Abortion, Fertility, and Changing Legislation: An International Review 72-73 (1974) (1 million). For post-Roe figures, see Hyman Rodman et al., The Abortion Question 65-67 (1987) (1.5 million); Rosenberg, supra note 139, at 180, 353-55 (1.6 million). For estimates of the abortion rate before and after Roe, see Brief for the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence as Amicus Curiae Supporting Appellees, Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, 109 S. Ct. 3040 (No. 88-605) (1989), reprinted in 11 Women's Rts. L. Rep. 281, 292 (1989). See also Posner, supra note 94, at 277 (death rate fell from 72 per 100,000 to 0.8 per 100,000); Willard Cates,Jr., & Roger W. Rochat, Illegal Abortion in the United States: 1972-74, 8 Family Planning Perspectives 86, 92 (1976) (illegal abortion death rate is eight times higher than the legal abortion rate). 
argument-quite a conventional one-is that those laws that intrude on fundamental interests or discriminate on the basis of sex must show a strong means-ends connection. See Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 507 (1965) (White, J., concurring) ("At most the broad ban is of marginal utility to the declared objective."). Of course, for some the symbolic gain-the affirmation of human life produced by a prohibition on abortionmight be sufficient. But that symbolic gain is probably inadequate to survive heightened scrutiny. Cf. id. at 496-98 (Goldberg, J., concurring); 505-07 (White, J., concurring) (refusing to invoke symbolic goals in case in which statute inadequately serves its other legitimate purposes). 
It is possible that new abortion restrictions would be more effective or less dangerous than old ones, because of greater enforcement activity and technological changes. But the severe difficulties of policing the practice without unacceptable costs suggests that this is unlikely. Moreover, the technological changes that might decrease the danger of unlawful abortions-to those who have access to the relevant technology-would simultaneously decrease the efficacy of the legal prohibitions. criminatory purpose. The failure of advocates of abortion laws to come to terms with that evidence suggests the possibility that at least a part of the antiabortion movement stems from punitive goals rather than an interest in protecting fetal life. 
The argument for an abortion right built on principles of sex equality is thus straightforward. Restrictions on abortion burden only women, and are therefore impermissible unless persuasively justified in sex-neutral terms. Adequate justifications might be available for sex discrimination in some settings. But here they are not, in light of the fact that the burden of bodily cooptation, properly understood, is imposed only on women, could not under current conditions be enacted without unacceptable stereotypes about women's appropriate role, and does not operate in practice sufficiently to save fetal lives. Such arguments do not posit an abstract right to privacy or to control of one's body.143 
Moreover, these arguments have a large advantage in that unlike privacy or liberty arguments, they do not devalue the legitimate interest in protecting the fetus, and indeed make it unnecessary to take any po143. I do not mean to suggest that such an argument is necessarily unpersuasive or that it is impossible to argue that an interest in autonomy or in freedom from bodily invasion justifies an abortion right. But one of several difficulties with those arguments is that they must come to terms with the moral or political status of the fetus, a problem that the equality argument successfully avoids. And the presence of a strong claim from liberty joins with the equality argument to increase the power of the basic position: It is not as if the abortion context involves an inequality with respect to something trivial. 
Indeed, there is some artificiality in separating the equality and liberty claims in this setting, since the matter treated unequally-control over reproductive processes-is simultaneously a central ingredient in a denial of both liberty and equality to women. The social and legal control ofwomen's reproductive capacities is a defining characteristic of systems of caste based on gender; and a serious commitment to both liberty and equality calls for a legal attack on those systems in all their various forms. 
In fact, it may be ventured that the understanding of the equal protection principle as an attack on irrational differentiation-treating likes differently-has been a large mistake for constitutional law, which might instead have understood the principle as an attack on caste legislation. This understanding draws firm support from history. See Fairman, supra note 59, at 15-18. 
I do not mean to say that an abortion right would necessarily be unavailable in a world of sexual equality. No one is likely to be in a good position to answer that question. It may be that the biological difference creates a relevant inequality that would be at stake in any restriction on abortion. It may be that the autonomy interest is sufficient no matter how much there is in the way of sexual equality. Nonetheless, movements in the direction of sexual equality-before, during, and after conception, including after birth-unquestionably weaken the case for an abortion right by removing one of the factors that supports its existence. See Calabresi, supra note 119, at 146-47. 
Ironically, it is the privacy argument, not the equality argument, that forces proponents to ask bizarre and unresolvable counterfactual questions. The argument from equality stresses the context, well-springs, and consequences of abortion restrictions; it is solidly anchored in existing practices. The autonomy argument requires an assessment of how abortion would or should be treated if those practices were changed in a fundamental way. It is doubtful if that assessment can be made into a sensible one. sition on the moral and political status of unborn life. Even if the fetus has all of the status of human life, the bodies of women cannot, under current conditions, be conscripted in order to protect it. The (admittedly imperfect) analogy here would be to a case in which black people were required to become blood donors to ensure that certain people needing blood did not die. Even if the protection of those who need blood were a compelling state interest, selectivity of this sort could not be tolerated. Even if the people in question were parents of children needing blood, the racial selectivity would be impermissible. Even if only black people had the right blood, it is doubtful that this would be permitted. It does not matter if people's lives are at stake, since a selective imposition on one class of people, even to protect others who need them, cannot be justified under the equal protection clause. 144 
There are two possible challenges to the line of argument thus far: first, that pregnancy results from a voluntary activity that creates a special duty; and second, that the equal protection argument fails to address legitimate claims of the fetus. Neither argument, however, responds sufficiently to the equality argument. 
Because the existence and vulnerability of the fetus result from a voluntary choice, it might be thought that a special duty is properly placed on the woman to protect it, even if that duty requires bodily cooptation. In circumstances in which the fetus exists by virtue of voluntary actions, and cannot live without bodily cooptation, the proper analogy is to murder rather than to failure to assist.1 45 Moreover, what makes the abortion context distinctive is that selectivity in the imposition of bodily cooptation is the only available option for those concerned about fetal life. Because of biology, government cannot make men bear the relevant burden even it wants to do so. If fetuses are to survive, impositions on women are required. Selectivity is ordained by biology. 
Even if this argument is accepted on its own terms, it would not work in cases in which pregnancy has resulted from involuntary intercourse, such as rape and incest. Certainly the argument from equality is secure in such cases. Moreover, the fact that individualized proof of rape or incest is so difficult even in criminal cases reveals that it is extraordinarily hard to make pleading and proof of rape or incest a predicate for abortion. If the right exists in rape or incest cases, the only realistic way to protect that right seems to be to create a general right to abortion. Such protection would be far too broad in that it would protect abortions to which there is (on the argument offered thus far) discriminatory measures not upheld if the interest is strong, even when the interest is tied up with discrimination? I do not attempt to answer that question here. Instead I build on conventional legal principles. (I am indebted to Michael Sandel for raising this point.) liability may be based on failure to act where there is a legal duty to act). no constitutional right; but the fact that a general right may be necessary to protect those abortions that are constitutionally safeguarded seems at least a consideration counting in favor of the general right. 
More broadly, the fact that intercourse, is voluntary hardly means that pregnancy is. Voluntary intercourse does not mean, as a matter of simple fact, voluntary pregnancy, any more than the decision to walk at night in a certain neighborhood means voluntary mugging. Even reasonable efforts at contraception may fail. The question is instead the (always and inevitably normative) one of assumption of risk: whether the decision to engage in intercourse, when voluntary, should be taken to allow the state to impose on women a duty of bodily cooptation in cases of pregnancy. 14 6 
If the argument thus far is correct, the answer to that'question must be negative. As we have seen, the imposition of that duty is deeply implicated in violations of the equality guarantee in terms of its wellsprings. Moreover, it remains impermissibly selective despite the genuine fact that the state cannot, as a biological matter, conscript men to protect fetuses. The reason is that even in cases in which men's bodies could be conscripted to protect children-for whose existence they are in part responsible, and for whom they therefore could well be said to have assumed the risk-the state imposes no such obligations. The selectivity comes in the state's across-the-board failure to impose on men a duty of bodily use to protect children. Blood transfusions are never required by law. Finally, antiabortion restrictions serve their own purposes too poorly to be acceptable, even if the voluntariness of pregnancy could be established, and could be shown to distinguish the situation from others. 
The second response would be that the argument I have made fails to come to terms with the legitimate claims of the fetus. No group is as politically weak or generally vulnerable as unborn children, and perhaps they themselves have a claim of inequality sufficient to override the imposition on women.1 4 7 According to this view, any objection from inequality or selectivity comes even more powerfully from fetuses than from women. 
This response properly points to the fact that politically vulnerable groups are on both sides of this question. Indeed, it suggests that in some contexts the government may be under some sort of constitutional duty to protect the unborn, at least if it can do so without coopting the body of the mother.148 It is not, however, a persuasive argument). 

fact that under current law, there is generally no constitutional right to protection by the government, at least in the absence of a claim that one has been treated unequally. See DeShaney v. Winnebago County Dep't of Social Servs., 489 U.S. 189, 195 (1989). For rejoinder to the claim of impermissible sex discrimination. Even if fetuses are a vulnerable group, and even if they are entitled to special protection against discrimination, they do not have a claim to conscript bodies of another vulnerable group on their behalf. The analogy here-an imprecise one, to be sure 4 9-would be a law requiring Hispanic people to devote their bodies (through blood donations and compulsory kidney transplants, for example) to the protection ofvulnerable black children, or imposing such a duty on the parents of black children alone. Even if the group to be protected has a special claim to protection, the state cannot selectively impose the relevant duty on another vulnerable group. 
An argument from sex equality seems preferable to one that posits a general or acontextual privacy right, and also to the view that restrictions on abortion simply do not raise constitutional questions. In particular, the equality argument has a large advantage over the "prochoice" position in that it does not rest on privacy; freely acknowledges and, indeed, insists on the strength of the interest in protecting fetal life; and stresses rather than disregards the fact that women alone become pregnant and the existence of discrimination and coercion in the realm of reproduction. The reasons for these advantages closely parallel those in the antipornography context. 
The equality argument has advantages over the "prolife" position as well, insofar as the equality argument stresses both that restrictions on abortion are unlikely to protect life at all and the selectivity of the imposition on women. Indeed, it seems reasonable to conclude that an argument from sex discrimination is not merely a worthy competitor to the two alternatives, but on balance correct. 
As far as current constitutional law is concerned, however, the argument from sex discrimination is the least well-represented, having appeared not once in a Supreme Court opinion. The reason is that there is a crisp answer to that argument, one that is strikingly reminiscent of the answer provided in the case of pornography. In the Supreme Court's view, laws restricting abortion cannot amount to discrimination because only women can become pregnant. 150 A denial of equality means a refusal to treat the similarly situated similarly. With respect to the capacity to become pregnant, women and men are not similarly situated. An equality argument is therefore unavailable. criticism of this view, see Jack M. Beerman, Administrative Failure and Local Democracy: The Politics of DeShaney, 1990 Duke LJ. 1078; David A. Strauss, Due Process, Government Inaction, and Private Wrong, 1989 Sup. Ct. Rev. 53. 
foreordained; if government wants to protect fetuses, it cannot proceed on a sex-neutral basis. But as noted above, the first glance is misleading, since no other duties of bodily imposition are imposed by law, and since sex-neutrality would in that sense be possible with respect to the protection of fetuses, infants, and children generally. 
U.S. 484, 496 n.20 (1974). 
This conception of equality turns out also to be a conception of neutrality. According to that conception, the government's duty of impartiality is violated when, and only when, it distinguishes between those who are the same, by, for example, treating blacks differently from whites, or women differently from men. But this conception of neutrality rules out of bounds a perfectly plausible claim of inequality. It does so precisely because it embodies a controversial substantive baseline. Here the baseline is not existing distributions of wealth and, opportunities; it is not as if the social status quo, in that sense, is taken as prepolitical and just. Something quite similar is, however, at work. Women's biological differences "from the norm" are treated as a social given, and legal rules directed at those differences are said not to implicate equality. 
The problem here is that the norm itself is defined as the physical capacities of men. 15 1 Sex discrimination is perceived when, and only when, women are the same as men. As currently understood, the equality principle requires only that women must be treated the same as men insofar as they are the same as men. 152 
This approach takes male biological capacities as the baseline against which to assess the equality issue. 15 3 This is the parallel in the abortion context to the use, in other contexts I have discussed, of existing social practices as the baseline from which to assess deviations from neutrality. In fact, it is a version of the same phenomenon. Of course, there is no obvious reason to ask the equality question in this way. Indeed, if we do so, we will fail to see inequality in cases where it plausibly exists (and see equality in cases in which it is plausibly absent1 5 4). Surely a law that turns a biological capacity into a social and legal disability for a part of the population, and for only that part, should be seen as raising questions of discrimination. If a biological capacity limited to one gender is made a basis for social disadvantage Difference 56-60 (1990). It might be useful to explore a legal system taking female biological capacities as the norm: Imagine, for example, a state giving every citizen the choice of either bearing a child or giving the government nine months in salary. Such a law should readily be seen as a form of discrimination against men, even though it is a far weaker case for invalidation than laws burdening female reproductive capacity in light of (a) the fact that the burdened class consists of infertile women as well as men and (b) the fact that laws that burden female reproductive capacity are part of a system of subordination on the basis of sex, something that cannot be said for laws that burden male capacities. 

"differences" approach to sex equality). 
women might in fact promote equality, as in the case of alimony laws that recognize women's contributions to housework. See Becker, supra note 5, at 218-21 (showing that cases invalidating sex-based alimony law have hurt women). through law, one might think that the relevant law creates a problem of inequality. 
The failure to see this point in the context of abortion is a product of a peculiar notion of neutrality and a derivative, and similarly peculiar, notion of what equality means. I conclude that laws restricting abortion violate the Equal Protection Clause and that the response from neutrality embodies an unjustified baseline. 
Many courts and state legislatures are in the process of deciding whether and how to regulate arrangements by which women sell their reproductive capacities, and the children who result, to couples who are infertile or otherwise unwilling to adopt children or to have a biological child between them. Thus far, the Constitution has played little role in this setting. But freedom of choice, and indeed contractual liberty, is the rallying cry for advocates of surrogacy agreements.15 5 At least one lower court has suggested that constitutional liberty forbids government restrictions on such agreements.1 56 
On this view, surrogacy arrangements are acceptable for the same reason that Roe is right. Freedom of choice and control over one's body and reproductive processes are the governing principles. What matters is not that the choice be correct, but that it be remitted to individuals rather than to the state. This view is espoused by many who believe that Roe was right, and who support surrogacy arrangements for the same reason that they accept Roe.157 
As in the case of abortion and pornography, there is a familiar competing position. According to this view, reproductive capacities and babies should be thought sacrosanct in the sense that they cannot be purchased and sold. To trade reproductive capacities-or peoplefor money is to diminish and degrade them. Sexuality and reproduction should be protected from hedonism and profit-making. In this respect, surrogacy arrangements are wrong for the same reason that Roe is wrong. Both are insufficiently respectful of the special claims of sexuality and reproductive processes, in their traditional forms, to protection from various forms of debasement. Similar ideas underlie the antiobscenity position. 158 
Advocates of surrogacy arrangements might well be prompted to ask (perhaps tendentiously) why women ought not to be permitted to sell their offspring if, under Roe, they are permitted to kill them. They 
A.2d 1227 (NJ. 1987). This is an unusual position. For a catalogue, see Martha A. Field, Surrogate Motherhood 155-69 (expanded ed. 1990). 
supra note 155, at 128-29. 
might well be prompted to add that it is plausible to be for Roe and for surrogacy, or against Roe and against surrogacy-but impossible or even hypocritical to be, as some are, both for Roe and against surrogacy. If the abortion right finds its justification in a right to control one's body, then it follows that surrogacy arrangements are unobjectionable. 159 They are similarly a result of individual control over reproductive choice. 
In either case, it might be thought extremely ironic that advocates of a right to abortion are frequently disturbed by free markets in reproduction. If the right is one to autonomy-or to control over one's own affairs with respect to issues of reproduction-surely the right to sell gestational services stands on at least as firm ground as the right to have an abortion. 
If the conception of neutrality that I have been discussing here is a constitutional command, the answer is not easy to come by. As in the context of pornography and abortion, however, the most plausible response turns to principles of equal protection rather than privacy. We have seen that the problem with pornography (as defined here) is that it treats one group of people as objects for the sexual use of another or, more particularly, for sexual violence. 
In the case of abortion, the problem is similar: the reproductive capacities of one class of people are turned, by law, into something for the use of others. If surrogacy is troublesome, it is for the same reason. 160 The practice of surrogacy also turns the reproductive capacities of one group of citizens into objects for other people's use. 
The problem arises even if the bargains that result are in an important sense voluntary. The problem is especially severe in light of the fact that social and legal institutions have frequently turned women's reproductive capacities into something for other people's use and con159. A qualification is necessary here. Perhaps the privacy right means only that bodies cannot be literally invaded, not that there is a general right to autonomy with respect to reproduction. On this view, the abortion right is more secure than the right to participate in surrogacy arrangements, since literal invasion of the body by the state is not involved in the latter context. (This formulation does answer some hard questions in contestable ways.) 
intrusion is imposed on people who are forced to give up a child that they have borne through pregnancy. That intrusion may be sufficient for allowing the relevant contracts to be voidable even without an equality dimension. 
If the argument in the text is persuasive, it would not matter whether the surrogate mother's egg is involved. What is crucial is that she carried the baby to term. The problem with surrogacy arrangements is in the commodification of women's gestational services, a problem that exists even if the fetus is biologically connected to both mother and father. I might suggest, speculatively, that the view that the fetus "is" the father's, or "is not" the surrogate mother's, is connected in all cases with an old and still-pervasive view, notwithstanding its biological implausibility: children are in a deep sense the product of the father alone, and the mother is a mere vehicle for the act of production. See Tom Laqueur, Making Sex 57-59 (1990). trol, and that this process is closely associated with the use, by those institutions, of women's reproductive capacities as a basis for creating second-class citizenship for women.' 6 1 
In the context of surrogacy, this argument faces serious difficulties. A decision to constrain surrogacy might itself be seen as a mechanism for social control of the reproductive choices of women. In light of the fact that surrogacy agreements are (by hypothesis) voluntary and thus provide benefits for the women involved, it is necessary to explain why a decision to allow this voluntary choice should be seen as a form of harmful discrimination. It is plainly inadequate to invoke the term "exploitation," or (what may be the same thing) to refer to the background conditions faced by women who participate in such agreements. Disallowance of the agreement does nothing to eliminate those conditions. It simply eliminates one mechanism by which women might try to counteract them. These are altogether different strategies. Elimination of the most-preferred option is hardly a sensible way of dealing with background injustice or hardship. 
The basic problem with the sale of reproductive capacities is not the background conditions, but the fact that the sale may have adverse consequences for those who participate in these arrangements and for women and children in general. The first difficulty is that notwithstanding subjective ex ante conceptions of welfare, the process of selling reproductive capacities can be harmful for the women involved. It may be hard to understand in advance exactly what it means to hand over a child that one has brought to term. Many illustrations, some highly publicized, can be found.' 6 2 
The second problem is that there will be some inevitable external effects from social legitimation of the practice of exchanging women's reproductive capacities, and the children who result, in return for cash. A choice to allow these to be treated as objects for sale and use may affect how men perceive women, how womeh perceive themselves, and how both perceive children. Here the questions of surrogacy and prostitution become closely allied.163 
(1987). 
For those who doubt the systemic and external effects of commodification, it might be useful to consider a revealing and frequently repeated joke attributed to George Bernard Shaw. As the story goes, Shaw, then an old man, encountered an attractive young woman at a party, and asked her, "Would you sleep with me for $1 million?" The woman answered in the affirmative, and Shaw responded, "Well, how about for $10?" The woman answered, "Mr. Shaw, what kind of a woman do you think I am?" Shaw responded, "We've already established that. Now we're just haggling over the price." 
The real meaning of the story is confirmed by the fact that it would make absolutely no sense if the genders were reversed. If an old woman were soliciting a young man in this way, the story would not seem funny, but instead puzzling and meaningless; and any 
In particular, a world in which female sexual and reproductive services are freely traded on markets would legitimate and reinforce a pervasive form of inequality-one that sees the social role of women as that of breeders, and that uses that role to create second-class citizenship. Surrogacy arrangements, if widespread, could affect attitudes, on the part of both men and women, about appropriate gender roles. Social stigmatization of the sale of those services might therefore bejustified on antidiscrimination grounds. There is no parallel problem for men. In view of the social (and to some extent biological) differences between men and women, a decision to allow male reproductive capacities to be bought and sold has no such consequences. To treat the sale of male and female reproductive capacities in the same way is thus not required by neutrality, in view of the vastly different purposes and effects of such sales. 
I have not offered anything like a complete argument against surrogacy arrangements. A final resolution of that issue depends on a range of factors not mentioned here.16 The effects I have described might occur only a little or not at all. Many or most women who participate in these arrangements may be pleased to have done so, and this is surely relevant (though not decisive). A prohibition on surrogacy might involve an unacceptable form of protectionism, one that would help erase the fact that the process of carrying fetuses to term is actually a form of work. The external effects of allowing such arrangements might be small. In any case, an assessment of their magnitude is quite speculative. Social attitudes about the appropriate roles of men and women are affected by numerous factors, of which surrogacy arrangejoke would be on the old woman who is soliciting. What makes the story repeatable, in its current form, is that it trades on the institution of female prostitution and thus on the social commodification of female sexuality. In view of those things, Shaw is able to establish that all women are prostitutes; only the price is in doubt. The humor of the story results from Shaw's cleverness in being able to establish this. The joke is emphatically on her. 
The general point in the text casts some doubt on the basic approach in Posner, supra note 95. Posner treats various "outlets" for sexual drives as largely interchangeable. To a significant degree, however, the outlets are nonfungible. There is a huge difference between what a person seeks through sex with a prostitute-basically, a form of use-and what a person seeks through sex in an intimate relationship. To treat various expressions of sexuality as if they were interchangeable is to erase crucial differences. 
or might have been sold, could have harmful consequences. It would be necessary to evaluate this issue in order to come fully to terms with the surrogacy problem. 
Moreover, issues of race are in the background here. There is a shortage of white children available for adoption, and a large number of unwanted black children. The appeal ofsurrogacy must be understood in this context. See Elizabeth Bartholet, Where Do Black Children Belong? The Politics of Race Matching in Adoption, 139 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1163 (1991). If black children were sought by white parents, there would be less need for surrogacy arrangements. Issues of this sort are of course a part of the surrogacy problem. ments might well be a quite minor one. The countervailing benefits to infertile couples and the women involved may outweigh any harms. Of course, some kinds of commodification exist here already. Much will depend on the details.' 6 5 The argument for outlawing these arrangements, rather than refusing to enforce them when the birth mother refuses to proceed, seems particularly weak.' 6 6 
If surrogacy arrangements are troublesome, however, it is for reasons that argue for, rather than against, the outcome in Roe v. Wade. If those reasons are persuasive, there is no inconsistency in simultaneous approval of the abortion right and rejection of surrogacy arrangements. That position will seem inconsistent only to those who have already set forth the premises on which the discussion is to be conducted. Those premises have everything to do with a certain conception of neutrality. 
If the arguments I have offered thus far are sound, the prevailing conception of neutrality often operates as a device for ruling out of bounds, as impermissibly partisan, views that see existing distributions of entitlements, wealth, and preferences as partisan and a product of law. Moreover, the very category of government action is defined by reference to existing distributions and to a correlative notion of what partisanship is. 
There is simply no other way to explain the state action doctrine, which turns out not to be about action or inaction at all, but is instead rooted in a substantive and controversial view about what government normally or naturally does. One version of the constitutional assault on affirmative action, 167 and the closely related attacks on "affirmative rights,"' 68 campaign finance regulation, 69 and the right of access to the broadcasting media,' 7 0 turn on the same constellation of ideas. 17 1 there are severe limits to how much can be accomplished through conceptual analysis and through even plausible speculations about likely effects. To reach closure, a large amount of empirical evidence is often necessary. 
Reproductive Technologies 77-78, 151 (1989). 

(upholding repeal of fairness doctrine), cert. denied, I10 S. Ct. 717 (1990). 
adjudication that are built on principles of compensatory justice. On the compensatory model, A injures B, and A must pay; there is no inquiry into existing distributions, which are held constant for purposes of tort law. The notion that adjudication should take existing distributions as a given seems fully plausible in many and perhaps most areas of private law, and the extension of that notion to adjudication in general is hardly surprising. In the contexts at hand, however, the extension appears reflexive, and is often hard to defend in substantive terms. See Sunstein, supra note *,at ch. 11. 
The point suggests reasons to be skeptical of the conventional division of constitutional arguments over the issues of pornography, abortion, and surrogacy. The conventional division relies on understandings that assume, as the baseline for decision, the naturalness and justice of existing sexual and reproductive practices. These understandings are thought to be neutral precisely because they indulge this assumption. 
A highly plausible set of alternative arguments, in all three settings, has been ruled out of bounds because it rejects this assumption. Such arguments do not point broadly and acontextually to freedom of choice, or to the appropriate role of government in maintaining a distinction between public and private spheres. Instead, they look much more concretely at the causes and effects of legal controls in the three settings. In all three areas, the basic problem is that the practice at issue turns women's sexuality and reproductive functions into objects for the control and use of others. On this view, the sexual and reproductive status quo is sometimes a locus of unjustified inequality, and the law should protect against that inequality. 
Regulation of pornography might therefore be founded on realworld harms to women rather than community mores. Such regulation would target not sexually explicit speech in general, but speech that mingles sex with violence against women. It would stress that sexuality ought not to be something for the use and control of others, at least where violence is involved; it would connect the antipornography movement with general efforts to combat sex-related violence. 
The principal obstacle to this argument rests on the supposed partiality of antipornography laws, which target materials that contain sexual violence against women. But the claim of partiality would make sense only if sexual violence by women against men were a problem of anything like the same magnitude as sexual violence by men against women, which of course it is not. 
The best argument for protection of abortion stresses not privacy 172 but freedom from discrimination-here in the form of a governmental requirement that women's reproductive capacities be used, uniquely and against their will, for protection of the lives of others. The existence of that requirement owes a great deal to traditional stereotypes about the natural role of women, and it has the effect of helping to maintain those stereotypes. The principal obstacle to this position also sounds in neutrality. It sees discrimination only when one group has been treated differently from another to which it is similarly situated. But this is a peculiar conception of neutrality, since it treats the legal translation of biological differences into legal and social disabilities as entirely unobjectionable. 
The principal question raised by surrogacy is closely related. If sur172. See supra notes 114-118 and accompanying text. rogacy is troublesome, it is largely because it treats women's reproductive capacities as objects for sale to and use by others. There is thus no inconsistency between approval of an abortion right and unease with surrogacy arrangements. Indeed the two are perfectly compatible. 
To say all this justifies, I believe, recognition of a constitutional right to abortion on equal protection grounds. It does not resolve the questions of pornography and surrogacy, which turn in part on considerations that I have been unable to discuss here. 173 But it does suggest that the objection from neutrality cannot be sustained. The reason is that the relevant conception relies on an unjustified substantive baseline, one that is peculiarly ill-suited to these three settings. 
In recent years some people have treated a commitment to any conception of neutrality as an unfortunate disguise for contestable substantive theories, so that neutrality is, in any form, something that judges and lawyers should avoid in the interest of simple candor. 174 But this does not follow. Neutrality is indeed a futile aspiration if the term is intended to refer to legal decisions not informed by value judgments or commitments of some sort. In questions involving the proper organization of human affairs, that form of neutrality is unavailable, and obviously so. All approaches to social life depend on some substantive view about the right or the good. Neutrality cannot generate the relevant view.17 5 
This point need not, however, be taken to suggest that other, less ambitious conceptions of neutrality are similarly impossible goals. These less ambitious conceptions are not the'source of appropriate baselines, in the sense that they do not provide the substantive foundations for legal decisions. But they are nonetheless of great importance. 
I want to conclude by outlining several uses of the notion of neutrality in law. There are a number of distinct conceptions here, and it is possible and, I think, desirable to hold them simultaneously. None of them is wedded to existing distributions of any kind. All of them recognize the role of human beings in creating the background against which norms of neutrality must operate. 
First, the requirement of neutrality is unobjectionable insofar as it is a call for internal consistency.' 7 6 The idea that one should order 
from a neutrality principle. For a response, seeJames S. Fishkin, Can There Be a Neutral Theory ofJustice?, 93 Ethics 348 (1983). To reject the idea that neutrality can generate a set of substantive results-is not to say that respect for disparate conceptions of the good cannot be defended, substantively, as a neutrality principle. But this idea would take me well beyond the present discussion. 
The Enduring Significance of Neutral Principles, 78 Colum. L. Rev. 982 (1978), which elaborates this conception of neutrality. one's intuitions through an effort to reach "reflective equilibrium,"' 77 or through a kind of internal socratic dialogue, is an indispensable one. It is hardly to be disparaged. It is part and parcel of the rule of law, and it affects substantive outcomes in many settings. The process of reasoning by analogy-central to legal interpretation-is best understood as a method of producing the necessary consistency across cases, in an effort to develop principles that do not conflict with one another, and in that sense embody an important principle of impartiality. 
Second, the neutrality constraint is appropriate insofar as it requires public-regarding justifications for legal outcomes, or for the distribution of social benefits and burdens. Sometimes the demand for neutrality is actually a demand for justifications that can be phrased in public terms-the general principle of neutrality described at the outset of this Article. As a means of flushing out pure political power, or unarticulated, illegitimate, or unarticulable considerations, there is everything to be said in defense of that concept of neutrality. This is what distinguishes deliberative democracy from authoritarianism, majoritarian or otherwise. Indeed, much of constitutional law consists of a requirement of public-regarding justifications for what might otherwise be seen as naked wealth transfers. 178 
Third, the idea of neutrality is unobjectionable insofar as it imposes, in certain contexts, a requirement of impersonality or abstraction on certain decisionmakers. In this view, neutrality restricts the kinds of considerations to which those in a position of authority may point. Ajudge in a tort case ordinarily pays no attention to the religion or race of the parties. If she does, she is violating her duty of impartiality. So too, a legislator distributing defense department grants should pay no attention to attempted bribes, personal friendships, political affiliation, or even campaign contributions. 
Neutrality might therefore refer to a form of institutional division of labor, that is, a principle that certain actors must be indifferent to certain considerations. The division between law and politics can often be understood in these terms. If that division is to be accepted, and it should be, it can only be for straightforwardly political reasons. The division is thus justified on the ground that distinctly legal actors should not look to certain factors that have been-and this is the key point-deemed irrelevant for them. It is highly revealing that in most well-functioning legal systems, judges cannot consider factors that are properly part of the day-to-day work of administrators and legislators. 179 Judges are thus barred from referring to considerations that have been publicly made irrelevant for those who hold their particular offices. For example, a contracts case cannot ordinarily turn on the rel177. See Rawls, supra note 1, at 20. 
1689 (1984), is a catalogue. 
ative wealth of the parties, even though relative wealth is important for other government officials in other settings. 
Thus understood, neutrality imposes a requirement of generality. It forbids bias or selectivity in the form of reliance on particular factors that have been deemed to be legally irrelevant. The content of this requirement of course has to be justified on the basis of good reasons, and there is a risk that generality, like neutrality, will sometimes conceal an indefensible substantive theory. Any division of labor must be justified in substantive terms; neutrality, by itself, will not explain which considerations should be placed off limits. But the notion that in some contexts certain considerations will be deemed irrelevant is a perfectly uncontroversial conception of neutrality. 80 
Fourth, neutrality might refer to decisions made in accordance with the appropriate baseline. For example, a decision to exclude from the workplace those who require wheelchairs, or care for children, might seem objectionable because it turns morally irrelevant differences into a source of systemic social disadvantage.' 8 ' Objections about selectivity, made against the reflexive use of biased norms, are a familiar and indispensable part of legal and political argument. In this usage, the development of the appropriate baseline is doing the serious work. Notions of neutrality are derivative in the sense that they depend on that baseline, which is rooted in substantive ideas having a source independent of neutrality itself. Those substantive ideas, of course, should cohere with one another, both in their mode of derivation and in their content. To say all this is hardly to disparage the use of a certain conception of neutrality. 
In many areas of constitutional law, however, a different conception is at work. According to that conception, the status quo-existing practices, distributions of wealth, opportunities, preferences, and natural assets-is the baseline from whichjudgments about partiality will be made. A departure from those practices and distributions signals both action and partisanship; adherence signals inaction and neutrality. Ideas of this sort are of course unobjectionable if the status quo can be defended in substantive terms, or if it does not itself embody injustice, whether social, biological, or otherwise. But sometimes existing practice is partial or at least the subject of controversy, and here a conception of neutrality that takes it as natural or just is at best reflexive and often serves as a mask for substantive theories that cannot be defended if brought into the open. That conception of neutrality is surprisingly pervasive. We would be better off without it.182 
overcome the baseline problem and to put to one side morally irrelevant differences. 
Was Justice Thurgood Marshall an egalitarian? I Did he believe that the Constitution should be used to produce "equality of result" for those he happened to favor? 
I write at a time when many people, especially those in the federal judiciary, believe that both questions should be answered with an emphatic "Yes." But it isn't so. 
Above all, Thurgood Marshall will be remembered for his role in Brown v. Board of Education,2 and indeed it is in that case that one can find many of the central elements of Marshall's conception of the Constitution. Brown is commonly thought to have been a case about racial discrimination. It is even said to have established a constitutional norm of "color-blindness." But to the participants in the case, and to the Court at the time, the case was fundamentally about education.3 The briefs and oral argument stressed not color-blindness, but the need for equal educational opportunity. And the Court listened. In the passage that Justice Marshall particularly liked to quote, the Court said: 
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstate our recognition of the importance of * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. The author was law clerk to Justice Marshall during the 1979 Term. 
disparities in wealth, income, or other resources. As we will see, Justice Marshall's conception of equality embodied a far more limited and conservative set of ideals. 

Hutchinson, an early draft of the Boiling opinion stated explicitly that education is a fundamental interest for constitutional purposes. The draft read: 
This Court has applied similar reasoning to analogous situations in the field of education, the very subject now before us. Thus children and parents are deprived of the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause when the children are prohibited from pursuing certain courses, or from attending private schools and foreign-language schools. Such prohibitions were found to be unreasonable, and unrelated to any legitimate governmental objective. Just as a government may not impose arbitrary restrictions on the parent's right to educate his child, the government must not impose arbitrary restraints on access to the education which the government itself provides.... We have no hesitation in concluding that segregation of children in the public schools is a far greater restriction on their liberty than were the restrictions in the school cases discussed above. 
Dennis J. Hutchinson, Unanimityand Desegregation:Decisionmakingin the Supreme Court, 19481958, 68 GEo. L.J. 1, 45 (1979) (citation omitted). Professor Hutchinson reports that Justice Marshall was genuinely delighted to see that early draft, responding, "That's it' That's what the case was aboutl" Personal Communication from Dennis Hutchinson (Dec. 7, 1991). 
1267 education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education.4 
Brown was a case about education. In this, I believe, lies the clue to understanding the wellsprings of Marshall's life, work, and vision of the Constitution. 
The long struggle by the NAACP-a struggle within and against the "separate but equal" doctrine-was undertaken, first and foremost, with an eye toward the achievement of equal educational opportunity. 5 The original challenge to that doctrine was part and parcel of this goal. Above all, Marshall and others objected to a practice that would engrain second-class citizenship in children, and do so with respect to the social service most indispensable for an equal chance in life. Segregated education stamped notions of racial inferiority into children at an early, even decisive stage. Hence what seems to me the most revealing moment in Justice Marshall's argument in Brown. In response to a question from Justice Reed about whether the state should consider desegregation's potential negative impact on "law and order," Marshall said: 
[Whites and blacks] are fighting together and living together. For example, today they are working together in other places.... I know in the South where I spend most of my time, you will see white and colored kids going down the road together to school. They separate and go to different schools, and they come out and play together. I do not see why there would necessarily be any trouble if they went to school together. 6 
We now take it for granted that after Brown, the Court rapidly repudiated the "separate but equal" doctrine not only in education, but across the board, in a series of per curiam opinions.7 But these cases should not obscure Marshall's focus on education, and the reasons for that focus. 
Marshall's early commitment to equal educational opportunity carried over to his work on the Court. It helps explain many of his votes and writings; it unites a number of seemingly disparate ideas.8 A conspicuous example is Marshall's greatest opinion, dissenting in San Antonio School Districtv. Rodriguez,9 a case that has emerged as one of the most important since Brown itself. In that case, the Supreme Court upheld significant disparities in per-pupil expenditures in school financing in Texas. Marshall's dissenting opinion rested above all on the centrality of education to constitutionally protected liberties. First, Marshall said, education is connected with freedom of speech: "Education directly affects the ability of a child to exercise his First Amendment rights, both as a source and as a receiver of information and ideas, whatever interests he may pursue in life." 10 
Second, education is central to the system of self-government: "Education may instill the interest and provide the tools necessary for political discourse and debate. Indeed, it has frequently been suggested that education is the dominant factor affecting political consciousness and participation."11 In this way, education is connected to the democratic aspirations of the American legal tradition. 
Third, Marshall argued that education is a crucial mechanism for allowing people to overcome disadvantaged conditions. It ensures, not equality of resources or outcomes, but a fair chance. "[T]he right of every American to an equal start in life, so far as the provision.., of education is concerned, is far too vital to permit state discrimination on grounds as tenuous as those presented by this record."' 12 This is not an egalitarian theme. It is about prospects from the start, not results in the middle. Here Marshall's Rodriguez dissent is linked to the deepest goals behind Brown. 
The same themes appear throughout Marshall's work. For him, education supplies "the basic tools and opportunities that might enable [people] to rise."' 13 Thus the Constitution should be seen to reflect "a deep distrust of policies that specially burden the access of disadvantaged persons to the governmental institutions and processes that offer members of our society an heard at the end of a clerks' reunion: [Tihe goal of a true democracy such as ours, explained simply, is that any baby born in these United States, even if he is born to the blackest, most illiterate, most unprivileged Negro in Mississippi, is, merely by being born and drawing his first breath in this democracy, endowed with the exact same rights as a child born to a Rockefeller. 
Of course it's not true. Ofcourse it never will be true. But I challenge anybody to tell me that it isn't the type of goal we should try to get to as fast as we can. 
Thurgood Marshall, Address Before the Annual Judicial Conference of the Second Judicial Circuit of the United States (Sept. 5, 1986), in 115 F.R.D. 349, 354 (1987). 

dissenting) ("For the poor, education is often the only route by which to become full participants in our society. In allowing a State to burden the access of poor persons to an education, the Court denies equal opportunity and discourages hope."). 
opportunity to improve their status and better their lives."' 14 Such distrust is justified because [a] statute that erects special obstacles to education in the path of the poor naturally tends to consign such persons to their current disadvantaged status. By denying equal opportunity to exactly those who need it most, the law not only militates against the ability of each poor child to advance herself or himself, but also increases the likelihood of the creation of a discrete and permanent underclass.' 5 
Thus Marshall understood the Constitution to create a "right of every American to an equal start in life,"' 6 at least in the sense of a right that the state provide legitimate reasons for failing to provide equal educational opportunity. In this way, Marshall's work on the Court maintained deep continuity with his work on the school segregation cases. 
Marshall was not an egalitarian. His conception of equality was extremely old-fashioned. An outgrowth of his experiences with segregation, that conception involved, as its defining feature, a commitment to equality of opportunity. In Marshall's constitutional vision, this commitment entailed, first and foremost, a right to equal prospects in education. But it also required more generally an opposition to all caste systems-understood as second-class citizenship, in which one group is systematically below others on the basis of a morally irrelevant factor such as race, sex, or disability. In his view, rejection of caste was the central lesson of the Civil War Amendments: "The intent of the Fourteenth Amendment was to abolish caste legislation. When state action has the predictable tendency to entrap the poor and create a permanent underclass, that intent is frustrated.' 7 
Thus the equal protection principle did not ban all racial differentiation. It did not require color-blindness. For Marshall, this precept was ahistorical; it was insufficiently attuned to the particular history behind the Civil War Amendments. The principal point of those Amendments was not to require that people who were similarly situated be treated "the same." Instead, Marshall thought that the core meaning of the Equal Protection Clause was that the government could not translate morally irrelevant differences into a form of second-class citizenship. It could not take skin color, or gender, and turn these into social disadvantages for blacks or women.' 8 It is highly misleading to say that this is a vision of the Fourteenth Amendment that favored the "rights of groups" over "the rights of individuals." In any 
dissenting) (reiterating his view that a child's education is a fundamental interest). 

exclusion of women from registration for the draft is unconstitutional); Personnel Admin. of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 281 (1979) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (arguing that veterans' preference statute constitutes impermissible gender discrimination). It is notable that Justice Marshall was the most vigorous voice of opposition, under the Equal Protection Clause, to official practices connected to the exclusion of women from the military; he insisted that this exclusion was part and parcel of women's second-class citizenship. Id. at 285. effort to dismantle a caste system, caste membership is highly relevant to remedial policies, and precisely in the interest of "the rights of individuals." At least Marshall thought that government could reasonably so believe. 
It was on this ground that Marshall argued that discrimination on the basis of disability should be subject to special scrutiny under the Fourteenth Amendment.1 9 And most notably, it was on this ground that he rejected the constitutional assault on affirmative action.20 For him, that assault was filled with bitter ironies. There was no basis, he thought, for the view that affirmative action offended the vision of the framers of the Civil War Amendments, who had themselves engaged in affirmative action.2 1 The anti-caste principle, as originally understood, permitted such practices. 
Nor was invalidation of affirmative action compelled by principle. In Marshall's view, most racial discrimination was objectionable because of its particular purposes and its particular effects-that is, because it served to create a system of caste. When the use of race has quite different purposes and effects, it should be evaluated more leniently.2 2 
To Marshall, the deepest irony of the modem attack on affirmative action was that it ripped the hard-won victories against racial discrimination entirely out of their particular historical context, when it was precisely that context that made the words ones of opprobrium. Thus for Marshall, the constitutional assault on affirmative action "pervert[ed] the intent of the Framers by substituting abstract equality for the genuine equality the Amendment was intended to achieve."'23 
By "genuine equality," Marshall did not mean equality of result. Instead, he referred to a system in which the caste-like features of American society had been dismantled-a dismantling that was part and parcel of the attack, decades earlier, on Jim Crow. Hence his unusually personal last paragraph in Bakke: 
I fear that we have come full circle. After the Civil War our Government started several "affirmative action" programs. This Court in the Civil Rights Cases and Plessy v. Ferguson destroyed the movement toward complete equality. For almost a century no action was taken, and this nonaction was with the tacit approval of the courts. Then we had Brown and the Civil Rights Acts of Congress, followed by numerous affirmative-action protgirvaem-asc.tiNonowp,rowgerahmavse othfitsheCotyupret augsaeidn bstyepthpeinUgniniv,etrhsiistytimofeCtoalsitfooprniaaf.f2ir4maThus far I have suggested that Marshall's constitutional vision included 
a commitment to equality of opportunity, particularly in education, and a rejection of caste. Of all Justices to serve on the Supreme Court, Marshall was also by far the most insistently protective of poor people. Indeed, he moved very close to a belief in a constitutional right to freedom from desperate conditions. This right is the third and final cornerstone in Marshall's conception of equality. It was also connected, though less directly, with the original wellsprings of Brown. 
At the very least, Marshall believed that any system that left an identifiable class of Americans in conditions of this kind should be subject to careful scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause. Under this view, no one should be deprived, without good reason, of adequate education, police protection, food, shelter, or medical care.25 
This principle is hardly egalitarian. It merely affords a basic minimum. It allows enormous variations in living standards. There is no evidence that Marshall objected to such variations. But it would not permit people to fall below a specified floor. Certainly Marshall believed that poor people could not be deprived of access to the basic institutions of a democratic society, including the political process, the judicial process, 26 and education. In an appropriate case, I think that he would also have held that the government could not constitutionally deprive people of the basic means of subsistencethat it could not allow them to fall beneath a decent minimum.27 
Marshall was not an egalitarian. But in his conception of the Constitution, courts were to assume an aggressive role in promoting equality of opportunity. At a minimum, that role entailed vigilance over discrimination with respect to education, probably even a right to education; an attack on caste systems; and a willingness to look skeptically at any state action that allowed people to be subject to desperate conditions. 
The Supreme Court has rejected this vision of the Constitution in all of its fundamentals. Certainly the Court has refused to see freedom from desperate conditions as part of constitutional liberty.2 8 It is by no means clear that the Court has been wrong to do this. A serious commitment to Marshall's vision would entail an extraordinary judicial role, one for which the courts are quite ill-suited. There is good evidence that courts are generally ineffective in bringing about systematic, stable social change. 2 9 A judicial decree does not automatically change the world.30 Implementation is always required, and implementation will sometimes encounter unexpected obstacles. Courts are ll-equipped to understand the complex systemic effects of ad hoc intervention. 3 1 The innovative, even ingenious theories and practices of modem commentators and courts should not disguise this fundamental fact.32 
Even when courts are effective, there are serious problems in judge-led reform from the standpoint of democratic legitimacy. Reform through the courts may dampen the practice of citizenship, an individual and collective good. And if reform does not have a democratic pedigree, it may run into severe resistance. Such resistance may in turn undermine the very causes that the Court purports to favor. The judicial struggle with abortion may well be an example. It is at least plausible to think that Roe v. Wade 33 demobilized the women's movement, contributed to the defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment, and helped create the moral majority, in a way having quite adverse effects for the cause of equality on the basis of sex.3 4 
The point can be made more generally: Constitutional law is an uneasy amalgam of substantive theory and institutional constraint. In developing constitutional principles, courts must be attentive not only to the best substantive interpretation of the relevant text, but also to institutional limits on judicial capacity. Even if the best substantive theory calls for something like Marshall's vision, institutional considerations would argue powerfully against it. 
In any case, the era of Brown-an era that produced so many extraordinary developments in American law, many of them engineered by Marshall-was an exceptional one in American history. It had no real predecessors. It is doubtful whether it will have any real successors. Many of those captivated by Marshall's achievement in Brown have hoped, for the last thirty years, for one, two, three, or a dozen Browns-in which federal courts, following Marshall's lead, reform the multiple unjust practices of American society. For now and for the foreseeable future, this hope looks like nostalgia, based on an anachronistic vision of the role of courts in American society. 
The capacities of the courts are one thing; the relationship of the Constitution to American life is another. Many Americans continue to live in desperate conditions. They are without hope, food, or shelter. They are subject to both random and systemic criminal violence-usually from the private sector, sometimes from the police. Blacks and women are disproportionately victims. Many children are without decent life prospects. A system with caste-like features currently exists with respect to race, sex, and disability. Many Americans never receive a decent education. In educational opportunities there are persistent, extraordinary, and unnecessary disparities, and these are correlated with race and other moral irrelevancies. 
Even if the Supreme Court of the United States lacks the willingness, the tools, or the competence to respond to the situation, it remains plausible to think that the Constitution of the United States is not an irrelevance. Other institutions, most notably Congress, the President, and state governments, have duties of fidelity to the founding document. Those institutions are not burdened with the limits that face the judiciary. Their duties of fidelity might well be discharged in a way that is attuned to the fact that for them, institutional disabilities are not present. 
We might even think of the judicial rather than legislative enforcement of the Fourteenth Amendment as the most profound irony in American constitutional history-one for which Marshall is above all others responsible. On the original view, it was Congress, not the courts, that would enforce the Civil War Amendments. In the aftermath of the Dred Scott decision,35 the ratifiers could not possibly have anticipated the extraordinary role of the judges, associated above all with Brown and its aftermath. It may well be that in the next generation, there will be an institutional shift more in keeping with the original understanding of that Amendment and, perhaps, with better understandings of the appropriate allocation of authority among Congress, the President, and the judiciary. 
In these circumstances, it is fully plausible to think that Marshall's vision of the Constitution will continue to have a conspicuous place in American constitutional thought. But increasingly, its place will be the halls of the legislatures and the bureaucracies, rather than the judiciary. This is an extraordinary irony: More than anyone else, Marshall is responsible for the idea that social reform, through the courts in the name of the Constitution, was both possible and desirable. But the irony is one that Marshall appears fully to appreciate. 36 
The last words come from Marshall himself. In 1980, the city of Baltimore erected a statute of Thurgood Marshall. It was able to persuade him to attend the ceremony-a real accomplishment in light of his storied reluctance to receive public tribute. But this was a remarkable event. Baltimore had been a segregated city, and one of Marshall's first endeavors after graduating from law school was to desegregate Maryland's all-white law school. 37 The dedication of a statue honoring a black civil rights lawyer who had abolished American apartheid would have been unfathomable fifty or sixty years before. 
Surely this was an occasion for celebration-of an extraordinary life of accomplishment, and of the remarkable achievements of the civil rights revolution. But if celebration meant complacency, Marshall would have nothing of it: 
Some... feel we have arrived. Others feel there is nothing more to do. I just want to be sure that when you see this statue, you won't think that's the end of it. I won't have it that way. There's too much work to be done.38 
On Truisms and Constitutional Obligations: A Response David A. Strauss* & Cass R. Sunstein** 
In our essay on the confirmation process of Supreme Court Justices,' we sought to support four propositions: presidents of a single party made eleven consecutive appointments to the Supreme Court, even though the Senate, except for a brief period of time, was controlled by another party.3 This development threatened to create a Court that lacks the appropriate range of views on constitutional issues.4 in deciding whether to consent to presidential nominations Such a role would be especially desirable under the conditions described in (2), even if it leads to the rejection of nominees because of their likely voting patterns. 
prospective nominees to the Court.6 It would be especially appropriate for * Harry N. Wyatt Professor of Law, the University of Chicago. A.B. 1973, Harvard; B. Phil. 1975, Oxford; J.D. 1978, Harvard. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of'urisprudence, Law School and Department ofPolitical Science, the University of Chicago. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. 
Process, 101 YALE L.J. 1491 (1992). 

our arguments are now largely moot-likely to have little practical significance in the immediate future. The distinctive circumstances that justified an active senatorial role no longer exist. The circumstances we describe, however, could recur (as they did after the period 1977-1981, when one party controlled both the presidency and the Senate); or they might arise in a slightly different form if important jurisprudential rifts developed between the Senate and the executive. 
the Senate to assume such a role, given our recent experience, both to decrease the level of distraction and antagonism in the recent nomination proceedings7 and to produce greater quality and diversity on the Court. 
Professor McGinnis's vigorous response does not take issue with proposition (1), says little about proposition (2),' and explicitly agrees with our reading of the Constitution in proposition (3), which is the heart of our paper. 9 The principal subject of his article is proposition (4). 
Professor McGinnis advances two principal arguments against our suggestion that the Senate should advise the President on prospective nominees to the Court. The first is that the Constitution contemplates no "formal prenomination advisory role" for the Senate' but "reserves the act of nomination exclusively to the President."" If we understand Professor McGinnis correctly, we have no disagreement with him on this point; indeed, he is obviously right. We do disagree, however, that his demonstration of this point undermines our position. 
Professor McGinnis's second argument is that the President has a constitutional obligation not to appoint anyone out of a desire to compromise with the Senate on legal philosophy.12 The President, Professor McGinnis says, violates his oath of office if he appoints someone who does not share his approach to constitutional interpretation. 3 Here we really do have a disagreement; we think Professor McGinnis's argument is unpersuasive on this score. 
Professor McGinnis argues extensively that the President alone has the power to nominate candidates for the Supreme Court. He marshals a distortions of Judge Robert Bork's record, to the effects of television on some Senators' behavior, and to the uninformative generalities offered by some recent nominees. See id. at 1518-19, 1518 n.107, 1519 n.110. 
Supreme Court, on the grounds that liberal law professors and others will offer criticism of conservative outcomes, and that persuasion of one justice by another is rare. See John 0. McGinnis, The President, the Senate, the Constitution, and the Confirmation Process:A Reply to Professors Straussand Sunstein, 71 TEX. L. REV. 633, 650-52 (1993). These premises may be right, but we think that there remains a need for diversity within the Court. It is important for Justices of varying views to confront one another in conference, outside of conference, and during the circulation of opinions. This is a valuable internal check on both arguments and outcomes. 
nominee who, in the opinion of the majority of the Senate, holds fundamentally incorrect principles of constitutional interpretation."). 

great deal of evidence to support this claim, and he criticizes us for not discussing some of this evidence. 
But of course we do not deny that the power to nominate rests with the President alone. We do not suggest that the nomination power is shared. If the President makes a nomination without seeking or accepting advice from the Senate, the nomination is no less effective. If this is what Professor McGinnis is saying when he insists that the Senate has no "constitutional prenomination advisory role,""' then we have no disagreement with him; nothing we said suggests a Senate role in this sense. 
Professor McGinnis, for his part, does not insist on the hermetic separation of the Senate and the President; on the contrary, he seems to acknowledge that the President may consult with the Senate on nominees "out of comity or political prudence.""5 Our disagreement might therefore appear to be quite narrow: he admits that consultation is sometimes a good idea, and we do not claim that consultation is formally necessary to make a nomination effective. 
We suspect, however, that our disagreement is more significant than that. Especially in conditions of prolonged divided government, we think that consultation between the President and the Senate is more than just a matter of "political prudence." If the Senate has, and exercises, an independent role in considering nominees-and Professor McGinnis says that it is entitled to do so-consultation is a necessary means of establishing a workable and sensible appointments process. Whether that makes it a "constitutional obligation"'S-the issue to which Professor McGinnis attaches such significance-seems to us practically an unimportant question and theoretically one of doubtful coherence. Under the conditions we discuss in our essay, conditions of long-term divided government in which one party's Presidents have made an extraordinary number of consecutive appointments, the President and the Senate are not properly discharging their roles in the constitutional scheme unless they consult about nominations. 
Suppose, for example, that a President repeatedly vetoed bills passed by Congress without letting Congress know ahead of time what his objection was, even though the objection might have been met easily by an amendment. Congress would then have to repass the bill, guessing (on the basis of the President's veto message) precisely what amendment would satisfy the President. As a result, the legislative process would be wastefully delayed and disrupted. Surely we would say that the President, by failing to make his objections known while the bill was pending, did not 
carry out his duty to make the Constitution a workable scheme. Whether this is characterized as a duty of "comity," or instead as a "constitutional obligation," does not really matter. It would be the President's responsibility-notwithstanding the undoubted fact that the Constitution does not say that the President may play a role in congressional consideration of a bill, and even though the President certainly has no formal role before a bill is presented for his signature. 
Our suggestion is that consultation with the Senate about Supreme Court appointments is, under conditions of prolonged divided government, a similar sort of responsibility. Professor McGinnis's extended discussion of the history of the Appointments Clause is essentially irrelevant to this relatively modest claim.'7 Professor McGinnis finds a number of instances in which people emphasized the President's power to nominate candidates of his own choosing; but nothing in our argument is inconsistent with that truism." 
Professor McGinnis has also not persuaded us that the language of the Appointments Clause argues against our view. That language is unavoidably awkward, at least to the modem ear: "[The President] shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint... Judges of the supreme Court.... "19 Professor McGinnis's explanation is that "[t]he Senate's consent is advisory because confirmation does not bind the President to commission ...the confirmed nominee."' This is a plausible explanation of the wording of the text, but it has the serious drawback of making the key word-"Advice"-redundant: the "advisory" character of the Senate's consent is fully secured by the separation of nomination and appointment. 
Our interpretation is, of course, also not free of textual difficulties. We do note, however, that Professor McGinnis's own misunderstanding of our position suggests an explanation of why "advice" is not directly linked with "nominate" in the Clause: if the Clause specified that the President, "with the Advice of the Senate, shall nominate," then questions might arise of certain delegates. Id. at 639 n.29. We do not believe, however, that these errors are relevant to the correctness of the propositions discussed in our essay. 
confirms proposition (3) and does not speak to proposition (4). Professor McGinnis is concerned about our omission of George Mason's reference to the President's exclusive right of nomination. See id. at 644-46. But we do not at all deny what Mason was asserting-that the President alone has the power to make an effective nomination-and we continue to be unable to see how Mason's statement of that truism bears on the question of prenomination advice. For the same reason, none of the quotations in Professor McGinnis's response suggests that Congress is disabled from offering prenomination advice. Advice is only that; it does not bind anyone, much less force the President to nominate someone of whom he disapproves. 

1993] about whether a nomination was effective (even if it was consented to by the Senate) if the President did not obtain the proper form of "advice" before making it. Further, our position does have the virtue of not making the term "Advice" superfluous. 
In any event, the relevant provisions of the text are too ambiguous to be decisive on the question of the Senate's role. That issue will have to be resolved on the basis of the kinds of considerations of history, structure, and practicality that we discussed in our earlier essay. 
Finally, Professor McGinnis suggests that we are mistaken in saying that a nominee bears the burden of proof because, in his view, the Appointments Clause makes it difficult for the Senate to reject a judicial nominee without "compelling reasons."21 This is so, according to Professor McGinnis, because a "political burden" is placed on the Senate whenever it publicly rejects a presidential choice.' We agree with both of these points. But again they are, we think, essentially irrelevant to the Senate's assessment of its constitutional responsibilities. In general, it seems quite sensible to say that a nominee should be rejected only for "special and strong reasons."' But under the extremely unusual circumstances of the recent past,' we believe that such reasons exist if the nominee is unable to show that he would add quality and an appropriate degree of intellectual diversity to the Supreme Court. No one has a right to serve on the Court. In the face of eleven consecutive appointments by Republican Presidents, a Senate controlled by the Democrats would be perfectly entitled to insist on its constitutional prerogatives-and this is so even if the Senate may face political barriers to this course of action, and even if the President insists on continuing to choose people of whom the Senate disapproves. 
If Professor McGinnis's first claim, that the President alone makes nominations to the Supreme Court, is a truism that we do not and need not dispute, his second claim is more nearly the opposite: it seems to us implausible. This is the claim that because the President swears to "preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States"' he is "under a constitutional obligation to nominate an individual who he believes will interpret the Constitution in a manner that generally accords with his view of its lawful construction."' Accordingly, a President who accepted our arguments "and agreed with the Senate in advance to nominate a jurist whose constitutional views differed substantially from his own would abrogate this most solemn oath."' 
This is a striking claim. It would mean, to give just one example, that unless President Hoover "substantially" agreed with the principles of early Legal Realism, he violated his oath of office when he nominated Benjamin Cardozo to the Supreme Court. In our view, Professor McGinnis's argument rests on a simple misunderstanding, a form of category mistake. Professor McGinnis's reliance on the President's oath of office? is a makeweight argument: invoking the oath just raises the question of what the Constitution requires. In order to determine the President's duty under the Constitution-in this case, under the Appointments Clause-one must interpret that Clause, using all appropriate textual, historical, and structural arguments. 
Undoubtedly Presidents have certain obligations under the Appointments Clause. For example, a President would surely violate the oath if he nominated a person who was sworn to subvert the constitutional order. And we do not think that it is unconstitutional for a President to seek, as recent Presidents have often sought, to nominate people whose jurisprudential or ideological views agree with the President's. 
But we do not see any basis at all for saying that the Appointments Clause makes it unconstitutional for a President to look past his own jurisprudential conceptions and to consider other factors: a nominee's distinction; the Court's need for appropriate intellectual diversity; and the fact that, on some constitutional matters, the composition of the Congress, not just that of the executive branch, reflects the appropriate benchmark for appointments to the Supreme Court. Not only is it constitutionally permissible for the President to act that way, but sometimes-such as in a period of prolonged divided government when one party has made an unusually large number of consecutive appointments-such an approach is more in keeping with the constitutional scheme. 
The contrary understanding of the appointments process is, we think, responsible for some of the unfortunate aspects of that process as it has been carried out in recent years. We think the President and the Senate can do better. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Rights, aspirations and state action in Eastern European constitutions. 
SOMETHING OLD, SOMETHING NEW 
The theory ofwhat belongs in a constitution remains in a surprisingly primitive state. Indeed, the theory has been in transition in the last hundred, fifty, or even twentyfive years. With respect to the matter of rights, scholars have suggested that there have been three distinct generations of understandings. The "first generation" rights involve the conventional civil and political liberties, most prominently the right to own property, to freedom of contract, to freedom of speech, and to freedom of religion. The "second generation"-still quite controversialincludes rights to positive state protection of human wellbeing, including the right to social security, to decent housing, to leisure, and to food. The "third generation" of rights involves the environment, peace, and economic development. The act ofconstitution-making in Eastern Europe-against the backdrop of the demise of Communism-affords a distinctive opportunity for self-conscious reflection about the proper place of different conceptions of rights in a constitution. What emerges should provide important, and quite general, lessons about the theory and practice of constitutionalism. 
In approaching the current drafts, it is useful to distinguish between two conceptions of constitutionalism, between which the current reform efforts are now poised. Most of the old-regime Eastern European constitutions were similar to or modelled on the Stalinist constitution of the Soviet Union. Westerners often think that Sovietstyle constitutions are not constitutions at all. In fact, however, they embody a distinctive conception of constitutionalism, with three especially interesting features. First, and crucially, such constitutions do not distinguish between public and private spheres. They apply their prohibitions and permissions to everyone, not only to the government. No civil society is immunized from constitutional constraint. The "state action" doctrine of course plays an important role in American constitutionalism, immunizing the behavior of private persons (and corporations) from constitutional constraints. The Soviet constitution contains no such doctrine, and the same is true for the post-1946 constitutions of Poland, East Germany, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, and Czechoslovakia. The refusal to incorporate a state action doctrine in these constitutions is a predictable consequence of the attack on the public-private distinction and the traditional Communist reluctance to foster a civil society independent ofthe state. 
Second, such constitutions contain duties as well as rights. They do not merely grant privileges to citizens, but also impose obligations on them. The Soviet constitution, for example, created a duty for citizens "to make thrifty use of the people's wealth" (Article 61), "to preserve and protect socialist property" (Article 61), to "work conscientiously" (Article 60), and "to concern themselves with the upbringing of children" (Article 65). 
Finally, and most important, the central provisions of Soviet-style constitutions set out very general social aspirations or commitments. Their provisions are designed to state those aspirations-not to create concrete entitlements that citizens can attempt to vindicate, through an independentjudiciary and as a matter ofordinary law, against government officials. In fact, nojudicial enforcement of constitutional rights is authorized. The absence ofjudicial enforcement helps in turn to account for the existence of broad aspirations. The existence of judicial enforcement disciplines and limits the category of protected rights, restricting it to matters over which court superintendence ismost plausible. 
In Soviet-style constitutions, the enumerated aspirations include a wide range of "positive" rights. I put the term "positive" in quotation marks because some of the so-called negative rights in Western democracies have a positive dimension. The rights to private property and freedom of contract, for example, require state institutions to be available to provide positive protection on their behalf. In this way the distinction between negative and positive rights-as traditionally understood in American law-is no distinction at all. It is nonetheless perfectly possible to understand the difference between the rights protected in different legal systems. Thus, for example, the Soviet constitution includes the right to work (Art. 40), the right to rest and leisure (Art. 41), the right to health protection (Art. 42), and the right to maintenance in old age, sickness, and disability (Art. 43). The Polish constitution includes the right to work (Art. 68), the right to rest and leisure (Art. 69), and the right to health protection (Art. 70). The Bulgarian constitution offers the right to a holiday (Art. 42), the right to work (Art. 40), the right to labor safety (Art. 41), the right to social security (Art. 43), and the right to free medical care (Art. 47). 
Along each of these dimensions, Western constitutions are of course quite different. Their provisions generally apply only to the government, and not to private actors (with prominent exceptions such as our Thirteenth Amendment). The distinction is conventionally justified as a means of protecting and fostering a private realm, or civil society, by insulating it from constitutional constraints. Of course a legislature may impose such constraints, and this is far from uncommon in the United States. For example, the proscription on race and sex discrimination is generally applied to nongovernmental entities. But it is important, both practically and symbolically, that the proscription is remitted to democratic processes, and is not constitutionally mandated. 
Western constitutions also fail to impose duties; instead they create rights. In one sense, of course, the opposition between rights and duties is unhelpful. To create a right is to impose a duty. If one person has a right to property, other people have a duty not to trespass. If you have a right to be free from racial discrimination, others are under a duty not to act on the basis of the color of your skin. Because legal rights create legal duties, and vice versa, the apparent failure of Western constitutionalism to create duties must be understood through the lens of the state action doctrine. The rights created by such constitutions generally do not run against private persons. It istherefore the state, and not private persons, that is under constitutionally enforceable duties. Soviet-style constitutions are distinctive in their willingness expressly to impose duties on private persons. 
Most important, Western constitutions aim to create solid individual rights, ones that can be invoked by individual citizens, whenever they see fit, in an independent tribunal authorized to bar governmental action. Western constitutions generally do not include broad aspirations, and they usually avoid "positive" rights of the sort that is characteristic of Soviet-style documents. In America, it has sometimes been urged that broad constitutional provisions be interpreted to create such rights, most notably the right to subsistence. These arguments have had no success in the courts. Whether or not the courts should have taken arguments of this sort more seriously, the current outcomes are consistent with the general tendency to reject positive rights of this kind. The Lasting Legacy of Communism? Or a Third Way? With this background, we are in a position to make some general comments about the rights recognized in the draft constitutions and the new constitutions of Bulgaria and Hungary. There are many surprising developments here. One of the most remarkable features of these documents is that in many respects, they are much closer to their Soviet-style predecessors than to Western constitutions. Like Soviet-style constitutions, they do not make distinctions between the public and private spheres. In general, the text of all ofthe drafts suggest that they apply equally .to public and private actors. The constitutions do not attempt to foster or even anticipate a civil society, except insofar as they make occasional references to religious institutions or labor unions. 
To be sure, it is unclear to what extent some constitutional rights can be raised against the private sphere. The right to protection of property against takings without compensation, for example, seems to run only against official organs. The same is almost certainly true of the right to free education and to social security. But there is no general understanding, in any of these documents, that the constitution applies only to the government. In this respect, the drafts are a surprisingly conspicuous outgrowth of their predecessors. 
Equally remarkably, every one of the draft constitutions contains a rich array of welfare entitlements. In this regard, the draft constitutions generally go well beyond their Communist predecessors. The Albanian constitution is typical. It includes the right to work, the right to remuneration in cases of work stoppage, the right to a paid holiday, the right to recreation, the right to social security, guaranteed free medical service, and paid maternity leave. The Polish draft is quite similar. The Czech draft includes the right to work, the right to safe working conditions, the right to recreation after work and to a paid holiday, and the right to social security. It also provides rights to education and training for the disabled. The Czechoslovak draft includes in addition to these the right to a sound and worthy environment-a right found in the new Hungarian constitution and in the Slovak and Romanian drafts as well. The Bulgarian constitution contains many such rights, with especially vigorous commitments to the environment. The Lithuanian draft protects the right to an adequate living standard and to adequate and safe working conditions, as well as the general right to "adequate payment." Many of the drafts contain duties. 
At the same time, the draft constitutions contain a large set ofrights that are quite foreign to the Communist documents. Most notably, every one of the drafts, including the Hungarian constitution, includes the right to private ownership of property. There are differences in formulations. The Albanian draft, for example, guarantees private ownership, but also states that the "land and underground resources, the mines, forests, waters, natural resources of energy, means of communication of national importance, means of railway transportation, telecommunications, radio and TV stations, and cinematography are the property of the state" (Art. 12). It is especially notable to see a constitutional principle of public ownership of the means of communication-a principle that appears in no other document, and that is likely to provide a large obstacle to freedom of expression. Even the Albanian draft, however, makes it clear that the law will recognize and guarantee private ownership of property (Art. 15). 
We might think of private property and freedom of contract as the foundational liberties of a system built on the principle of free markets. Surprisingly, however, not one of the documents contains a general protection of freedom ofcontract. Contractual liberty is conspicuously absent from the drafts-conspicuous in view of the apparent shift to a market economy. All of the documents do protect the right to choose ajob, and building on this idea, some ofthem guarantee somewhat broader rights of contractual liberty in connection with employment. Thus the Czechoslovak draft also protects against forced labor, and singles out for protection the (especially ambiguous) right to enterprise and other economic initiatives; this latter provision finds a close parallel in the Hungarian constitution. 
There may be an eventual conflict between broadly guaranteed rights of freedom of choice in employment on the one hand and constitutionally-compelled regulation of the labor market on the other. Free choice in labor markets is often said to entail constraints on governmental controls on those markets. The tension will predictably arise in Eastern Europe. The existence of potentially conflicting provisions in the draft constitutions attests to the current ambivalence about unconstrained markets, at least with respect to employment. 
The draft constitutions also contain an extraordinary panoply of other rights. For present purposes I will be very brief. What we might call "participatory rights" are generally included-including the freedom to speak, to vote, to join and leave associations, and to strike. The Albanian constitution, for example, grants a general right to elect and to be elected to all citizens over the age of 18. 
There are broadly defined rights against the police. In their range and detail, these go well beyond the American constitution, and give a remarkable picture of the abuses against which the post-Communist nations have thought it most necessary to guard. In view of the widespread denial of political rights under Communism, and the frequent brutality of the police during that period, these provisions are of particular interest. 
Moreover, discrimination on the basis of ethnicity, religion, and sex is peculiarly likely to arise in the wake of Communism. Antidiscrimination provisions of some sort appear in all the documents, and the particular wording of the relevant provisions of course bear on this threat. It is conspicuous in this regard that the Bulgarian constitution contemplates compulsory instruction in the Bulgarian language, specifically prohibits any organization or alliance along ethnic lines or attempting to foster ethnicity, and refuses to put ethnic minorities on a plane of equality. Several of the drafts expressly forbid sex discrimination, but many do not. Protections against discrimination on the basis of religion and ethnicity take a variety of different forms. They also set out a range of protections in the criminaljustice system. Several of them bar capital punishment. Many of the protected rights are subject to quite open-ended abrogation where the public interest so requires; the Bulgarian, Lithuanian, and Romanian documents are especially notable here. 
For Western observers, however, the most remarkable feature of the current drafts is their broadly aspirational nature, protecting positive rights of many kinds, and their apparent application of constitutional rights and duties to nongovernmental action. On the optimistic view, this strategy may represent a healthy effort to synthesize the best of two very different conceptions of constitutionalism. Pessimists, on the other hand, would argue that an approach of this sort will seriously endanger the transition to civil society and a market economy-and perhaps threaten constitutionalism itself. 
Drafts andfinalversions ofCentralandEasternEuropeanconstitutions may be obtainedfrom the Centerforthe Study ofConstitutionalism in EasternEurope. 
Some preliminary notes on the intransigence of ethnic politics. STRONG CAUSES, WEAK CURES 
Large parts of the Western public in general and liberal intellectuals in particular are dismayed by the outbursts of nationalist politics and ethnic strife that have emerged in the post-Communist societies. At the risk of increasing their dismay, I would argue (a) that the "ethnification" of the politics oftransition is the outcome of powerful causal forces that cannot easily be wished away, and (b) that it is exceedingly difficult to design institutional or constitutional arrangements that would conform to universalist standards and pave the way for the peaceful coexistence of ethnic groups within East European states. In short, the ills of ethnic politics have strong causes and weak cures. 
The "ethnification" of politics involves several interrelated strategies. First, territorial boundaries are drawn in a way that maximizes ethnic homogeneity. Second, policies are pursued which differentiate the status rights of citizens according to ethnic affiliation. Third, policies are proposed, advocated and resisted, and political parties and other associations formed, in the name of fostering the well-being of one ethnic community while excluding those who don't belong. In all three of these strategies, ethnicity plays the role of the dominant cleavage and the source of symbolic representations. 
Given the situation in which individual and collective actors find themselves in post-Communist Eastern Europe, ethnification appears rational to them. Thus, it is no longer enough to convince the political leaders of these societies that ethnification is inconsistent with Western standards of universalism and political modernization, standards to which they themselves supposedly aspire. What is called for is not moral exhortations but a change in the parameters of action of these leaders that would make it both preferable and affordable for them to refrain from pursuing strategies of ethnification. 
It is well known that the ethnification of politics, apart from the emotional gratifications it may have to offer, involves a number of serious dangers. First, ethni 
It is difficult to find anyone who is satisfied with the way Supreme Court Justices are appointed today. Many of the criticisms are prompted by partisanship, of course. But there is a substantial element of truth in the complaints made by partisans on both sides. And those who are not partisan, but who simply want a healthy process that conforms to the constitutional design and is likely to produce the best appointments, have perhaps the most to criticize. 
In this Essay, we suggest that a return to the confirmation process contemplated by the text and structure of the Constitution-a process in which the Senate plays a more independent role than it does today-would help eliminate aspects of the system that both sides, Administration supporters as wel as Administration critics, find objectionable. It would also produce a better Court along two dimensions: a Court with Justices of greater distinction, and a Court that reflects a more appropriate diversity of views. 
Although often overstated, the criticisms of the current process are telling. Supporters of the Administration object that members of the Senate, and private groups generally critical of the Administration, expend enormous energy not in disinterested inquiry but in trying to "catch" the nominee: to find some statement in her record that reveals a belief so extreme as to be "out of the mainstream." The hearings themselves consist of trying to get the nominee to betray views that will be unacceptable to the public at large, or, failing that, to make inconsistent statements that can be used as evidence of an unprincipled "confirmation conversion." As a result, the Administration's supporters insist, many potential candidates with distinguished records are effectively disqualified from the Court because their opponents can unfairly attack them with isolated statements they have made in the past. The result is an unduly political and sensationalistic spectacle that degrades the Court, the Senate, and the nominee. 
t Professor of Law,University of Chicago Law School Strauss served as Special Counsel to the United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary in connection with the nomination of Justice David H. Souter to the Supreme Court. The views expressed in this Essay are, of course, those of the authors alone. 
tt Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Akhl Amar, Elena Kagan, Jeffrey Peck, Richard Posner, and Geoffrey Stone for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Bart Aronson, Sonia Bychkov, Daniel Frank, and Thomas Marton provided valuable research assistance. 
1491 
The Administration's opponents reply that the real problem is that, for the Administration, filling vacancies on the Supreme Court has become a public relations offensive: one that consists of managing images and hiding the ball, while at the same time pushing the Court in a consistent and (to them) unhealthy direction. The President, his opponents say, chooses "stealth" nominees whom he has reason to believe are deeply conservative, but whose views the Senate will not be able to uncover. The White House then carefully prepares the nominees for the confirmation hearings, to the point where there is now practically a script: the nominee is open-minded, has "no agenda," enthusiastically accepts both Brown v. Board of Education1 and Griswold v. Connecticut,2 is humbled by the difficulty of being a Justice, and admires Justice Harlan.3 
The nominees commit themselves to liberal-sounding principles of privacy and racial and gender justice; but the commitments are at such a high level of platitudinous abstraction that they reveal nothing about the nominees' views on controversial issues.4 And if anything potentially embarrassing surfaces from the nominees' records, the Administration's opponents say, the nominees try to distance themselves from it or to shift attention to other, more attractive aspects of their backgrounds. The consequence is a confirmation process that amounts to a media event unedifying for the public, undignified for the country, and unlikely to produce outstanding Justices or an outstanding Court. 
Both of these accounts are exaggerated, but neither, unhappily, is very far from the mark. Indeed, the criticisms, though coming from sharply different sources, tend to converge. From the standpoint of the original constitutional plan, the current practice is indeed inadequate. Under the constitutional plan, the confirmation process should involve informed and tempered deliberation within the Senate, the White House, and the public at large about the best way to achieve a distinguished Supreme Court. At the very least, the President and the Senate should attempt to obtain Justices of outstanding character, of high intellectual caliber, and with qualities that will contribute something new or of particular value to the existing Court. Many members of the Senate and the Administration have tried hard to carry out this task. But it is-to understate 
be based not only on Justice Harlan's evident thoughtfulness and open-mindedness, but also on the fact that he was simultaneously (1) the most conservative Justice on the late Warren Court and (2) the preeminent intellectual source of the modem approach to substantive due process, an approach which culminated in both Griswold and Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). For a critique, see Bruce Ackerman, The Common Law Constitution ofJohn MarshallHarlan,36 N.Y.L. ScH. L. REv. 5 (1991). 
often consult closely for an extended time with officials in the Department of Justice-the most frequent litigant to appear before the nominee if she is confirmed. See "What'sthe Alternative?":A Roundtableon the ConfirmationProcess,ABA J., Jan. 1992, at 41 (remarks of Michael McConnell); see also infra note 107 and accompanying text. the matter-improbable that existing procedures are well suited to its fulfillment. 
The unfortunate current situation has many causes, but one that is most immediately apparent is the prolonged division of the federal government between the two political parties. Nominees selected by Republican Presidents have filled the last eleven vacancies on the Supreme Court (and sixteen of the last twenty). But eight of the eleven appointments were made while the Senate was solidly controlled by Democratic majorities. Nothing remotely similar has happened before in our history.5 Despite this unprecedented situation, Republican Presidents have made ideological appointments with little senatorial opposition, even though the Senate was usually controlled by another party. Any effort to evaluate the current situation must come to terms with this striking fact. 
One possible response to divided government, and to the troubled Supreme Court confirmation process it has produced, is for the Senate to be more deferential to the Administration's preferences. The Senate might confine itself to a role similar to that traditionally played by the American Bar Association and other advisory groups: to inquire into whether the nominee meets certain standards of character and professional distinction. Under this approach, the Senate could not appropriately consider a nominee's basic commitments or views on controversial issues, unless those views were so extreme as to call into question the nominee's character or competence. 
Confining the Senate to this deferential role would certainly eliminate some of the current complaints about the antagonistic nature of the confirmation process, and to this extent it would be an advance. But there is not much else to commend it. From the constitutional standpoint, this recommendation seems perverse. The Constitution requires that the Senate give its "Advice and Consent" to nominations; 6 this language contemplates a more active role than simple acquiescence whenever a nominee is not deeply objectionable. Beyond that nothing in the structure of the Constitution or the nature of Supreme Court appointments suggests that the Senate should be so deferential. The Senate, no less than the President, is elected by the people. Supreme Court Justices, unlike executive branch appointees, are not the President's subordinates. Often the Court must mediate conflicts between the President and the Congress; one party to a conflict should not have the dominant role in choosing the mediator. 
In our view there are other ways, more consistent with the constitutional plan, to deal with the defects of the current confirmation process. The first step is essentially the opposite of the proposal for Senate deference. We suggest that the Senate should assert its constitutional prerogatives more forcefully, unabashedly claiming an independent role. Specifically, the Senate should insist that it has both the authority to "advise" the President and the power to withold its "consent" because it disagrees with the nominee's basic commitments on the kinds of issues that are likely to come before the Court. 
When Congress considers the President's legislative initiatives, it is not deferential. No one would suggest that Congress should pass every bill the President proposes unless the bill fails some minimal test, analogous to a minimal test of character and competence. Congress is free to reject proposed legislation for political reasons. This is a most familiar part of the system of checks and balances. There is no reason for nominations to the Supreme Court to command greater deference. 
At first glance it might seem that our proposal can only make matters worse. The problem, one might say, is that the confirmation process is already too partisan, too focused on ideology, too much a media spectacle, and too unmindful of the qualities of genuine distinction that Supreme Court Justices should have. We do not disagree with the premise. The current process is too ideological and partisan. But paradoxically, the best first step toward a cure-the best way to obtain distinguished Justices under current conditions-is for the Senate to assert, rather than abdicate, its role as an equal partner in the appointment process. Partisanship in Supreme Court nominations is indeed problematic. But one-sided partisanship-in which only the President, and not the Senate, is allowed to be partisan-is much worse. 
The approach we recommend permits us to suggest several palliatives for the problems posed by partisanship in the confirmation process. In particular, we argue for a reduced emphasis on the role of the confirmation hearings and greater use of the Senate's "advice" function and of the pre-nomination record. The current emphasis on the hearings has produced many of the current difficulties. An independent role, combined with revisions in the process, would yield significant improvements. 
In Part I of this Essay, we show how the text, history, and structure of the Constitution contemplate an independent role for the Senate. In Part II, we suggest that an independent role is especially appropriate in current conditions. In Part III, we consider several counterarguments, including the most important: that our approach would unduly politicize the process of choosing Supreme Court Justices. In this final part, we also set out some recommendations for improving the confirmation process. 
The Constitution fully contemplates an independent role for the Senate in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.7 Article II, Section 2 provides that Supreme CourtAppointments, 56 U. CHL L. REV. 337 (1989); see also Charles L. Black, Jr., A Note on SenatorialConsiderationof Supreme CourtNominees, 79 YALE L.J. 657 (1970) (arguing that constitutional considerations demand enhanced senatorial scrutiny when giving advice and consent to judicial, as opposed the President "shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint... Judges of the supreme Court."' These words assign two distinct roles to the Senate-an advisory role before the nomination has occurred and a reviewing function after the fact. The consent requirement, if the Senate takes it seriously, places pressure on the President to give weight to senatorial advice as well. At the same time, the advisory function makes consent more likely. The clause thus envisions a genuinely consultative relationship between the Senate and the President. It assumes a deliberative process, jointly conducted, concerning the composition of the Court.' 
History supports this view of the text. The most explicit and elaborate contemporaneous exposition was given by George Mason in 1792. Mason wrote: 
I am decidedly of opinion, that the Words of the Constitution... give the Senate the Power of interfering in every part of the Subject, except the Right of nominating.... The Word 'Advice' here clearly relates in the Judgment of the Senate on the Expediency or Inexpediency of the Measure, or Appointment; and the Word 'Consent' to their Approbation or Disapprobation of the Person nominated; otherwise the word Advice has no Meaning at all-and it is a well known Rule of Construction, that no Clause or Expression shall be deemed superfluous, or nugatory, which is capable of a fair and rational Meaning. The Nomination, of Course, brings the Subject fully under the Consideration of the Senate; who have then a Right to decide upon its Propriety or Impropriety. The peculiar Character or Predicament of the Senate in the Constitution of the General Government, is a strong Confirmation of this Construction.10 
As the records of the Constitutional Convention demonstrate, the Constitution's drafters widely shared Mason's view. The Convention had four basic options of where to vest the appointment power: it could have placed the power (1) in the President alone, (2) in Congress alone, (3) in the President with congressional advice and consent, or (4) in Congress with Presidential advice and consent. Some version of each of these options received serious consideration. to executive branch, nominees); Luis Kutner, Advice and Dissent:Due Processof the Senate, 23 DEPAUL L. REV. 658 (1974) (arguing that Constitution calls for consultation before appointments); Charles M. 
54 U. CH. L. REV. 200 (1987) (arguing that Senate needs to reconceptualize its role of advice and consent and needs to devote more resources to enhancing role). 


CONSTITUTION? 102 (Robert A. Goldwin & William A. Schambra eds., 1980) (arguing that constitutional system of checks and balances was intended to promote deliberative government). 
MASON 1255 (William T. Hutchinson & William M.E. Rachal eds., 1970). 
The ultimate decision to vest the appointment power in the President stemmed from a belief that he was uniquely capable of providing the requisite "responsibility." A single person would be distinctly accountable for his acts. At the same time, however, the Framers greatly feared a Presidential monopoly of the process. They worried that such a monopoly might lead to a lack of qualified and "diffused" appointees, and to patronage and corruption. The Framers also feared insufficient attentiveness to the interests of different groups affected by the Court. 
An important feature of the debates was the Framers' effort to design the appointments process in a way that would protect the interests of the small states. In thinking about the appointment of Supreme Court Justices, the Framers thus focused on the likelihood that nominees would be attentive to the various interests affected by the Court Conflicts between large and small states, a principal political question of the founding period, present a much less important issue today. But there are now other conflicting interests that are profoundly affected by the composition of the Supreme Court. The Framers contemplated a senatorial role precisely to protect such interests, and to assure a degree of political oversight of the likely votes of Supreme Court nominees. The central importance of this political concern to the selection process, as that process was originally designed, strongly argues against a Presidential monopoly today. 
The compromise that finally emerged-the system of advice and consent-was designed to counteract all of these various fears. Throughout the Convention, representatives of the smaller states were especially skeptical of a large Presidential role and insistent on the need for the safeguards that the Senate could provide. Representatives of the larger states, concerned with congressional partiality and lack of responsibility, sought to constrain the Senate." The requirement of senatorial advice and consent simultaneously responded to both sets of concerns. 
A. The EarlyAgreement on CongressionalAppointment 
It is important to understand that during almost all of the Convention, the Framers agreed that the Senate alone or the legislature as a whole would appoint the judges. The current institutional arrangement emerged in the last days of the process. On June 5, 1787, the standing provision required "that the national Judiciary be [chosen] by the National Legislature." 12 James Wilson spoke against this provision and in favor of Presidential appointment.13 He claimed that "intrigue, partiality, and concealment" would result from legislative appointment, and that the President was uniquely "responsible.' '14 John Rutledge responded that he "was by no means disposed to grant so great a power to any single person. The people will think we are leaning too much towards Monarchy.' 15 
James Madison agreed with Wilson's concerns about legislative "intrigue and partiality," but he "was not satisfied with referring the appointment to the Executive.' 16 Instead, he proposed to place the power of appointment in the Senate, "as numerous eno' to be confided in-as not so numerous as to be governed by the motives of the other branch; and as being sufficiently stable and independent to follow their deliberative judgments."17 Thus, on June 5, by a vote of nine to two, the Convention accepted the vesting of the appointment power in the Senate.'8 
On June 13, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and Roger Sherman tried to restore the original provision for appointment of the Supreme Court by the entire Congress. 9 Madison renewed his argument and the motion was withdrawn. 
The issue reemerged on July 18. Nathaniel Ghorum claimed that even the Senate was "too numerous, and too little personally responsible, to ensure a good choice."2' He suggested, for the first time, that the President should appoint the Justices, with the advice and consent of the Senate-following the model set by Massachusetts.2' Wilson responded that the President should be able to make appointments on his own, but that the Ghorunm proposals were an acceptable second best.23 Alexander Martin and Sherman endorsed appointments by the Senate, arguing that the Senate would have greater information and-a point of special relevance here-that "the Judges ought to be diffused," something that "would be more likely to be attended to by the 2d. branch, than by the Executive." 24 Edmund Randolph echoed this view. s 
In the end, the Ghorum proposal was rejected by a vote of six to two. At that point, Ghorum suggested, as an alternative, that the President should nominate and appoint judges with the advice and consent of the Senate. On this the vote was evenly divided, four to four.' [Vol. 10 1: 1491 
Madison then proposed Presidential nomination with an opportunity for Senate rejection, by a two-thirds vote, within a specified number of days.27 Changing his earlier position, Madison urged that the executive would be more likely "to select fit characters," and that "in case of any flagrant partiality or error, in the nomination, it might be fairly presumed that 2/3 of the 2d. branch would join in putting a negative on it." Pinckney spoke against this proposal,29 as did George Mason, who argued: "[A]ppointment by the Executive [is] a dangerous prerogative. It might even give him an influence over the Judiciary department itself."30 
The motion was defeated by six to three. By the same vote, the earlier Madison proposal, in which the Senate would appoint the Justices, was accepted.31 
The issue next arose on August 23. Robert Morris argued against the appointment of officers by the Senate, considering "the body as too numerous for the purpose; as subject to cabal; and as devoid of responsibility."32 But it was not until September 4 that the provision appeared in its current form.33 Morris made the only recorded pronouncements on the new arrangement and seemed to speak for the entire, now unanimous assembly. Morris said, "[A]s the President was to nominate, there would be responsibility, and as the Senate was to concur, there would be security."'' Great weight should be given to the remarks made by Morris because of their timing. The Convention accepted the provision with this understanding. 
B. The Meaning of the Shift to PresidentialAppointment With Advice and Consent by the Senate 
This picture leaves something of a puzzle. For almost all of the Convention, the appointment power was vested in the Senate. At the last moment, it was shifted to the President, with the advice and consent of the Senate. What accounts for the shift? 
We speculate that two developments played an important role. First, on July 16, 1787, the Convention approved the Great Compromise, allowing equal representation for the states within the Senate despite their differences in population. This additional security for the small states may have provided those states with a degree of reassurance that made a Presidential initiative in the appointments process significantly less threatening. That reassurance, going to the structure of the document, may have made it less necessary to insist on limiting the President's role in appointments. 5 
Second, the assessment of Presidential powers appears to have changed in a major way when the Founders devised the Electoral College, thereby allowing a degree of representation of states qua states in the selection of the President.36 As we have seen, much of the resistance to Presidential power came from the small states, which feared that the President would be inattentive to their interests. Once it was decided that the President would be selected through the new, protective route, the small states had a new degree of security against the obvious risks, from their point of view, of pure majoritarianism. They therefore would have found it less threatening to vest the power of appointment in the President in the first instance. The Framers could accomplish the central goal of ensuring "responsibility" without undue risk to state interests. 
But there is no evidence of a general agreement that the President should have plenary power over the appointments process. On the contrary, the ultimate design mandated a role for the Senate in the form of the advice and consent function. In this way, it carried forward the major themes of the debates. With respect to the need for a Presidential role, the new system ensured "responsibility"37 and guarded against the risk of partiality in the Senate. With respect to resistance to absolute Presidential prerogative, the principal concerns included (1) a fear of "monarchy"' in the form of exclusive Presidential appointment; (2) a concern for "deliberative judgments"; 9 (3) a belief that "the Judges ought to be diffused,"40 that is, diverse in terms of their basic commitments and alliances; (4) a fear of executive "influence over the Judiciary department itself'; 4 ' and (5) a desire for the "security" 42 that a senatorial role would provide. 
As Mason's comments suggest, the Senate's role was to be a major one, allowing the Senate to be as intrusive as it chose. Even Hamilton, perhaps the strongest defender of Presidential power, emphasized that the President "was bound to submit the propriety of his choice to the discussion and determination of a different and independent body." Of course, the President retained the power to continue to offer nominees of his selection, even after an initial rejection. He could continue to name people at his discretion. Crucially, howev35. The argument is advanced in Gauch, supra note 7, at 347-50. 
CONVENTION OF 1787, at 171 (1988); CHARLES C. THACH, THE CREATION OF THE PRESIDENCY, 1775-1789: A STUDY IN CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY 97-104 (2d ed. 1969). 
er, the Senate was granted the authority to continue to refuse to confirm. It also received the authority to "advise." 
These simultaneous powers would bring about a healthy form of checks and balances, permitting each branch to counter the other. That system was part and parcel of general deliberation about Supreme Court membership. The Convention debates afford no basis for the view that the Senate's role was designed to be meager. On the contrary, they suggest a fully shared authority over the composition of the Court. That shared authority was to include all matters that the Senate deemed relevant, including the nominee's point ofview. 
As we have noted, this argument derives particular force from the centrality of the question of states' interests to the debate over the appointments process. The split between the large and small states was among the most important political issues of the period. Some delegates were fearful that all judicial nominees would come from large states. More generally, state rivalry, dominating the debates over the appointments clause, was the functional equivalent of the most sharply disputed of current legal and political debates. There can be no question that the "advice and consent" role was intended to provide, in Morris' terms, "security." And there can be no question that a central aspect of "security" was the power to refuse to confirm nominees insensitive to the interests of a majority of the states. In this sense, political commitments were understood to be a properly central ingredient in senatorial deliberations.' 4 C. The Early Practice 
The practice of the Senate in the early days of the republic and thereafter attests to the same conclusion. 45 George Washington's nomination of John Rutledge, then Chief Justice of South Carolina, as Chief Justice of the United States is the most revealing case in point.46 Rutledge's challenge to the Jay Treaty, 47 negotiated by Washington with Great Britain, played a pivotal role in the confirmation process. The Jay Treaty was challenged by the Republicans as a concession to Britain but approved by the Federalists as a way of keeping the peace. Rutledge attacked the treaty in a prominent speech in Charleston. The Federalists sought to block the Rutledge appointment on straightforwardly political grounds. Hamilton, a leader of the support for the Jay Treaty, led the opposition to Rutledge. The Senate ultimately rejected Rutledge for political reasons, by a vote of fourteen to ten.4 
TO THE SUPREME COURT 71-94 (3d ed. 1992). 
at 358-62. 

7, at 360-62. 
Nor was the Rutledge rejection unique. In 1811, the Senate rejected Madison's appointment of Alexander Wolcott, partly on the basis of political considerations. In 1826, President Adams' appointment of Robert Trimble was nearly rejected on political grounds. The 1828 nomination of John Crittenden, a Whig, was ultimately prevented through postponement, and squarely on ideological grounds. Similar episodes occurred in the first half of the nineteenth century. In fact, during the nineteenth century, the Senate blocked one of every four nominees for the Court, frequently on political grounds.49 
The Senate has at times insisted on the "advice" segment of its constitutional mandate. In 1869, President Grant nominated Edwin Stanton after receiving a petition to that effect signed by a majority of the Senate and the House.50 In 1932, the Chair of the Judiciary Committee, George W. Norris, insisted on the appointment of a liberal Justice to replace Oliver Wendell Holmes.5 1 Greatly influenced by a meeting with Senator William Borah, President Hoover eventually appointed Benjamin Cardozo to the Court. The Senator persuaded President Hoover to move Cardozo, then at the bottom of the President's list of preferred nominees, to the top. 52 D. The ConstitutionalStructure 
We have established that the constitutional text and history support an independent role for the Senate in the confirmation process. In the particular context of judicial appointments, there is an additional and highly compelling concern, one that stems from constitutional structure. It may be granted that the Senate ought generally to be deferential to Presidential nominations involving the operation of the executive branch. For the most part, executive branch nominees must work closely with or under the President. The President is entitled to insist that those nominees are people with whom he is comfortable, both personally and in terms of basic commitments and values.53 SENATE: A STUDY OF THE CONFIMATON OF APPOINTMENTS BY THE UNITED STATES SENATE 302-03 (1953). 

President has power to supervise executive officers even when they are exercising discretion in their ordinary duties prescribed by statute, andpower to remove them for unwise use of such discretion). The constitutional text, mandating Senate involvement in the appointment process, is identical for the Senate's review of Supreme Court and executive branch nominees. There is thus an argument from the text that an independent senatorial role is appropriate in all cases. Considerations of history and structure, however, suggest that the cases might be treated differently. The complex history summarized above, see supra notes 7-44 and accompanying text, argues strongly for an independent role for the judicial branch nominees, and it applies only to these nominees. There is no corresponding debate for executive branch nominees. As discussed in the text, the structural considerations argue against an independent role for the Senate with respect to executive branch employees, and for such a role with respect to Supreme Court nominees. See infra Part ILE. (discussing separation of powers reasons for independent investigation of judicial nominees). 
The case is quite different, however, when the President is appointing members of a third branch. The judiciary is supposed to be independent of the President, not allied with him. It hardly needs emphasis that the judiciary is not intended to work under the President. This point is of special importance in light of the fact that many of the Court's decisions resolve confficts between Congress and the President. A Presidential monopoly on the appointment of Supreme Court Justices thus threatens to unsettle the constitutional plan of checks and balances. 
Constitutional text,history, and structure strongly suggest that the Senate is entitled to assume a far more substantial role than it has in the recent past. There are analogies to proposed legislation and treaties, and to the Presidential veto. No one thinks that the Senate must accept whatever bill or treaty the President suggests simply because it is a "competent" proposal; it would be odd indeed to claim that the President must sign every bill before looking closely at the merits. Under the Constitution, the role of the Senate in the confirmation process should be approached similarly. 
II. THE SENATE'S ROLE IN AN ERA OF DIVIDED GOVERNMENT For much of the twentieth century, the Senate has not made independent judgments of the kind we urge for Supreme Court nominees. Until 1968, only one nominee had been rejected by the Senate in this century.5 There is some controversy over exactly how independent a role the Senate played in the nineteenth century.55 
But since 1969, circumstances have changed. Current conditions-conditions that are unique in our history-justify a more active role for the Senate.56 These circumstances include a large number of consecutive appointments by Presidents of one party during a period of divided government; the danger of intellectual homogeneity on the current Court; overt ideological attacks by the President on the Court and the self-conscious screening of 
Ginsburg) and three have been defeated (Haynsworth, Carswell, and Bork). Thus, the Senate has stopped Presidential nominees in 5 of 16 attempts, which amounts to 31%, a high percentage. However, no understanding has emerged on thepart of the Senate that it is entitled to undertake an independent inspection of the nominee's likely voting record. Indeed, it appears that many Senators believe that such a role would be unacceptable. See, e.g., 137 CONG REC. S9295 (daily ed. July 9, 1991) (statement of Sen. Grassley); 136 CONG. REC. S14,360 (dailyed. Oct. 2,1990) (statement of Sen. McConnell); 136 CONG. REc. S12,872 (daily ed. Sept. 12, 1990) (statement of Sen. Hatch); 133 CONG. REC. S14,913 (daily ed. Oct. 23, 1987) (statement of Sen. Domenici); 133 CONG. REc. S10,537 (daily ed. July 23, 1987) (statement of Sen. Dole). 
All in all, there is no clear current understanding on the part of the Senate of its appropriate role in the confirmation process. No sharply defined view has materialized on this question. There is, however, a discernible shift in the direction suggested in this Essay. See, in particular, the proposed Senate Resolution introduced by Senator Simon, calling for "philosophical balance" as a relevant consideration in selecting nominees and requesting "informal, bipartisan consultation with some members of the Senate" before nomination. S. Res. 194, 102d Cong., 1st Sess., 137 CONG. REc. S14,712 (daily ed. Oct. 15, 1991). nominees to the Court by the executive branch; the effective exclusion of the Senate from the selection of lower federal court judges; and the increased importance of separation ofpowers questions. Under these conditions, deference by the Senate is likely to produce neither a Court of high quality nor a Court with the appropriate range of views5 A. Eleven ConsecutiveAppointmentsDuring a PeriodofDividedGovernment 
The most important circumstance is, of course, prolonged divided government-specifically, the eleven consecutive Republican appointments, all made while the Democrats controlled the House, nine while the Democrats controlled the Senate.5 
American politics has not, in general, been characterized by the alternation of parties in power.59 Republicans dominated the national government between the Civil War and the New Deal.6° Democrats then dominated until 1968,61 and Republicans have won five of the last six Presidential elections. 
Even so, it is nearly unprecedented for one party to fill eleven consecutive vacancies. 62 This is partly the result of the fact that President Carter was the It is free to do so even in a period in which the same party controls the Senate and the Presidency. But the argument that such a role would be a structural imperative of the constitutional plan-as opposed to constitutionally authorized-would be far weaker in that event, for reasons set out below. See infra Parts Ml.A, Ml.E. The argument for an independent role would be further weakened if the Court were not, in the relevant sense, monolithic. A Court with a balance of respectable views, see infraPart ILF, poses a far less urgent case for careful inspection by the Senate of likely voting patterns. For these reasons, we believe that the case for an independent role is currently far stronger than it was, for example, at the time of the nomination of Judge Robert Bork. 
Things would be different if one party controlled both the Senate and the Presidency. For example, there would be little need for a Democratic Senate to undertake an independent investigation of the nominee of a Democratic President-not because the Democratic view is "correct," but because there would be a reduced need for the Senate to serve as an ideological check on the President. (Of course, competence and character would remain relevant.) Almost none of the arguments would be relevant if a Democratic President in (say) 1994 offered nominations to a Democratic Senate. Yet another question would be raised if a Republican Senate in 1994 were confronted by a nominee from a Republican President. Here some of the arguments we offer would remain relevant, but others would cease to be compelling. 
William Rehnquist from Associate Justice to Chief Justice. Because of the Chief Justice's influence and the controversy surrounding the Rehnquist elevation, we count this as eleven appointments. Associate Justice to ChiefJustice.) President George Washington, of course, appointed the entire membership of the Court, then six Justices. He and President John Quincy Adams, both members of the Federalist Party, made a total of 13 consecutive appointments. At no other time have Presidents from one party appointed more than nine consecutive Justices. See infra Appendix. ry. only President in history to serve a full term without making a single appointment. 63 More important, however, most of these appointments have been made while the Democrats thoroughly controlled Congress. In the past, one party has tended to dominate national politics entirely, controlling both elected branches. The last quarter-century of divided government is genuinely unique in our histo64 
To be sure, the Supreme Court is supposed to be independent of the political controversies of the moment. Its independence is reflected in the constitutional provisions for life tenure and nondiminution of salary.65 The Court should not track popular opinion; its duty is to interpret the Constitution. But the constitutional plan insulates the Court only to a certain extent. The Constitution makes the Court responsive to popular sentiment as well. The desire for responsiveness is reflected in a selection process in which the President and the Senate play crucial and mutually constraining roles. 66 The Constitution responds to the risk that a Court whose members serve for life may grow too far out of touch with societal convictions. The Constitution ensures that the Court will in a certain sense be attuned to the prevailing interpretive aspirations of the public at large.67 
When the people over time elect Presidents of different parties, and Presidents of each party contribute to the Court, this function is well served. The Court's membership then has some connection with the political balance in the country. When, as during the Roosevelt and Truman Administrations and during most of the post-Civil War period, the people turn over both Congress and the Presidency to one party, this function is again served, though in a different way. The Court does not reflect a balance between the parties-because there is no such balance in the country. Rather, the Court reflects the dominance of one side of the debate. After 1936, for example, the New Deal "won";68 the nation 
Of course, in these instances, the same party controlled both the white House and the Senate-a crucial difference from current circumstances, as we explain in the text. President Washington was not formally a member of any party, but he was generally thought to be affiliated with the Federalists, who controlled the Senate during his administration. See JOHN C. MILLER, THE FEDERAUST ERA 122-24 (1960). GEOFFREY R. STONE ET AL., CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 76-77 (2d ed. 1991) (Mr. Dooley was Finley Peter Dunne's pen name). We claim only that there is reason for concern when the Court is dominated by one branch and unchecked by another of similar electoral pedigree. In general, we put to one side the questions of what counts as "too far out of touch," and of what is the proper relationship between existing political convictions andjudicial interpretations. The proposition in the text need not depend on controversial answers to these questions. 
Of course, it is true that in certain circumstances a Court would do well to be quite out of touch, as in a case in which both elected branches were censoring political speech. In this sense, there are substantive constraints on the sorts of political convictions that properly influence constitutional interpretation, but those substantive constraints do not argue against our proposal here. 
("When the New Dealers gained a crushing victory in the Presidential and congressional elections of 1936, was thoroughly committed to it, and Democrats dominated both branches. The Court, with thirteen consecutive appointees by Democratic Presidents, properly reflected the fact that the nation had made up its mind.69 
But in the last twenty-five years the nation has not made up its mind. It has elected mostly Republican Presidents, but mostly Democratic Senates. The composition of the Supreme Court played a role in Presidential campaigns, and it is possible that this issue helped settle the elections as well. We know of no evidence that the composition of the Court has ever played a significant role in either Presidential or senatorial elections. Of course, it is theoretically possible that people voted for Republican Presidential candidates because they wanted a certain kind of Supreme Court; but it is also possible that the composition of the Court played a role in senatorial elections. Any relevant mandate is therefore quite muddled. 
In any case, the country has not reached closure on the questions of constitutional method or constitutional result that were raised in the Warren Court, the Burger Court, and the Rehnquist Court. On the contrary, the country is deeply divided. In these circumstances, if the Court is to stay in touch with public convictions (in the limited way that the appointment power envisions), it should not reflect only the President's views. It should reflect the Senate's as well. 
B. 
Overt IdeologicalAttacks on the Court by the President 
A series of appointments by one party will not necessarily reflect that party's ideology.7" Some appointments in the history of the Court have been indisputably nonideological and nonpartisan; sometimes Presidents simply sought a distinguished figure.71 In such cases, the members of the Senate, even in a period of divided government, cannot complain that their mandate from the people is being ignored by the President. they claimed a mandate from the People in support of their new activist vision of American government."). 
to the Constitution after the Democratic appointments could be understood as a capitulation. But until the nation revisits this question, there is no practical means to control this problem, if indeed it is a problem. 
we do not intend to take any controversial position about the nature of reasoning in constitutional law. Certainly we do not mean to identify constitutional law with "politics" or 'ideology" or to claim that legal reasoning is reducible in that way. But we do believe that it is much too simple to think that the interpretive views of the Reagan and Bush Administrations are simply "faithful to the Constitution," whereas the interpretive views of Justices such as Earl Warren and Hugo Black represented "an abandonment of the Constitution." We insist only that there is a spectrum of reasonable, good faith interpretive positions and that under current conditions it is implausible to think that only one of these positions warrants participation in judicial and public debate. 
another. We recognize, however, that some would dispute the claim that there are any appointments that are truly nonpolitical. A nomination based purely on quality and character would be hard to imagine. Some people of outstanding ability and outstanding character also have views that are unacceptably extreme, and they are therefore unappointable. 
The eleven consecutive Republican appointments do not, in general, fit this description. Those appointments were made by four Presidents-Nixon, Ford, Reagan, and Bush. Each of these Presidents campaigned on a platform that specifically condemned certain Supreme Court decisions. 2 Each of these Presidents (President Ford to a lesser extent than the others) vigorously criticized the Court during his campaign and again during his Presidency.73 
We do not argue that this is necessarily an inappropriate thing for a President to do. Concerns of this sort can be a fully legitimate part of the nomination process. Nor do we contend that the resulting nominees have been undistinguished. But when a President has criticized the Court so strongly on such grounds, the President's appointments can be counted on to reflect his own commitments. When the people elect a Senate with different convictions from those of the President, there is no reason for the appointments to reflect the President's views alone. Under the constitutional plan, the Senate need not sit idly by while a consistent stream of Presidential appointments leads the Court in a direction of which it disapproves. 
C. Screening ofNominees by the Administration,With a View TowardLikely Voting Patternsand JudicialCommitments 
If the President, regardless of his statements during a campaign, deliberately sought to make nonpartisan appointments, the Senate would have much less warrant for injecting concerns about likely voting patterns. But with two arguable exceptions-Justices Stevens and Powel174-there can be little doubt that recent Republican Presidents have made appointments on the basis of their criticisms of the Court, attempting to fill vacancies with people with certain predictable commitments. We do not suggest that there has necessarily been a "litmus test" on such issues as abortion or affirmative action. But it seems indisputable that these Presidents have generally attempted to choose Justices with predictable views about the role of the Court, and whose positions on the most controversial issues facing the Court were likely to conform to the President's own views. role. 
President Nixon did not attempt to conceal the real bases of his appointments. When he announced the appointments of Chief Justice Burger and Justice Blackmun, for example, he said that one of his reasons for choosing them was to change the Court's direction in criminal procedure cases.75 Nixon said his appointees shared his conservative judicial philosophy in contrast to the "activist" philosophy of the Warren Court, obviously referring to their basic judicial orientation, especially in such areas as race discrimination and criminal 7 6 procedure. 
In the Reagan and Bush Administrations, the screening ofJustices has been institutionalized. (The same is true of federal lower court judges, an important point we consider below.) Officials in the Department of Justice and the White House have played a prominent role in selecting Justices."7 The public statements of Presidents Reagan and Bush have also generally confirmed that the nominees were chosen because of their conceptions of the appropriate judicial 78 D. The Effective Exclusion of the Senatefrom the Selection ofLower Federal Court Judges 
During the last few years, the Senate has been effectively excluded from the selection of lower federal court judges. This aspect of the current situation is not widely noted, but it adds to the case for Senate independence in the selection of Supreme Court Justices. In the last twenty-five years, there have been two very significant changes in the composition of the courts of appeals. First, the size of those courts has expanded enormously. Second, the Adminis75. See, e.g., 1969 PUBLIC PAPERS OF THE PRESIDENTS OFTHE UNITED STATES: RICHARD NIXON 396. 
REWRITE THE CONSTITUTION 58-149 (1988); see also Sheldon Goldman, The Bush Imprinton the Judiciary, 74 JUDICATURE 294 (1991) (describing selection process under Bush); Sheldon Goldman, Reagan'sJudicial Legacy: Completingthe Puzzle and Summing Up, 72 JUDICATURE 318 (1989) (describing selection process under Reagan). For example, the Reagan Administration created the Committee on Federal Judicial Selection, and White House Counsel C. Boyden Gray currently chairs it. Id. 
June 29, 1991 at 1 (President Bush says that he would replace Justice Marshall with "somebody that would be seen as keeping with the judicial philosophy that I've always expounded.. . interpretation, not legislation"'); David Hoffman, ReaganReliedonHisInstincts,WASH. POST, June 18, 1986, at Al (Administration officials say that President Reagan's primary goal in selection ofRehnquist as ChiefJustice was Rehnquist's agreement with President's philosophy of judicial restraint); Steven R. Weisman, ReaganAides Say 'Short List' of Candidatesfor CourtIsReady, N.Y.TIMES, July 1, 1981, at A19 (White House officials make clear that President Reagan wants a nominee "to be compatible with his overall philosophy ofjudicial restraint"). tration now systematically screens lower federal court judges on several grounds, including the way they are likely to vote. 
In 1968, there were 83 court of appeals judges. 79 As late as 1978, there were 95 court of appeals judges. ° Now there are 154.81 The turnover rate is, correspondingly, much greater today. As a result, it is essentially impossible for the Senate effectively to monitor the composition of the federal courts of appeals. 
The executive branch, using a variety of formal and informal networks, can track potential judicial nominees for years, observing their development and assessing their orientation on issues likely to come before the courts. When a vacancy occurs, the Administration can move quickly to nominate a person who is already relatively well known to it. The Senate will not have nearly the same degree of familiarity with the nominee. Moreover, while the executive branch has as much time as it needs to study a person before appointing her, the Senate has little time to act: once the President has nominated someone to fll a vacancy, the Senate cannot delay its decision for long without appearing irresponsible. Even if the Senate did mobilize its resources, study the nominee, and decide to reject her, it would have to repeat the process all over again with another nominee who was known to the Administration but not to the Senators. In theory, the Senate could establish a duplicate bureaucracy and investigate each nominee to the lower courts as thoroughly as it wished. But the expense, and the political costs of the delay, would be prohibitive. 
The result of the institutionalized screening of lower federal court judges is that the Administration can effectively fill the lower courts with judges committed to its basic views, and the Senate is virtually powerless to resist. Again, we do not argue that it is always inappropriate for the President to seek ideologically compatible nominees for the lower courts. Screening of this sort might, on the whole, produce nominees more capable than those produced by the patronage system that characterized earlier times. 82tIefsatehe Senate shared the President's basic orientation, then executive branch screening might not necessarily be a bad thing.83 But when the country is divided on certain issues, it is difficult to see why the federal judiciary should be monolithic on the matters over which divisions persist.84 
COURTS 90. 

the state in which the appointment will be made. But this holdover from the patronage system is no substitute for more general senatorial participation. 
convictions within the political process. See supranotes 68-69 and accompanying text. 
independent senatorial role in the nomination of lower court judges; there is no difference for these purposes between the Supreme Court and the lower courts. The Senate is perfectly entitled to look carefully at nominees to the lower courts as well. We do not, however, argue for such a role in light of the evident 
Because the Senate is essentially unable to affect the composition of the lower courts, Supreme Court appointments are even more important today than in the past. They are the Senate's only realistic opportunity to influence the orientation of the federal judiciary. Unlike an appointment to a court of appeals, a Supreme Court appointment is so infrequent and so important that the Senate can afford to invest the resources needed to investigate nominees thoroughly. If the Senate is not willing to take an independent look at Supreme Court nominees, however, then a committed executive is free to dominate the entire federal judiciary. 
E. The IncreasedImportance of Separationof Powers Issues 
As one would expect, the era of divided government has given rise to an unusually large number of disputes between the branches. Often the Court must resolve disputes involving the allocation of power between the President and the Congress. The constitutionality of the independent counsel provision of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978,85 the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act,8 6 and the Sentencing Commission s7 are recent illustrations. In the future, there is likely to be litigation over the constitutionality of institutional arrangements designed to limit Presidential control of the administrative process.88 
The problem, however, goes much deeper. Recurring and now sharply debated issues of statutory construction have raised important conflicts between the executive branch and the Congress. Such issues include, most notably, the role of legislative history in statutory interpretation 9 and the degree of deference to be given to administrative interpretations of statutes. In the resolution of such conflicts lies much of the de facto power of the executive branch and the legislature. For example, there would be a large increase in executive power, in some ways at the expense of the Congress, if the Supreme Court were to hold that legislative history is irrelevant and that administrative interpretations prevail in the face of any slight ambiguity in the statutory text. 
The Court will undoubtedly confront all of these questions in the next decade. The Civil Rights Act of 1991,91 for example, may raise important questions about the role of legislative history in statutory interpretation.92 There may be a new array of arrangements in which Congress attempts to participate in the implementation of federal law or to limit the President's power to control implementation. The degree of deference owed to administrative interpretations remains sharply disputed. These cases will raise difficult and fundamental questions about governmental structure. 
Traditionally the Court has functioned as a mediator between the branches. But it cannot perform that function well if one branch sees the appointment process as an opportunity to put sympathetic Justices on the Court, while the other branch simply defers to the nomination of anyone whose views are not demonstrably extreme. 
F. The Danger of IntellectualHomogeneity on the Court 
Other things being equal, the Court benefits when itis composed ofJustices with a range of views. The qualifier is important: we do not mean to suggest that the Court should have a member who believes that Brown v. Board of Education93 should be overruled, or who considers welfare laws unconstitutional. 4 But with respect to a significant number of issues, the Court can perform its task better if there is a diversity of opinions. 
This point is especially important today because Justice Marshall's retirement has deprived the Court of a distinctive voice, perhaps its last liberal voice. Of course, categories like "liberal" are contestable. But it is clear that no one now on the Court fully shares Justice Marshall's orientation. 95 For several reasons, even those who disagree with Justice Marshall should consider his retirement an unfortunate development-just as the loss of the last distinctively conservative voice would be an unfortunate development. These reasons also suggest why it is fundamentally incorrect to say that when the Court is predominantly of one view, it does not matter whether the ninth Justice holds another view. 
First, because the Supreme Court's jurisdiction is discretionary, the Justices' ability to identify problems in the legal system is in some ways as important as their ability to decide fully briefed cases. Judges with distinctive views notice 
Fine Print,NEW REPUBLIC, Nov. 18, 1991, at 10. 

the sense that plausible arguments cannot be brought forward on its behalf; and each position lacks any significant support within the professional community. 
criminal procedure. Justice Stevens is difficult to characterize as liberal or conservative. Nor do we deny that all of the Justices at some points depart from what might be predicted. legal problems that other judges do not see-not through ignorance or malice, but because of differing priorities. Once an issue is brought to general attention, everyone might agree on what the outcome should be. But the issue might not have come to the Court's attention at all were it not for the distinctive concerns of one of the Justices. The certiorari process has often benefitted from intellectual diversity of this kind, and it is important that it continue to do so. 
Second, the Court's internal deliberations will suffer if the Court does not consist of Justices with differing views. If they are willing to listen, judges of one general outlook will learn a great deal from those with other basic orientations. Notably, one of the most significant theoretical contributions of the founding period consisted of the insistence, by the Federalists against the AntiFederalists, that heterogeneity could be a creative and productive force. As Alexander Hamilton wrote in The Federalist,"the jarring of parties... often promote[s] deliberation."9 6 One need not romanticize the real-world consequences of internal deliberation in order to suggest that differences in perspective often improve both the collective reasoning process and the outcomes. 
Litigants alone cannot provide the necessary perspective. The quality of advocacy before the Court is uneven, and even the best advocate usually plays only a limited role in comparison with a member of the Court. Divergent views should be presented, and pressed, during internal deliberations, when the Court is formulating results and reasons. In this regard, litigants are inevitably inadequate. 
Finally, throughout American history, dissenting opinions have helped Congress and the President-and even future generations-formulate their responses to the CourtY A Court that lacks a liberal voice-or a conservative one-would not carry out these educative tasks as well. It is hard for the American public to think about what the Court is doing if cases include no opinions presenting different sides. 
There remains the question of what counts as diversity, and of when a "diverse" view is so extreme as to be unacceptable. These questions are hard to answer in the abstract. On the one hand, the current Court is by no means monolithic in the sense that all of its members agree on everything important. In any nine-member body, there will be genuine disagreements. And, as we said, we do not think that the Court is insufficiently diverse because it lacks anyone who believes, for example, that Brown v. Board of Education98 is wrong, or that the Constitution requires revolutionary socialism. On the other hand, the current Court now lacks any member fundamentally committed to the views on constitutional method and constitutional results represented by judges like Hugo Black, William Brennan, William Douglas, Thurgood Marshall, and Earl Warren. These views cannot be characterized as marginal or as having nothing valuable to offer on their behalf. They have substantial support in the state and federal judiciaries, and from the public, Congress, professionals, and academics. Views of this sort provide a valuable perspective to the Court. 
For present purposes, however, we do not have to define the boundaries of the acceptable diversity of views. The need for a diversity of views on the Court strongly argues in support of the position we advance: namely, that the Senate should take an independent role in Supreme Court nominations. In a period of divided government, Senate independence will naturally produce a diversity of views on the Court. When the nation has made up its mind about an issue-as the nation did about the New Deal in the late 1940's and as it has today about Brown-individuals who are at odds with the national consensus will find no support in either the Senate or the Administration.99 Where the nation has not made up its mind-as ours has not, for example, about affirmative action, abortion, sexually explicit speech, or the separation of church and state-an independent Senate role will ensure that the Court is not monolithic, and that its deliberations have the quality that will be absent if there is no serious encounter with divergent views. 
All of these considerations suggest that, under current circumstances, the Senate should undertake an independent role in evaluating nominees to the Supreme Court.3' 0 The Senate is entitled to insist that the next nominee be a "liberal" or a "moderate." It should not perceive itself as constrained by the Presidential election to confirm all minimally competent nominees who are not "out of the mainstream." In the words of the Constitution, the Senate is entitled to claim that it will not confirm any President's nominee unless there has been a process involving "advice" as well as "consent." 
We suspect that the principal source of concern about an independent Senate role is not that it would be inconsistent with the Constitution. Rather, the concern-and it is obviously an important one-is that an independent Senate role would unduly politicize the process of choosing Justices, thus be desirable if the judge's own convictions are based on good reasons. Part of the point of judicial independence is to allow this phenomenon to occur. But it seems hard to design an appointments process that would systematically produce such judges. 
ofthe Supreme Court. The same is true of any party that controls the Senate. For example, there are sharp disagreements among current Democrats about the appropriate role ofthe Court on such issues as affirmative action, abortion, and sex discrimination. But these disagreements do not argue against an independent role for the Senate. They suggest only that each Senator should feel free to examine and to vote on the basis of his or her convictions. exacerbating the serious difficulties of the current situation. In fact, however, there is good reason to think that the approach we suggest would result in a less politicized appointment process, and one less likely to have the other undesirable characteristics that have led to so much dissatisfaction. In addition, as we will discuss, there are ways to help limit any adverse effects of an independent Senate role. 
A. The Process Is Already Politicized 
As we have shown, many Presidents, including most of those who appointed the last eleven Justices, more or less overtly considered a candidate's likely voting patterns in choosing a nominee. Under the current understanding, the process is political in this sense, but only at one end: the President is free to choose as conservative a nominee as he thinks he can get away with, but in order to reject the nominee the Senate must do more than merely object to the nominee's political or legal orientation. In order to reject a nominee, the Senate has to find some major deficiency in character or has to brand the nominee as "out of the mainstream." 
There is no question that, if the Senate were to assume the independent approach we suggest, Senators would have to be prepared to make judgments about how nominees would be likely to vote if they became Justices. In this sense, our approach might add elements to the process that can be characterized as "political." But part of what has politicized the process is the approach of recent Presidents.1"' Requiring the Senate to be nonpolitical will not cure that.1o2 
A nonpolitical appointment process (leaving aside the question of what that might mean 03) might be far better than one in which both the President and the Senate unabashedly focus on a nominee's likely votes. But a nonpolitical process will not come about simply because the Senate abstains. And while there is much to be said for a process that is not politicized, there is little to be said for a process in which one side to a partisan debate is free to consider likely voting patterns, while the other is supposed to remain indifferent to them. This is especially the case in a prolonged period of divided government, when Presidents have criticized the Court on political grounds and have self-consciously tried to shift its course. 
role would require a longer discussion than we can provide here. 
it would produce a kind of open and sustained public debate over nominees-often prolonged, sometimes misleading and confusing, and in many respects "political." But this is a proper, if not always well designed, aspect of the system of checks and balances, and indeed of democracy itself. 
B. How an Independent Senate Role Might Ameliorate the CurrentProblems of the Appointment Process 
More important, there is reason to think that our approach would actually make the process less political. We do not want to overstate this point, which is somewhat speculative. But ironically, a system in which only one side is free to be political might inject more politics into the appointment process than a system in which the two sides battle on equal terms. 
If the Senate insists on its "advice" function, there will be a greater likelihood of bipartisan agreement before the nomination is made. A Senate willing to provide "advice" should allow its leadership to meet with the President and other executive branch officials before a nomination is made. Influential Senators might well provide a list of preferred or acceptable candidates. They should certainly have an opportunity to review and comment on possible Presidential choices, with a power to "veto" before the fact those potential nominees of whom they most strongly disapprove. Such a system might well move toward a genuinely deliberative process in which Senators and executive branch officials talk together about future nominees. Such consultations might reduce or even eliminate many of the current problems. 
Moreover, if the Senate is free to consider a nominee's views openly, the President will have a greater incentive to compromise on the choice of the nominee. The Senate will also have more reason to confirm such a compromise nominee without searching for out-of-context statements, trying to catch the nominee in a damaging admission, and the like. As matters stand now, the President has a strong incentive to choose a nominee who is very conservative, but who will be difficult to defeat. So long as the Senate is not openly concerned with the nominee's views in the same way as the President is, but confines itself to the nominee's "acceptabiity"--that is, to whether the nominee has good character and is not an extremist-the President has limited incentives to compromise on the choice. Instead, the ideal nominee is one who strongly agrees with the President, but who cannot be portrayed as unacceptable. 
By the same token, so long as the Senate is not unabashedly free to consider likely voting patterns, it will have to find other ways to try to defeat nominees it actually opposes on these grounds. This is the dynamic that generates many of the practices that critics of the Senate deplore. We do not want to suggest that it is inappropriate for the Senate to take a careful look at a nominee's character and integrity. Matters of character can and should disqualify even a nominee of great legal distinction. But the confirmation process unquestionably has a tendency to exaggerate the importance of isolated statements from, for example, judicial opinions or academic articles written years earlier by the nominee. To some extent that exaggeration comes about because the Senate is, in effect, sublimating its legitimate concern with the nominee's judicial convictions. 
If the Senate were free to oppose a nominee explicitly because it disagreed with those convictions, 1' 4 the President would have a stronger incentive to compromise by selecting a nominee whose views were more in keeping with those of the Senate. In the current climate, under the approach we advocate, it is not at all implausible that the President and the Senate might agree on a moderate nominee of genuine distinction. The President, knowing that he could not rely on the confirmation of an extreme conservative, might find such a nominee the second-best choice. The Senators, knowing they had done all they could to obtain a more moderate nominee, would have less incentive to attack the nominee's record in ways that might be unfair. Both sides, having checkmated each other on this dimension, might be more concerned with the nominee's qualities of intellect and vision. 
In the long run, this interaction might be exceedingly healthy. Assume, for example, that the next nominee were a genuinely distinguished moderate, with unpredictable views on currently controversial issues. Assume also that the selection of such a nominee emerged through a process in which the Senate offered its advice and threatened to refuse its consent. If a Republican President nominated some such person, the dynamics of political compromise ought to leave him freer to fill the next seat with a genuinely distinguished conservative. Over the course of time, a President who, facing an independent Senate, was prepared to compromise on likely voting patterns for genuine distinction, might well, and certainly should, find a Senate prepared to do the same. Both distinction and diversity-in the sense of maintaining a Court that reflected, in an appropriate way, the heterogeneity of public opinion-might be furthered in this way. 
It is naive to suppose that this would be the inevitable result of the independent Senate role we describe. But there is reason to believe that these desirable outcomes are more likely if the Senate takes an independent approach. The Supreme Court appointment process is already politicized; the institutions established by the executive branch for screening prospective nominees attest to how deep-seated that politicization is. Allowing the Senate to meet the Administration openly on grounds of a nominee's likely voting patterns holds out some hope of reducing the politicization. And even if it does not do that, it will nonetheless break the unjustified monopoly that the Administration now has on the consideration of political orientation in nominees. Above all, an active Senate role might increase the likelihood of a distinguished Supreme the nominee about votes in specific cases? In brief, we advocate the following approach. Members of the Senate are fully entitled to ask such specific questions as they like. Nominees are entitled to refuse to answer-if they do refuse, they may do so in part on the plausible ground that no assurances should be given in advance, lest judicial independence be compromised. But for its part, the Senate is entitled to take into account the refusal to answer-subject to the important qualifications we discuss below. See infra Part IC. Senators may conclude that the absence of relevant assurances counts against confirmation. Court, one whose members offer the appropriate qualities of character, excellence, and diversity of view. 
C. The Problem of "Campaigning"for the Court 
No one would welcome an appointments process in which nominees to the Court made campaign promises--commitments about how they will vote on particular issues-to various Senators in the hope of gaining enough votes to be confirmed. Of course, once a nominee is confirmed, any such commitment is unenforceable. But a nominee who promised during a Senate hearing that she would not, for example, vote to overrule Roe v. Wade 05 would inevitably think twice about the public uproar that would result if she were persuaded by contrary arguments as a Justice and reneged on that promise. 
At first glance our proposal seems likely to encourage such campaign promises. On balance, however, it is unlikely that Senate independence would make this problem worse than it already is. In fact, it might improve matters. 
Whenever politics becomes strongly ideological, people who want to be on the Supreme Court have an incentive to campaign for the Court by reshaping their views. When a President pursues an ideological appointments strategy, the incentive is even greater. It is a safe prediction, for example, that the Bush Administration will not appoint anyone who has taken an unequivocal position in support of Roe. 106 Neither the President nor his advisers would have to ask a prospective nominee overt questions about such issues as abortion, affirmative action, or capital punishment. Since the President has the whole country to choose from, he can select someone who is reliable on these issues. People who want to be on the Court know that. 
If the Senate were to begin to act in the independent way we describe, what would change is not the degree of this kind of campaigning, but only the target. One could expect some people who see themselves as potential nominees to begin tailoring their public views to conform more closely to those of key Senators, instead of trying to attract the attention of the Administration as they do now. This would not be a desirable state of affairs, but it is no worse than what we have now. Moreover, campaigning of this kind, which often consists of writing editorials and making speeches, is not nearly as troublesome as explicit commitments made to a Senator in public hearings. 
Perhaps surprisingly, our proposal should have the effect of reducing the likelihood of that kind of public commitment. Senators are aware of the unseemliness of a Supreme Court nominee having to campaign for office. Senators on the Judiciary Committee, for example, often try to learn about the nominee's 
stated that the New Deal was unconstitutional, and a Democratic President in the near future is unlikely to appoint anyone who unequivocally opposes Roe. views while taking pains not to ask for commitments on specific issues. Moreover, Senators realize that public questioning of a well-coached nominee, by Senators who must be careful not to look too partisan or too bullying, is a particularly ineffective way to find out what a nominee really thinks. 
What forces the Senators to ask uncomfortably specific questions is their sense that they would otherwise be excluded from any effective role in shaping the Court's orientation. If the Senate asserted itself more fully-if it were a partner in choosing the nominee, instead of an after-the-fact check on acceptability-it would not need to rely so heavily on the crude and ineffective tool of public questioning. As matters now stand, the President has an incentive to choose the most conservative nominee he can find and then devise the best way to slide that nominee through the Senate. The nominee then says what she must in the confirmation hearings. If the Senate were a full partner in the appointments process, the President would have a greater incentive to obtain the assent of key Senators before announcing a nominee. Those Senators, in deciding whether to assent, could examine the candidate's entire record-just as the President can. Like the President,they would not need to seek explicit commitments on specific issues at the time of the nomination. Indeed, they would be foolish to rely on such a "campaign promise" unless the nominee's entire record made it credible. 
The current system creates a substantial incentive to make public commitments; unless a nominee can satisfy the Senate that she is acceptable, the Senate will reject the nomination even now. Thus, nominees routinely genuflect to Brown and, now, Griswold. There is good reason to believe that the changes in the Senate's approach that we propose will not make matters any worse, and may even make them better. 
D. Improving the Process 
As our previous arguments suggest, an independent Senate role might, perhaps paradoxically, diminish the importance of the confirmation hearings. Currently, the confirmation hearing is a climactic media spectacle that determines whether the President can slip his nominee (whom everyone knows was chosen in part for her likely voting patterns, despite the President's claims that merit was the exclusive basis) past the Senate (which is also concerned with the nominee's likely votes, notwithstanding the Senators' contention that they are concerned only with character, competence, and whether the nominee is in the "mainstream"). The fate of legislation is not decided in this manner. For the reasons outlined above, judicial appointments would not be decided in this way either, if the Senate approached them with the same independence it brings to the President's legislative initiatives. 
In any event, many of the problems of the current appointments process, particularly those pointed out by supporters of the Administration, arise from the central role of the confirmation hearing. Whether or not the Senate adopts a more independent view of its role (and perhaps especially if it does), a number of steps might be taken to reduce the significance of the hearing and to improve the process in general. 
(1) The President should seek and take seriously the "advice" offered by the Senate. We have suggested several ways in which this might be done: the President might solicit a list of the Senate's preferred candidates; key Senators might be invited to review and comment on possible choices; or there might be ongoing discussions between Senators and the White House about possible nominees. If such consultations produced a mutually agreeable candidate, the hearings would be simpler and much less contentious. Even if the President could not agree with key Senators on a nominee, serious consultation would reduce the range of disagreement and, therefore, the adversarial nature of the hearings. The hearings would cease to be the only forum in which the Senate could make its voice heard. 
(2) More generally, it is in the Senate's own interest to place less weight on the confirmation hearings. Both sides have pointed to serious problems in the current emphasis on those hearings.'07 Of particular importance is the threat to judicial independence posed by ongoing conversations between the Department of Justice and the White House on the one hand, and the nominee on the other. These conversations frequently involve matters likely to reach the Court. It is unfortunate if the nominee has been schooled in the views of the current Administration. Moreover, the hearings sometimes become mired in irrelevant or misleading factors, such as the nominee's telegenic qualities and how the various Senators "look." Televised competition between Senators and the nominee, or among the Senators, is hardly in the national interest. Finally, because of their immediacy and drama, the hearings tend to assume disproportionate importance. They can dwarf the much more relevant information provided by the pre-nomination record. The pre-nomination record is a far more reliable indicator of the nominee's views. The Senate should rely principally on that record, rather than a nominee's testimony, in deciding whether to consent to the nomination. Such an emphasis would reduce many of the problems of the current system. 
This is not to say that hearings do not have some virtues. At least in their ideal form, they have an important educative function. Confirmation hearings might help inform the public of the actual and potential role of the Supreme Court, allowing diverse views to be expressed on that subject. Too often the prenomination record of Judge Robert Bork, catalogued in ROBERT H. BORK, THE TEMPT1NG OF AMIERICA: THE POLMCAL SEDUCTION OF THE LAW 323-36 (1988); the extensive preparation of nominees David Souter and Clarence Thomas before their hearings; the reliance on general appearance before the camera in the Bork, Souter, and Thomas hearings; the effects of television coverage on some Senators' behavior, and the uninformative generalities provided by several recent nominees in their statements to the Senators. nature of the Court, and of constitutional law generally, is unnecessarily obscured; hearings can serve to enlighten. But the current system offers only minor advances in public education, and it does so while introducing a range of distortions into the process. Moreover, it appears that the hearings can be truly educative only on those occasions when the system is, in a sense, out of equilibrium. This occurs, for example, when the questioners unexpectedly change their tactics and the Administration and nominee are caught unprepared. Once the executive adjusts, the hearings become stylized and their educative value is reduced. Reducing the centrality of the hearings would significantly advance the goal of a healthy confirmation process.'0 8 
(3) The Senate should place the burden of proof-with respect to character, excellence, and point of view--on the nominee. No one has a right to sit on the Supreme Court. The country need not accept nominees simply because they might ultimately prove distinguished or open-minded. A "hope" to this effect is insufficient."0 9 In exercising its consent power, the Senate is entitled to reject nominees simply because they have not established that they have the requisite qualities, even if there is considerable uncertainty on that point. 
This understanding of the burden of proof would remove some of the difficulties introduced by greater reliance on the pre-nomination record. For example, such reliance creates an incentive for the President to nominate people without extensive records, simply because they have not said anything controversial.110 The Senate need not confirm someone of this sort. Indeed, it should presume that a candidate of this kind will not meet the burden of proof. 
(4) The Senate might rely more formally on lawyers familiar with the workings and practices of the Court. The Senators have an extraordinary range of duties. Although many Senators are, by training and temperament, well equipped to handle constitutional issues, it is unreasonable to expect members of the Judiciary Committee to be specialists in the intricacies of legal doctrine. Perhaps some of the questioning should be done directly by outside counsel. Perhaps there should be sharp time limits on senatorial questioning. In any case, the difficulties inherent in the hearing process, especially in an era dominated role, at least to the extent that such hearings mobilize public opposition to a nominee. We hope that such a role does not depend on such mobilization, produced as it sometimes is by arbitrary or irrelevant factors. 
hearings. A heavy burden of proof is correctly placed on governmental efforts to incarcerate someone, or to convict him of a criminal offense; in view of the enormous harm of a mistake-the conviction of an innocent person-the state must bear an extraordinary burden. In a confirmation hearing, the possibility of harm argues in precisely the opposite direction. Someone wrongly denied a seat on the Court may be embarrassed or worse, but is hardly placed in the position of a convicted criminal. Someone wrongly placed on the Court is in a unique position to commit social harm. For this reason we think much of the "heavy burden ofproof' rhetoric in the confirmation hearings involving Justice Thomas was misconceived-though we do not confront the many complexities of those hearings, unfortunate by any standard, in this space. 
been precisely this. by television coverage, argue strongly against the current emphasis on a process that has become a public spectacle. 
These are simply a few suggestions intended to counteract some of the difficulties likely to accompany an independent role for the Senate. Other solutions are surely possible as well. The principal point is that the confirmation hearing ought not to be the centerpiece of the decision whether or not to consent to a judicial appointment. There are far more reliable and desirable means from which the Senate can draw information about the candidate. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The Constitution contemplates an important role for the Senate in the confirmation process. It provides that there will be senatorial "advice" before the fact. It ensures that no nominee may serve without senatorial "consent." There is especially strong structural support for such a role in connection with appointments to the branch of government that resolves disputes and allocates power between the other two branches. 
We are in the midst of an extraordinary period--one in which Republican Presidents have made eleven consecutive appointments, usually with ideological motivations, even though the Congress was solidly controlled by the Democratic Party for virtually this entire period. In this context, it is unhealthy for the Senate to maintain a posture of deference. The current system, unprecedented in the nation's history, creates serious risks from the standpoint of checks and balances. The Senate should now assume a self-consciously independent role. It should insist on its constitutional prerogatives. 
APPENDIX PESmENrT 
PRpEASRmrEynar'S 
JUSCE(s) APoamD 
YEAR CONFRIdMA 
SPEANRrAyTaE'S Washington (10) 
F YEAR 1789 1797 1801 1809 1817 1825 1829 1837 1841 1841 1845 1849 1850 1853 D D W W D W W D 
John Jay CJ John Rutledge William Cushing James Wilson John Blair James Iredell Thomas Johnson William Paterson Samuel Chase Oliver Ellsworth C Bushrod Washington Alfred Moore John Marshall CJ William Johnson H. Brockholst Livingston Thomas Todd 1845 1846 D D W D D D D a Letter symbols for political parties: Ad - Administration; C - Coalition; D - Democratic; DR - Democratic-Republican; F - Federalist; R - Republican; W - Whig. 
Buchanan (1) Lincoln (5) A. Johnson (0) Grant (4) Hayes (2) Garfield (1) Arthur (2) Cleveland (2) B. Harrison (4) Cleveland (2) McKinley (1) T. Roosevelt (3) 
Taft (6) 1913 
Wilson (3) D R R R R R R D R D R R R D b The Senate was evenly divided in the 47th Congress, with Vice-President Chester Arthur giving the Republican Party control. 
c Denotes a Chief Justice who was elevated from the position of Associate Justice. 1921 
Harding (4) 1945 
Truman (4) 1953 
Eisenhower (5) 1923 1929 1933 1961 1963 1969 1974 1977 1981 
Coolidge (1) Hoover (3) Roosevelt (9) Kennedy (2) Johnson (2) Nixon (4) Ford (1) Carter (0) Reagan (4) R R R D D R D D R R D R 
William IL Taft CJ George Sutherland Pierce Butier Edward T. Sanford Harlan P. Stone Charles E Hughes CJ Owen J. Roberts Benjamin N. Cardozo Hugo L. Black Stanley F. Reed Felix Frankfurter William 0. Douglas Frank Murphy Harlan F. Stone Cle James F. Bymes Robert H. Jackson Wiley B. Rutledge Harold IL Burton Fred 1L Vinson CJ Tom C. Clark Sherman Minton Er Warren CJ John M. Harlan William J. Brennan, Jr. 
Charles E. Whittaker Potter Stewart Byron R. White Arthur J. Goldberg 
Willam H. Rehnquist Ci Antonin Scalia Anthony M. Kennedy 1965 1967 1975 
D D D D D d The Republican Party held the Senate'by a two-vote margin in the 66th Congress. e Denotes a Chief Justice who was elevated from the position of Associate Justice. 
The Republican Party held the Senate in the 83d Congress by only one vote, with one Senator affiliating with neither the Democratic nor the Republican Party. 
g In the 84th Congress, the Democrats held the Senate by only one vote, with one Senator affiliating with neither the Republican nor the Democratic Party. 
I The Democrats' majority in the Senate in the 85th Congress was only two votes. 1989 YEAR 1921-33 1953-61 1969-92 1933-53 1961-69 1979-81 Eisenhower Carter Bush (2) 
R 1990 1991 
PARTY 
R 
SOURCECSO:NGREASTSO Z: CQ's READY R.EBIuENCEENCYCLOFEDIA 496-98 (Congressional Quarterly Inc. 1988); HAROLD W. STAERY & RICHARD E. NIEMIVITAL STATISTICOSNARiESCAN POLITICS 292-97 (1992); ELDERWRITr,GUIDE TO THE U.S. SUFRED,COURT 995-98 (1990). 
164 168 170 171 173 177 220 t All rights reserved. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, David Currie, Elena Kagan, Stephen Gilles, Michael McConnell, Richard Posner, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments, and to Gabriel Gore and Richard Madris for valuable research assistance. 
222 223 224 226 226 228 229 231 232 232 233 234 235 
INTRODUCTION 
In 1983, Judge Antonin Scalia, of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, published a dramatic and provocative essay on the law of standing. The thesis can be found in the title: 
Powers.I Only recently named a judge, and having taught administrative and constitutional law for many years, Judge Scalia called for a significant shift in the law of standing. 
Judge Scalia's argument hinged on a distinction between two kinds of cases. "[W]hen an individual who is the very object of a law's requirement or prohibition seeks to challenge it, he always has standing."'2 But standing should frequently be unavailable when "the plaintiff is complaining of an agency's unlawful failure to impose a requirement or prohibition upon someone else." 3 In the latter case, Judge Scalia contended that there was a serious interference with executive power. Judge Scalia concluded that in cases of the latter sort, courts should hold that Article III imposes "a limit upon even the power of Congress to convert generalized benefits into legal rights ....-"4The Court had not addressed this important and longdisputed issue before. 
In 1992, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote the dramatic opinion for the Supreme Court in Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife,5 which significantly Powers, 17 SUFFOLK U. L. REv. 881 (1983). 

shifts the law of standing. The opinion hinges on a distinction between two kinds of cases. "When... the plaintiff is himself an object of the action (or forgone action) at issue ... there is ordinarily little question" that he has standing. 6 "When, however, ... a plaintiff's asserted injury arises from the government's allegedly unlawful regulation (or lack of regulation) of someone else, much more is needed."' 7 In the latter case, there is the risk of serious interference with executive power, in the form of a "transfer from the President to the courts" of "the Chief Executive's most important constitutional duty, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.' "8' Through Justice Scalia's opinion, the Court held that Article III required invalidation of an explicit congressional grant of standing to "citizens." 9 The Court had not answered this question before.10 
Lujan may well be one of the most important standing cases since World War II. Read for all it is worth, the decision invalidates the large number of statutes in which Congress has attempted to use the "citizen-suit" device as a mechanism for controlling unlawfully inadequate enforcement of the law.' Indeed, the decision ranks among the most important in history in terms of the sheer number of federal statutes that it apparently has invalidated.12 The citizen suit has become a staple of federal environmental law in particular: nearly every major environmental statute provides for citizen standing.13 The place of the 
citizen standing was constitutional even without a showing of injury in fact. See, eg., Evans v. Lynn, 537 F.2d 571 (2d Cir. 1976); Friends of the Earth v. Carey, 535 F.2d 165 (2d Cir. 1976); Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Train, 510 F.2d 692 (D.C. Cir. 1975); City of Chicago v. General Motors Corp., 467 F.2d 1262 (7th Cir. 1972); Citizens for a Better Envt. v. Deukmejian, 731 F. Supp. 1448 (N.D. Cal. 1990). 
Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, 30 U.S.C. § 1270 (1988); Clean Water Act of 1976, 33 U.S.C. § 1365 (1988); Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1415(g)(1) (1988); Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8 (1988); Noise Control Act of 1972, 42 U.S.C. § 4911 (1988); Energy Policy and Conservation Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6305 (1988); Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6972 (1988); Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7604 1990) U.S.C. § 96 Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. § 11046(a)(1) (1988); Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, 43 U.S.C. § 1349 (1988); Hazardous Liquid Pipeline Safety Act of 1979, 49 U.S.C. § 2014 (1988). Every major environmental statute except FIFRA authorizes a citizen suit. 
100312 (White, J., dissenting) (appendix). 
citizen in environmental and regulatory law has now been drawn into sharp question. 
But the importance of Lujan does not lie only in the invalidation of the citizen suit. The decision revises the law of standing in several other ways as well. And it raises a host of new puzzles for later cases to solve. 
In this article, I have two principal goals. The first is to explain why Lujan's invalidation of a congressional grant of standing is a misinterpretation of the Constitution. It is now apparently the law that Article III forbids Congress from granting standing to "citizens" to bring suit. But this view, building on an unfortunate innovation in standing law by Justice William 0. Douglas,14 is surprisingly novel. It has no support in the text or history of Article III. It is essentially an invention of federal judges, and recent ones at that. 
should not be accepted by judges who are sincerely committed to the original understanding of the Constitution and to judicial restraint. Nor should it be accepted by judges who have different approaches to constitutional interpretation. 
Lujan holds that the requirement of an "injury in fact" is a limitation on congressional power; but an "injury in fact," as the Court understands it, is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for standing. The relevant question is instead whether the law governing statutes, the Constitution, or federal common law has conferred on the plaintiffs a cause of action. 15 
fact" will both allow standing where it should be denied and deny standing where it should be granted. 
More fundamentally, the very notion of "injury in fact" is not merely a misinterpretation of the Administrative Procedure Act 16 and Article III but also a large-scale conceptual mistake. I hope to show that the injury-in-fact requirement should be counted as a prominent contemporary version of early twentieth-century substantive due process. It uses highly contestable ideas about political theory to invalidate congressional enactments, even though the relevant constitutional text and history do not call for invalidation at all. Just like its early twentieth-century predecessor, it injects common law conceptions of harm into the Constitution. Moreover, it acts as if injury can be assessed through a purely factual inquiry, rather than one that is inevitably a product of courts' value-laden judgments and of governing legal conventions. This deep problem has been obscured by the surprising evolution of modem standing principles. 
My second goal is to discuss the many new issues that will arise in the aftermath of Lujan. Under what circumstances can citizens now prove that they are not mere citizens, but people with the requisite "injury" or "personal stake"? How does Lujan affect environmental and other regulatory cases? What might Congress do to respond to the decision? These will be the key questions in the next decade. They will have considerable importance for the development of environmental law and risk regulation, and indeed for administrative and regulatory law in general. 
This article is divided into three Parts. Part I briefly sets out the history of the law of standing. Here I discuss the clear acceptance of "stranger" or "citizen" suits at the founding period in both England and early America. The Lujan Court should not have taken the extraordinary step of invalidating a congressional grant of standing without investigating the relevant history. 
I also describe the very recent creation of the "injury-in-fact" test. I will show that, in an exceedingly short period, a revisionist view of Article III, with no textual or historical support, has established injury in fact as a constitutional prerequisite. I also argue that, despite its apparent simplicity, the notion of injury in fact is heavily dependent on an assessment of law and is far from a law-free inquiry into facts. 
Part II describes and evaluates the various holdings in the Lujan question of substantive law, answerable by reference to the statutory and constitutional provision whose protection is invoked." 111 S. CL at 1704 (citing Fletcher, supra, at 229). case. I end the Part with two brief detours: a discussion of the role of the citizen suit in regulatory law and a general assessment of Justice Scalia's conception of Article III, as set out in his 1983 Suffolk Law Review article. The overlap between the 1992 Lujan opinion and the 1983 article is sharp and clear. The overlap makes the article a matter of considerable current interest. 
Part III discusses the future of the law of standing in the wake of Lujan. Here I try to show exactly which issues are open and which closed. One of my major purposes is to explore the effect of Lujan on current regulatory cases brought by beneficiaries. of regulatory statutes. I argue that in many such cases standing remains available, but that some cases brought by consumers and others are now drawn into sharp question. 
In order to overcome some of the uncertainties now facing citizen suits, I recommend that Congress create a system of bounties for citizens in cases involving both private defendants and the executive branch. Even after Lujan, such a system should raise no constitutional question. Congress may also have the power both to create property rights in the benefits provided by regulatory statutes and to establish standing to vindicate those property rights. I conclude with a discussion of this intriguing possibility. 
I. 
A CAPSULE HISTORY OF STANDING 
For convenience, we might think of American law as evolving through five different eras of standing doctrine. We are now in the midst of the fifth; its contours remain indistinct. But one of its principal features is an insistence that Article III requires injury in fact, causation, and redressability - requirements this Part, I outline the development of standing doctrine. 17 
It makes sense to begin with the text of Article III, which extends "Judicial Power" to certain specified "Cases" and "Controversies." 18 In the original understanding, "cases" included both civil and criminal disputes, whereas "controversies" were limited to civil disputes. 19 Article III contains no explicit constitutional requirement of "standing" or "personal stake." Nor does it ever refer to "injury in fact." It does require a case or controversy, and very plausibly there is no such thing 
without a cause of action. 20 If we are to impose additional standing requirements, we must do so on the basis not of text but of history, both before and at the time of the framing and through judicial practice over time.2 1 
An overview of opinions addressing the issue of standing will help illustrate the basic picture. In the history of the Supreme Court, standing has been discussed in terms of Article III on 117 occasions. 22 Of those 117 occasions, 55, or nearly half, of the discussions occurred after 1985 
that is, in the past seven years. Of those 117, 71, or over two thirds, of the discussions occurred after 1980 that is, in just over a decade. Of those 117, 109, or nearly all, of the discussions occurred since 1965. The first reference to "standing" as an Article III limitation can be found in Stark v. Wickard,2 3 decided in 1944. The next reference does not appear until eight years later, in Adler v. Board of Education.24 Not until the Data Processing case in 197025 did a large number of cases emerge on the issue of standing. The explosion of judicial interest in standing as a distinct body of constitutional law 26 is an extraordinarily recent phenomenon. 
What of "injury in fact"? Barlow v. Collins 27 in 1970. 
about ten cases during each succeeding five-year interval, until a leap to ten references in the brief period from 1990 to 1992.28 
HART & WECHSLER, THE FEDERAL COURTS AND THE FEDERAL SYSrEM (Paul M. Bator et al eds., 3d ed. 1988)). 

recency of the particular words obscures the tradition represented by the general concept. (b) Perhaps standing has become important only recently as a result of attempts to bring suit by people who would never even thought of doing so before. If (a) is true, the evidence tells us nothing. If (b) is true, the constitutional limit was always present but did not have to be often invoked until recently. 
The discussion in Part I should shed light on these possibilities. For the moment, a few brief words. The history suggests that (a) is only partly true. A cause of action has traditionally been required, and this requirement is indeed imposed by Article III. But standing, as a distinct body of law, represents a genuinely new development, not a traditional one. As Part I also suggests, (b) is only partly true as well. Stranger or citizen actions are familiar to English and American law. The suit to compel nondiscretionary government action is no innovation; it is part of the old idea of mandamus. On the other hand, the modem regulatory state has furnished many more occasions for this suit than was traditional. 
injury-in-fact test played no role in administrative and constitutional law until the past quarter century. 
To say this is not to deny that there were important antecedents for the requirement of standing. As we will soon see, there had always been a question whether the plaintiff had a cause of action, and this was indeed a matter having constitutional status. Without a cause of action, there was no case or controversy and hence no standing. This is an extremely important principle. Moreover, a handful of cases in the 1920s and 1930s relied on notions of "standing" without mentioning the word. These cases, too, are of considerable importance. But we will see that the modem understanding of standing is insufficiently self-conscious of its own novelty, even of its revisionism. 
A. 
The first period, by far the longest, ranges from the founding era to roughly 1920. In that period, there was no separate standing doctrine at all.29 No one believed that the Constitution limited Congress' power to confer a cause of action. Instead, what we now consider to be the question of standing was answered by deciding whether Congress or any other source of law had granted the plaintiff a right to sue. 30 To have standing, a litigant needed a legal right to bring suit. 
The notion of injury in fact did not appear in this period. The existence of a concrete, personal interest, or an injury in fact, was neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for a legal proceeding. People with a concrete interest could not bring suit unless the common law, or some other source of law, said so. But if a source of law conferred a right to sue, "standing" existed, entirely independently of "concrete interest" or "injury in fact."' 31 
Implicit in these ideas was a particular conception of Article III and a particular understanding of the relationship between Article III and standing. If neither Congress nor the common law had conferred a right to sue, no case or controversy existed. Whatever harm had occurred was not legally cognizable at all; this was a case of damnum Standing toSue in PublicActions: Is It a ConstitutionalRequirement?,78 YALE L.J. 816 (1969); Louis L. Jaffe, Standing to Secure JudicialReview: PublicAction. 74 HARV. L. REv. 1265, 1269-82 (1961); Winter, supra note 22, at 1394-425. I rely a good deal on these treatments here. 
the forms of action); supra note 15. Justice Scalia appears to have recognized this point, subject to his Article III caveats, in his 1983 article: "Standing requires ... the allegation of some particularized injury to the individual plaintiff. But legal injury is by definition no more than the violation of a legal right; and legal rights can be created by the legislature." Scalia, supranote 1, at 885. 
absque injuria. Courts had no power to hear the plaintiff's claim. There was therefore a sharp distinction between an injury on the one hand (a "harm") and a legal injury on the other. To this extent, the Article III requirement of a case or controversy did indeed constrain the category of persons who could bring suit. But the constraint had everything to do with whether the legislature or some other source of law had created a cause of action. It had nothing to do with "injury in fact." 
There is no evidence of constitutional limits on the power to grant standing. In both England and America, actions by strangers, or by citizens in general, were fully permissible and indeed familiar. There is no basis for the view that the English and early American conception of adjudication forbade suits by strangers or citizens. 
The practice in England is revealing, for it helps cast light on what the founding generation may have understood by "case or controversy." Before and at the time of the framing, the English practice was to allow strangers to have standing in the many cases involving the ancient prerogative writs. Of these writs, two of the most important were certiorari and prohibition. "The English tradition of locus standi in prohibition and certiorari is that 'a stranger' has standing, but relief in suits by strangers is discretionary." 3' 2 
The governing idea behind the writ of prohibition was that a usurpation of jurisdiction encroached on the royal prerogative. It followed that anyone could bring the writ.33 A key case was Articuloi Cler, reported by Coke in a passage that would have been familiar to the Americans of the late eighteenth century.3 4 The central passage says: "And the kings courts that may award prohibitions, being informed either by the parties themselves, or by any stranger, that any court temporall or eclesiasticall doth hold plea of that (whereof they have not jurisdiction) may lawfully prohibit the same ... ,,a3 No English court appears to have rejected the view that prohibition was available at the behest of strangers.3 6 
The writ of certiorari was similarly available to citizens, and not just those with a concrete or personal interest. A case in 1724 indi32. Jaffe, supra note 29, at 1274. 
ed., 1980); Jaffe, supra note 29, at 1274. 
cated that "one who comes merely as a stranger" was entitled to discretionary judicial relief.37 Suits by strangers were also permitted under a statute allowing an information of quo warranto.38 An English case expressly so held in the auspicious year of 1789.39 
There were other English precedents for the citizen suit. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, mandamus was available in England, even at the behest of strangers. 40 Thus Berger writes: From such cases a colonial lawyer might well have concluded that mandamus was capable of issuance at the suit of a stranger who sought to assert the public interest, especially because the analogy of mandamus to prohibition was early drawn, and because Coke, who had unequivocally stated the availability of prohibition to strangers, also made a massive assertion of mandamus jurisdiction. 4 1 The mandamus action is closely related to the modem citizen suit. The purpose of the mandamus action is to require the executive branch to do what the law requires it to do. This is the same idea that underlies the citizen suit, most conspicuously in the environmental area. 
Related devices in England were the informers' action and the relator action. In the informers' action, cash bounties were awarded to strangers who successfully prosecuted illegal conduct. In relator actions, suits would be brought formally in the name of the Attorney General, but at the instance of a private person, often a stranger. "[A]ny persons, though the most remote in the contemplation of the charity, may be relators ... ."42 Certiorari and prohibition remain available to strangers in England today.43 
The English history is sufficient to show that if we are thinking in historical terms, "the argument for a constitutional bar to strangers as complainants against unconstitutional action" is "without foundation."44 The modem injury-in-fact test, developed in the twentieth century, attempted to draw on the Westminster practice.45 But note 29, at 820-21 & n.29. 

Berger, supra note 29, at 823 & n.38 strangers to enforce acts of Parliament, as such acts were of interest to all in "the kingdom") [A] court will not decide a question unless the nature of the action challenged, the kind of injury inflicted, and the relationship between the parties are such that judicial determination enough has been said to show that this is a historical blunder. 
There is relatively little explicit material on the Framers' conception of "case or controversy." 46 
Certainly there is no direct evidence that injury in fact or concrete interest was intended to be a constitutional prerequisite under Article III. There is no reason to think that the Framers sought to limit Congress' power to create "cases" or "controversies" by conferring causes of action.4 7 To understand what the Americans understood, it is useful to consult the early American practice, looking at the state and federal levels. 
If we look at the practice in state courts, we will find no reason to think that the American practice was more restrictive than that in England. Several state cases built explicitly on the English practice. For example, a South Carolina court issued a writ of prohibition at the behest of a stranger.48 A New Jersey case in 1794 established stranger jurisdiction in certiorari, effectively allowing a citizen action. 49 Another New Jersey case issued a writ of certiorari on behalf of a citizen and expressly rejected the view that the "court ought not to award a certiorarion the mere prayer of an individual, unless he will previously fected by the operation of the by-law .... lay some cause before them tending to show that he is or may be af-5o 
Other cases in the first century of the republic suggested the same view. 5 1 Thus Louis Jaffe summarized his historical survey with the is consonant with what was, generally speaking, the business of the Colonial courts and the courts of Westminster when the Constitution was framed. 
Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Comm. v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123, 150 (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). 
CONSTrrUTION 212-373 (1987). 
right to a commission is something which the laws of the United States cannot enforce: In pursuing this inquiry, the first question which presents itself, is, whether this can be arranged with that class of cases which come under the description of damnun absque injuria- a loss without an injury. 
This description of cases never has been considered, and it is believed never can be considered, as comprehending offices oftrust, ofhonor or ofprofit. The office ofjustice of peace in the district of Columbia is such an office; it is therefore worthy of the attention and guardianship of the laws. It has received that attention and guardianship. It has been created by special act of congress, and has been secured, so far as the laws can give security to the person appointed to fill it, for five years. It is not then on account ofthe worthlessness of the thing pursued, that the injured party can be alleged to be without remedy.). 
present day. "The considerable weight of authority now supports the citizen-mandamus suit." Id. at 1276 & n.44. [V€ol. 91:163 suggestion that "the public action - an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the public interest in the enforcement of public obligations - has long been a feature of our English and American law."'52 
At the national level, there is no clear American tradition of reliance on the prerogative writs. According to the Supreme Court's interpretation of the All Writs Act, 53 Congress did not choose explicitly to create general mandamus, prohibition, or certiorari jurisdiction, though there were particular statutory and common law cases involving the writs, and it seems clear that their limited use was a matter of legislative discretion rather than constitutional command. 54 There are, however, revealing early precedents for the citizen suit at the national level. The writ of prohibition to restrain an allegedly unconstitutional tax was treated as a constitutional case in a relatively early decision of the Marshall Court, 55 and in 1875 the Supreme Court allowed a petition for mandamus at the behest of what it treated as citizens. In Union Pacific Railroad v. Hall,56 merchants brought suit to require a federally chartered railroad to create a certain railroad line. They invoked a general mandamus statute "to compel the Union Pacific Railroad Company to operate its road as required by law."'57 The Court said that the merchants were attempting to enforce "a duty to the public generally" and that they "had no interest other than such as belonged to others."' 58 Nonetheless, the Supreme Court allowed the action to go forward. 
Moreover, the early Congress was active as well. I believe that Congress supplied two precedents - the qui tam action and the informers' action - that operate as a powerful affirmative argument against the view that Article III bars "stranger" or "citizen" actions once these have been congressionally authorized. 
The most important development was the widespread early congressional creation of the qui tam action. The purpose of this action is to give citizens a right to bring civil suits to help in the enforcement of the federal criminal law. Under the qui tam action, a citizen - who might well be a stranger - is permitted to bring suits against offenders of the law. Qui tam actions are familiar to American law. "Statutes providing for actions by a common informer, who himself has no interest whatever in the controversy other than that given by statute, have been in existence for hundreds of years in England, and in this country ever since the foundation of our Government." 59 In the first decade of the nation's existence, Congress created a number of qui tam actions. 6° Explicit qui tam provisions were allowed under many statutes, including those criminalizing the import of liquor without paying duties, 6 1 prohibiting certain trade with Indian tribes, 62 criminalizing failure to comply with certain postal requirements, 63 and criminalizing slave trade with foreign nations." 
The qui tam action was accompanied by the informers' action. Through this action, people can bring suit to enforce public duties; successful plaintiffs keep a share of the resulting damages or fines. In the states, this action had become familiar in the early stages of American history. Notably, the informers' action was available against both private defendants and public officials. 65 Early Congresses created at least two informers' actions to assist in the enforcement of federal law. The first of these operated not only against private violators but against executive officials as well. 66 "Suits by those without personal injury who were acting as representatives of others were not viewed as raising constitutional problems under article III.1167 
For present purposes, what is especially revealing is that there is no evidence that anyone at the time of the framing believed that a qui tam action or informers' action produced a constitutional doubt. No one thought to suggest that the "case or controversy" requirement placed serious constraints on what was, in essence, a citizen suit. This fact provides extremely powerful evidence that Article III did not impose constraints on Congress' power to grant standing to strangers. 
There are two possible differences between the qui tam and informers' actions on the one hand and the modem citizen suit on the other. First, the former are usually brought against a private defendant. By contrast, the government is often the defendant in the citizen suit, as indeed it was in Lujan itself. If the requirement of injury is to be read in light of constitutional provisions relating to executive power,68 then the existence of the qui tam and informers' actions may not be decisive as against the claim that citizen or stranger suits are constitutionally forbidden. 
Second, the victor in a qui tam action is ordinarily entitled to recover money to be paid to himself, to the United States, or to both. The victor in an informers' action also receives some financial benefit. By contrast, the victor in a citizen action does not recover money. For this reason it is not completely odd to think that, as originally understood, the Constitution permitted stranger actions only if dollars were to change hands. 
These are not entirely implausible distinctions. But if they are set out as part of an argument that Article III forbids the citizen suit, they do make for quite a stretch. Most important, the informers' action was available against public as well as private defendants at the state and federal levels. It cannot be distinguished on the ground that it operated only against private defendants. Nor should it matter that money does not change hands. The history suggests that the bounty is designed to offer an incentive, not to create an injury where none existed before. A declaratory judgment or an injunction serves the same purposes as a victorious suit in a qui tam or informers' action. Indeed, mandamus suits did not involve money at all, and these too were accepted during the early period. 69 
More generally, if the stranger suit was thought constitutionally problematic, in all probability some constitutional concern would have been voiced about the qui tam action or the informers' action. The absence of any concern about these actions makes it exceedingly unlikely that the case or controversy requirement was believed to place 
any constraints on Congress' ability to grant causes of action to strangers. 70 
The Constitution may require courts to impose greater constraints on standing when the executive is the defendant.71 But if an "injury in fact" is required by Article III, it should not matter a great deal whether the defendant is public or private. Hence the qui tam and informers' actions do seem to be powerful evidence against the claim that an injury in fact is an Article III requirement. 
The discussion thus far has shown that early English and American practices give no support to the view that the Constitution limits Congress' power to create standing. The relevant practices suggest not that everyone has standing, nor that Article III allows standing for all injuries, but instead something far simpler and less exotic: people have standing if the law has granted them a right to bring suit. There is no authority to the contrary before the twentieth century, and, indeed, I think that there is no such authority before World War 11.72 
A general picture emerges from the words of the great administrative law teacher Frank Goodnow, writing in 1905. Goodnow's extensive treatise has no discussion of standing, then a foreign concept; but it does deal with the prerogative writs in America. Describing what had come to be the American practice, Goodnow wrote: The purpose of the writs is twofold. In the first place, they are issued mainly with the intention of protecting private rights; in the second place, some of them may be made use of also for the purpose of the maintenance of the law regardless of the fact whether in the particular case a privaterightis attacked or not Thus in the case of the certiorariit has been held that this writ may not be made use of simply for the maintenance of the law, that no one may apply for it unless he has some particular interest in its issue which is greater than that possessed by the ordinary citizen. The courts, however, have held with regard to the quo warranto that it may be issued on the demand of any citizen of responsibility; and the better rule would seem to be that in matters ofpublic concern any citizen or taxpayer may apply for the mandamus.73 
In this light, is it even possible to argue that the case or controversy requirement forbids the citizen action? Perhaps the English cases are not decisive, since the case-or-controversy requirement was makes the litigant the holder ofa kind of property right. See infra notes 130-32 and accompanying text. 
not present in English law. That requirement might even be seen as a check on certain suits cognizable in England. Nor is the American practice completely unambiguous. The prerogative writs were not generally available at the behest of strangers in the federal courts. As noted, the qui tam action operated against private persons, and money would always change hands. It might therefore remain possible to argue that Article III indeed requires a "personal stake" or an "injury in fact" because, in the United States, federal courts were not traditionally given jurisdiction in pure citizen suits. 
The history does not completely foreclose this argument, but it does make the argument seem far-fetched. There is absolutely no affirmative evidence that Article III was intended to limit congressional power to create standing. There is no affirmative evidence of a requirement of a "personal stake" or an "injury in fact" - beyond the genuine requirement that some source of law confer a cause of action. Nor is there reason to believe that the case-or-controversy requirement was designed to draw sharper limits than existed in English law. The general unavailability of the prerogative writs in federal court was a matter of legislative discretion, not constitutional compulsion. 74 It is at the very least highly suggestive that no one seemed to think that the qui tam or informers' action raised an Article III issue. In light of all this, the claim that Article III bars citizen standing - once Congress has created it - seems most adventurous as a matter of history. 
It would be possible to respond that particular historical understandings are not always binding in constitutional law. Segregation is unconstitutional even if the framers did not intend to abolish it;75 in the Due Process Clause, the meaning of "liberty" changes over time;76 the Contracts Clause has been understood to be far narrower than originally conceived. 77 Perhaps Article III should be treated the same way; perhaps we should not be bound by the framers' particular conception of its meaning. 
The general point about constitutional interpretation seems correct, but it does not justify the view that Article III prohibits Congress from granting standing to citizens. When the specific understandings are not binding, it is because the framers are taken to have set out a general principle capable of change over time, or because changed circumstances call for a departure from historically specific understand74. See supra note 54. 
citizen suit. ings.78 In Article III, the general principle is that a case cannot exist unless some source of law creates a cause of action. It is hard to understand why this principle should be abandoned in the context of a 79 
and New Deal Periods 
The second stage of standing law occurred in the early parts of this century. It was here that "standing" began to make a modest initial emergence as a discrete body of doctrine. To understand this development, a little background is in order. 
The preliminary development of standing doctrine should be understood as part and parcel of the heated struggle, in the 1920s and 1930s, within the country and the courts about the constitutional legitimacy of the emerging regulatory state. Courts frequently invoked the Constitution as a barrier to regulatory law.80 Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter were, in their somewhat different periods, the leading exponents of the view that courts should defer to the outcomes of democratic processes. 
In this light, it should come as no surprise that the principal early architects of what we now consider standing limits were Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter. 8 ' 
New 
Deal legislation from frequent judicial attack. 
Attempting to counter the aggressive Supreme Court of the period, Justices Brandeis and Frankfurter helped develop a range of devices designed to limit the occasions for judicial intervention into democratic processes. 
"controversy." In all likelihood, for example, Congress is barred from overcoming the ban on advisory opinions. See GEOFFREY R. STONE ET AL., CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 86 (2d ed. 1991). This ban is a plausible inference from the "Opinions in Writing" Clause, which allows the President to require opinions from heads of departments, but not from judges. U.S. CONsT. art. II, § 2, cl.1. Moreover, the notion of a "case," as historically understood, excludes the judicial provision of advice at the behest of public officials. Outside of the distinctive area of standing, then, there are barriers to Congress' power to create a "case" where one did not exist before. In very rare cases, there may even be barriers to the congressional conferral of standing for separation-of-powers reasons. Consider, for example, a grant of standing to all members of Congress to challenge all executive action. I do not deal with such exotic examples here. See also Hayburn's Case, 2 U.S. (2 Dall.) 409 (1792) (refusing to adjudicate case where judicial decision is subject to executive suspension and legislative revision). 
AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 573-74 n.23-25 (2d ed. 1988) (collecting cases). The connection between the New Deal and the development of standing doctrine is traced in illuminating detail in Winter, supra note 22, at 1452-57, and briefly discussed in Sunstein, supra note 15, at 1437-38. 

In the key cases, they repudiated constitutional attacks on legislative and administrative action by invoking justiciability doctrines.8 2 Prominent among these doctrines was the requirement of what we now think of as standing.8 3 The crucial cases involved efforts by citizens at large to invoke the Constitution to invalidate democratic outcomes.8 4 In such cases, the Court held that there was no personal stake for the invocation of judicial power. 
How are we to understand these cases? We might begin by asking whether there was any source of a cause of action. In each case, no common law right was at stake. In addition, no statute created a right to bring suit. Finally, it seemed implausible to suggest, in these cases, that the relevant constitutional provision created a private right of action. The very notion that private rights of action - or standing could be created by constitutional provisions was many years away.8 5 Even if some constitutional provisions created private rights, it seemed hard to accept the view that provisions in these cases did so, because the relevant duties could not be individuated and seemed to run to the public at large. I take up this matter below. 86 
The development of standing limitations in the early part of the twentieth century was indeed a novelty, in the sense that no separate body of standing law existed before this period. Notably, the relevant opinions did not even refer to the word standing. But we might well see the Brandeis-Frankfurter innovations as broadly compatible with preexisting law. For the most part, their opinions can be read to hold that no one has a right to sue unless some law has conferred a right to do so. In the cases in which the cause of action was denied, no such right had been conferred. This was the key point in the relevant opinions. 87 
As noted above, the requirement of a cause of action is indeed a command both of Article III and of tradition."" The relevant denials of standing were therefore properly based on the plaintiffs' inability to find a law that entitled them to sue. Thus the Supreme Court could write as late as 1939 that, to have standing, a plaintiff must have a "legal right - one of property, one arising out of contract, one protected against tortious invasion, or one founded on a statute which confers a privilege."8 9 
The third period in the development of standing consists of the enactment and interpretation of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in 1946.90 The relevant provision of the APA was an effort to codify the developing body of judge-made standing law: "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial review thereof." 91 This apparently cryptic phrase was actually designed to recognize standing in three straightforward categories of cases. All three categories had become well-established under previous law.92 
First, people could obtain standing by showing that they suffered a "legal wrong" because a common law interest was at stake. An invasion of a common law interest would certainly qualify as a legal wrong. Courts presumed that anyone who could show such an invasion would be entitled to bring suit. This idea had constitutional foundations, to the extent that a foreclosure of standing to people with common law interests might raise problems under the Due Process Clause or Article III. 93 
Second, plaintiffs could show that they suffered a legal wrong within the meaning of APA by demonstrating that their statutory incourts in a democracy, an argument that stems from political theory. But because that argument is obviously influencing the development of standing principles in the Supreme Court and elsewhere, it is worthwhile to address the argument here. 
In his 1983 essay, Justice Scalia argued that "courts need to accord greater weight than they have in recent times to the traditional requirement that the plaintiff's alleged injury be a particularized one, which sets him apart from the citizenry at large. '235 Scalia acknowledged that this was "not a linguistically inevitable conclusion." 2 36 The text of Article III does not suggest that a personal injury is necessary. But in his key statement, discussed above, Scalia defended the limitation on grounds of tradition.2 37 
Scalia explicitly claimed that "there is a limit upon even the power of Congress to convert generalized benefits into legal rights - and that is the limitation imposed by the so-called 'core' requirement of standing. ' 238 A central concern is what Scalia describes the recent rise of the courts as "equal partners" with the legislative and executive branches. In his view, this unfortunate development is related to the law of standing. Thus Scalia suggests that "[tihe sine qua non for emergence of the courts as an equal partner with the executive and legislative branches in the formulation of public policy was the assurance of prompt access to the courts by those interested in conducting the debate. ' 239 Unlimited standing gave people this prompt access, thus impairing the system of separation of powers in two ways: first, by providing more occasions for judicial review of executive action; second, by changing the timing of that review. 
The core of Scalia's argument, however, lies elsewhere. [Tihe law of standing roughly restricts courts to their traditional undemocratic role of protecting individuals and minorities against impositions of the majority, and excludes them from the even more undemocratic role of prescribing how the other two branches should function in order to serve the interest of the majority itself.24 ° It is through this lens that Scalia offers the distinction with which I began this article. In the first class of cases, "an individual who is the [V/ol. 91:163 very object of a law's requirement or prohibition seeks to challenge it"; here, standing is simple. In the second class, "the plaintiff is complaining of an agency's unlawful failure to impose a requirement or prohibition upon someone else"; here the harm is "a majoritarian one." 24 1 
The central point in the analysis is that [u]less the plaintiff can show some respect in which he is harmed more than the rest of us ... he has not established any basis for concern that the majority is suppressing or ignoring the rights of a minority that wants protection, and thus has not established the prerequisite for judicial intervention. 242 Thus, the "doctrine of standing... is an essential means of restricting the courts to their assigned role of protecting minority rather than majority interests. ' 243 Scalia urged that judges had been assigned this role by the Constitution, and also that the other role - the protection of majority interests - would be poorly executed by judges. 
After all, judges are removed from political accountability and selected from a highly educated elite. This situation is just perfect for a body that is supposed to protect the individual against the people; it is just terrible (unless you are a monarchist) for a group that is supposed to decide what is good for the people. Where the courts, in the supposed interest of all the people, do enforce upon the executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political protcieosnss)itsteolfbweoeunlfdornciontgetnhfeorpceo,littihceayl parreejuldikiceelys (odfetshpeitier othwenbcelsatsso.2f4i4nten 
Scalia was alert to the concern that, without broad standing for beneficiaries, legislative enactments would be unlawfully underenforced within the bureaucracy. Indeed, he noted that statutes might get "lost or misdirected" in the executive branch; furthermore, he admitted that this was indeed the consequence of his proposal. 245 But and this is the article's striking conclusion - this is "a good thing. ' 246 Executive nonimplementation of statutes is part of a well-functioning democratic process, keeping law current with existing views. "Yesterday's herald is today's bore." 24 7 
This is a provocative and arresting argument, made in short compass. But it faces several difficulties. One problem is that the argument is strikingly ahistorical. The article does not address the question whether the Framers actually had this conception of Article III. As we have seen, there is no evidence that they did. There is considerable evidence to the contrary. 
A second problem is that the approach seems inconsistent with some of the most prominent aspects of Justice Scalia's own jurisprudence. Justice Scalia usually insists that judges should read constitutional provisions at a low level of generality and avoid infusing them with broad "values" of their own. In his view, such impositions increase the occasions for judicial invalidation of legislation.2 48 In this case, however, Scalia reads Article III broadly, invests it with general, controversial values, and ultimately recommends judicial invalidation of the outcomes of democratic processes. The theory of "minority rights" is after all a controversial theory of democracy, counselling courts to act in some cases but not in others. Let us assume that the argument is plausible, as it indeed appears to be. Should even a plausible theory of this kind be invoked in order to invalidate a law that is not inconsistent with the text and history of the Constitution? 
There is a further problem. In a case of beneficiary or citizen standing, courts are not enforcing "executive branch adherence to legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce. '249 Instead, they are requiring the executive branch to adhere to the law, that is, to outcomes that the political process has endorsed. In Lujan, for example, the plaintiffs would have won only if they could have shown an unambiguous legislative judgment in their favor.250 Standing would produce "legislative policies that the political process itself would not enforce" 25 1 only if courts systematically misinterpreted statutes. But this seems to be an unsupportable assumption. 
In addition, it is hardly a good thing if agency implementation defeats legislative judgments. Suppose, for example, that the EPA decided that statutes calling for a form of cost-benefit balancing should be construed not to allow consideration of costs, and thus to require a kind of environmental absolutism. Would it be plausible to say that this is "a good thing," so long as the agency, supervised as it is by the President, had so concluded? Surely not. Agency rejection of con248. See Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 2884-85 (1992) (Scalia, J., dissenting); Harmelin v. Michigan, II S. Ct. 2680 (1991); Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110, 112 (1989) (plurality opinion of Scalia, J.). 

Clean Air Act would not be set aside unless such regulations were contrary to the express intent of Congress or based on an unreasonable interpretation of the statute). 
gressional enactments, even if motivated by the President himself, is inconsistent with the system of separation of powers. 
There are of course important political constraints on administrative behavior, and an understanding of those constraints is a valuable part of administrative law.252 Moreover, the power of the executive to temper legislative enactments is indeed an important aspect of democratic government. The President can appropriately exercise this power in many areas, including prosecutorial discretion, interpretation of ambiguities, incremental policymaking, and not-so-incremental judgments when Congress has spoken ambiguously. But the executive is not normally empowered to violate the law through enforcement activity in violation of the boundaries set by Congress. Justice Scalia cannot be taken to argue in favor of the "updating" that occurs when the President implements a law in such a way as to rewrite it. 
To bring this problem closer to the standing issue, suppose that an agency decides that the ESA should not be applied to American activities in foreign nations, when in fact Congress plainly intended that the ESA should apply abroad. Is this a good thing? On the contrary, it is a violation of democratic aspirations and (more relevant still) of the system for national lawmaking set up by Articles I and II of the Constitution. If agency enforcement beyond that intended by Congress is not "a good thing," even where the agency responds to political pressures, it is not "a good thing" where an agency undertakes a pattern of enforcement that violates congressional will through abdication or failure to act. Asymmetry on this point would simply translate judicial antipathy to regulation into administrative law. The foreclosure of standing cannot plausibly be defended as a means of allowing the bureaucracy to implement the law in a manner that conflicts with the governing statute. 
Let us turn, finally, to Justice Scalia's argument from democratic theory, referred to briefly in Lujan itself.253 That argument rests on a distinction between minority and majority interests. The distinction between regulatory objects and regulatory beneficiaries, for purposes of standing, is said to rest on this prior distinction, which is itself said to be well adapted to the special role of courts in the American legal system. "Objects" represent a minority whose interests require judicial protection; "beneficiaries" represent a majority who can protect their concerns through the political process. But there are two problems with this argument. The first is that it does not justify a 245 (1992). 
distinction between the objects and beneficiaries of regulation. The second is that it turns on an inadequate conception of the workings of American democracy. 
Suppose we agreed that courts should not protect majority interests through administrative law. The result would be to jeopardize standing for many objects of regulation, not merely for beneficiaries. Often the objects of regulation are indeed majority interests. A regulation might, for example, affect a large number of companies at once, and in the process impose costs principally on consumers, which is to say on nearly all of us. Majorities are affected even when "objects" are at risk. But objects are not therefore to be deprived of standing, at least not without wreaking havoc on traditional administrative law. Indeed, the objects of regulation are not systematically more likely to be "majorities" than the beneficiaries. If we were to build our theory of standing on majority status, we must rethink standing in important ways - but not in the ways recommended by Justice Scalia. The majority-minority distinction is too crude a basis for distinguishing beneficiaries from objects. 
Now let us turn to the workings of American democracy. Justice Scalia's argument seems to be that courts are well-suited to protecting minorities, which cannot protect themselves through the democratic process, whereas they are in poor position to protect majorities, whose natural forum is the democratic process. The politically responsive institution is in turn the executive branch. 
But this argument is too simple. Some minorities are especially well-organized and do indeed have access to the political process, including the executive branch. The point is well documented. 254 At least sometimes, regulated industries are a prominent example. But they are not therefore to be deprived of standing. 
Moreover, some majorities are so diffuse and ill-organized that they face systematic transaction costs barriers to the exercise of ongoing political influence. This point is well documented in the area of environmental protection and elsewhere.25 5 The citizen suit is designed as a corrective. 256 Essentially, this cause of action reflects the congressional judgment that some interests, including those of majorities, are so diffuse and unorganized that they require judicial protection in the implementation process. Congress' judgment to this effect 
Interest: An Economic Analysis, in PUBLIC INTEREST LAW 4 (Burton A. Weisbrod et al. eds., 1978). receives distinguished support from a significant body of empirical and analytic literature.2 57 Even ifjudges do not agree with that judgment, they sh6uld not foreclose the cause of action in the name of the Constitution. 
I conclude that Justice Scalia's essay does not justify the view that Article III forbids the citizen suit. If Congress has chosen to rely on the citizen suit, courts should not foreclose that choice. 
To make a full evaluation of Lujan, a good empirical picture of the citizen suit would be valuable. What effect does the citizen suit have on the real world? Is it a valuable instrument of environmental and regulatory policy? How many citizen suits have merit? Does the citizen suit produce greater compliance with the law or better regulatory policy? In how many cases does the citizen suit facilitate standing, or simplify standing issues, compared to a requirement of injury in fact? The answers to such questions may not help with the constitutional issue. But they will aid in an assessment of whether the demise of citizen suits is an important event for administrative law. 
these questions. In the early period of the citizen suit, exceptionally few plaintiffs filed such actions. 2 58 Advocates of this form of enforcement were both surprised and greatly disappointed. But recent years, starting with 1983, have seen greater activity, especially under the Clean Water Act.259 Betwee collecting data on citizen suits), there were over 800 notices of intent to sue under that Act.26° The government was the defendant in 165 of these suits. Plaintiffs have won a large number of citizen cases under the Clean Water Act.26 1 Indeed, plaintiffs readily prevail under the Clean Water Act, apparently because some of the statutory provisions speak quite plainly and mandate unambiguous action. 262 
Post-Lujan, most environmental suits will be able to go forward under the injury-in-fact requirements. An environmental organization will typically be able to find a member who has the requisite injury.263 But the need to show an injury will complicate such suits, and some occasions will arise when no plaintiff can be found. Moreover, regulatory cases will arise in which the insistence on an actual injury, as understood in Lujan, will bar the action altogether. I discuss this possibility in Part III. 
There is good reason to believe that the citizen suit has indeed helped bring about greater administrative compliance with law. But there is no reason to think that the citizen suit is a fundamental part of modem regulatory reform. I offer a brief account of a long story here.264 
In its current form, the citizen suit should be seen as part and parcel of a largely unsuccessful system of command-and-control regulation. Under this system, Congress entrusts agencies with the job of issuing a massive number of highly centralized, rigid, and often draconian regulatory requirements. It should be no surprise that agencies are often unable to undertake their legally required tasks, especially in view of the fact that they infrequently receive the necessary resources. The citizen suit is part of a complex system in which Congress delegates difficult or even impossible tasks, appropriates inadequate resources, imposes firm and sometimes unrealistic deadlines, 265 and enlists courts and citizens in order to produce compliance. 266 The system may well find explanation in terms of the self-interest of elected representatives. 267 Credit-claiming for apparently aggressive regulaof Persons With Standingto Seek JudicialReview ofAgency Rulemaking,39 ADMIN. L. REV. 139 (1987); Fadil, supra note 258; David S. Mann, Comment, Polluter-FinancedEnvironmentally BeneficialExpenditures: Effective Use or ImproperAbuse of CitizenSuits Underthe Clean Water Act, 21 ENVTL. L. 175 (1991); James L. Thompson, Citizen Suits and Civil Penalties Under the Clean WaterAct, 85 MICH. L. REV. 1656 (1987). 
EnvironmentalCitizen Suits Became an Entitlement Program,in ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS, supra note 137, at 

HASSLER, CLEAN COAL/DIRTY AIR (1981); STEPHEN BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM (1982); DAVID OSBORNE & TED GAEBLER, REINVENTING GOVERNMENT (1992); SUNSTEIN, supra note 162. 

AdministrativeRegu 
tion can coexist with a range of real-world loopholes, helping industry to escape from government controls. But the public is often the loser. 
In these circumstances, the citizen suit is probably best understood as a band-aid superimposed on a system that can meet with only mixed success. Instead of band-aids, modem regulation requires fundamental reform. Congress should replace the command-and-control system with more flexible, incentive-oriented measures. 268 Instead of a continuing emphasis on judicial review, modem bureaucracy needs large-scale shifts introduced and implemented by legislators and administrators themselves.269 We should not, however, forget that bandaids can do some good. The citizen suit may serve as an effective if partial alternative to massive regulatory overhaul. In any case, the complex policy issues do not bear on the interpretation of Article III. 
From what has been said thus far, we can offer some brief general words about the law of standing and Lujan itself. With respect to standing in general, the key question is whether Congress (or some other relevant source of law) has created a cause of action. Without a cause of action, there is no standing; there is no case or controversy; and courts are without authority to hear the case under Article III. 
This point suggests that the real source of current difficulty is Data Processing, which diverted attention from the relevant question of cause of action to the irrelevant question of injury in fact. So long as injury in fact was thought to be the issue that Congress itself had made relevant under the APA, the difficulty was only minor. But when an injury in fact became both a necessary and sufficient condition for standing, the area grew badly confused. 
The result was that courts began to grant standing in cases in which it should have been denied, and to deny standing in cases in which it should have been granted. 270 Worse, the Court viewed the EcON. & ORGANIZATION 59 (1992) (discussing the symbiotic relationship between legislators and environmental groups). 
Reforming EnvironmentalLaw: The DemocraticCasefor Market Incentives, 13 COLUM. J. ENvrL. L. 171 (1988); Sunstein, supra note 137. 
JERRY L. MASHAW & DAVID L. HARFST, THE STRUGGLE FOR AUTO SAFETY (1990); Ackerman & Stewart, supra note 268; Melnick, supra note 161; Peter L. Strauss, Revisiting Overton Park: Politicaland JudicialControls Over AdministrativeActions Affecting the Community, 39 UCLA L. REV. 1251 (1992). 
(1973), an environmental case in which the law student plaintiffs could not easily show a cause of action conferred by Congress. Standing should almost certainly have been denied in SCRAP, even if an injury in fact might have been found. standing issue through the wrong lens. An injury in fact is not required by Article III, and it is not sufficient for standing.27 1 Both history and principle show that people with "injuries in fact" may or may not have standing. The question is whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. 
Under this view of the matter, Lujan was a relatively simple case. The first question was one of positive law: whether Congress had granted or denied standing to the plaintiffs. Congress' grant of standing resolved that issue. The grant created the relevant injury for Article III purposes. There was no need to start with injury in fact and redressability, or even to address these issues at all. And if it should be thought - contrary to the view presented here - that there are some Article III limits on legislative power to confer causes of action on citizens, those limits surely were not reached in Lujan. This was, after all, a case in which the plaintiffs claimed an intention to go to a place where allegedly unlawful government expenditures placed endangered species at risk. The Constitution did not forbid that action from going forward. The Lujan Court should not have discussed redressability; the congressional grant of standing disposed of the issue. If redressability was relevant, the Court should have said that the injury created by Congress - to prevent the U.S. government from threatening to produce extinction - would indeed have been redressed by a decree in the plaintiffs' favor.272 
Lujan settled some important questions. But it left many issues open, and it raised at least as many new ones. The future looks particularly murky in light of Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion, which refused to join the plurality on redressability, questioned any focus on the common law as the exclusive source of injury, and suggested relatively broad congressional power on the issues of injury and causation. 273 
In this Part, I outline the settled and unsettled issues. I also suggest how some of the current puzzles should be resolved. The most important conclusions involve possible congressional responses to LuJan. I suggest that the simplest and most effective response would be the creation of a bounty for successful citizen plaintiffs. Such a bounty 
to confer a property interest on citizens). 
would build directly on the qui tam and informers' actions, and it should not raise a constitutional problem in the aftermath of Lujan. 
A more complex response would be for Congress expressly to create a property interest in the various regulatory "goods" that it wants to authorize citizens to protect. It might, for example, say that citizens generally have a beneficial interest in certain endangered species that are at risk from acts of the U.S. government. This somewhat adventurous strategy would have the advantages of building on common law notions of interest and injury and of forcing focused congressional attention on the precise nature of the rights at stake. It would also respond to some of the concerns in Justice Kennedy's concurrence. Despite its relative novelty, an approach of this sort should also be constitutional. 
A. 
The Lujan opinion does not reject a number of cases in which courts have given standing to environmental plaintiffs. On the contrary, it expressly endorses many such cases, even when the plaintiff is complaining that the executive has taken inadequate action to enforce the law. To this extent, the invalidation of the citizen suit allows a good deal of room for private litigants - regulatory beneficiaries - to initiate proceedings against the executive branch. The case therefore introduces some uncertainty into the law, but it probably does not work any fundamental shift in the environmental area. 
The Court thus makes clear that, if an environmental plaintiff can show that its members use the particular environmental resource that is at risk, standing is available. It follows, for example, that a citizen in New York could, post-Lujan, complain about the failure to enforce clean air or clean water requirements in New York. The Court suggests as much by invoking the Japan Whaling case274 to show that an environmental organization could complain of excessive whale harvesting when the "whale watching and studying of their members w[ould] be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting. ' 275 The Court also says that a citizens' council has standing to bring suit to challenge environmentally harmful construction in the area where its members live.276 n.4). 
Council, 490 U.S. 332 (1989)). 
It also remains clear that some procedural injuries can produce standing under Article III. The Court writes: 
This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (ag., the procedural requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license application, or the procedural requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal facility is constructed next door to them).2 7 7 A citizen can thus complain about a failure to prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) even though it is "speculative" whether the statement will cause the project to be abandoned.278 
Standing remains available in all cases under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)279 whenever plaintiffs can show that the project, if completed, would adversely affect their interests. A concrete injury of this kind is sufficient even if ordinary redressability cannot be shown. "The person who has been accorded a procedural right to protect his concrete interests can assert that right without meeting all the normal standards for redressability and immediacy. 2 80 
It is clear that the Court believes this; but, as noted above, it is not clear why the Court does so. If Article III requires redressability, most NEPA suits indeed seem unconstitutional. In the typical NEPA action, there is no assurance that completion of an adequate EIS would have any consequence at all for the plaintiffs. One might well think, as the government urged in Lujan, that NEPA suits frequently violate Article III. 
But as the Lujan Court appears to acknowledge, this would be an odd and far-reaching conclusion. It is almost always the case that procedural rights have only speculative consequences for a litigant. If a judge is found to have ruled in favor of party A after taking a bribe from party A, it remains speculative whether an unbiased judge would have ruled for party B. Does party B therefore lack standing? Or suppose that an administrator is found to have violated the Administrative Procedure Act by promulgating a regulation without first publishing it for comment in the Federal Register. It is entirely speculative whether compliance would make any difference to the complainants. The Lujan Court, however, does not want the redressability requirement to bar standing in such cases. 
Perhaps the Court is endorsing Justice Kennedy's suggestion that "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. ' 281 More deeply, however, I think that the Court's conclusion on this point exemplifies several of the problems associated with the whole notion of redressability. A procedural right is created, not because it necessarily yields particular outcomes, but because it structures incentives and creates pressures that Congress has deemed important to effective regulation. The same is true for the sorts of interests at stake in the ESA and in many other environmental statutes. Congress is attempting not to dictate outcomes but to create procedural guarantees that will produce certain regulatory incentives. Redressability in the conventional sense is irrelevant. 
This point might well have arisen in Lujan itself. Even though it did not, the opinion makes clear that procedural harms remain cognizable when ordinary injuries are involved, despite the absence of redressability. 
B. 
Thus far I have explained the types of suits Lujan has left untouched. But it is equally clear that Lujan forecloses "pure" citizen suits. In these suits, a stranger with an ideological or law-enforcement interest initiates a proceeding against the government, seeking to require an agency to undertake action of the sort required by law. Many environmental statutes now allow such actions, and plaintiffs have brought many suits of this kind. Under Lujan, these suits are unacceptable. Congress must at a minimum "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. '2 82 If Congress has simply given standing to citizens, 283 this requirement has not been met. The plaintiff must point to a concrete injury, not merely to a congressional grant of standing. 
The discussion thus far has focused to a large extent on changes in the law of injury in fact. Lujan extends this change, placing a renewed emphasis on the notion that the harm must be imminent and nonspeculative. This requirement will likely carry more weight than it has in the past. Before Lujan, requiring people to obtain a plane ticket or to make firm plans to visit the habitat of endangered species might 
well have been unnecessarily formalistic. Now such actions are apparently required. But this is not a fundamental revision of previous law. The celebrated SCRAP case284 is probably a relic. But on that point, the handwriting had been on the wall a long time, and, if the analysis thus far is correct, there is no reason to mourn for SCRAP, in which Congress had not conferred a right to bring suit. 
Harder questions could arise in consumer cases, which play a large role in contemporary administrative law. Suppose, for example, that the government imposes on automobile manufacturers fuel economy requirements that are less stringent than the law requires. 28 5 Typically, plaintiffs will argue that their injury consists of a diminished opportunity to purchase the products in question.286 After Lujan, standing becomes a difficult issue in such cases. A court might find that the plaintiffs lack a concrete or particularized interest. They are perhaps not readily distinguished from the public at large. There is an issue about speculativeness as well: perhaps the relationship between a consumer and a product that he allegedly wants is the same as the relationship between the Lujan plaintiffs and an endangered species, in the sense that in neither case is it clear that the injury will occur as a result of the complained-of government acts. 
A consumer case of this sort may differ from Lujan, however, in the important sense that a consumer who complains of a diminished opportunity to purchase a product can very plausibly claim that he will in fact purchase that product. This claim is probably less speculative than that in Lujan. It is possible to discount an "intention" to undertake difficult foreign travel at an unspecified time; the intention may not show sufficient likelihood of harm. But it is harder to discount an intention to purchase a specified product, which usually applies to a single, simple transaction. The distinction suggests that, at least as Lujan stands, it does not significantly affect the standard consumers' action. In the automobile case, the key point is that a moreor-less sharply defined category of consumers is distinctly affected in a relatively nonspeculative way, and this is probably enough for standing. 287 
The same would be true in the standard broadcasting case, in 
1986), and Center for Auto Safety v. Thomas, 806 F.2d 1071 (D.C. Cir. 1986), vacated per curtam, 810 F.2d 302 (D.C. Cir. 1987), reinstatedper curiam, 847 F.2d 843 (D.C. Cir.) (en bane) (by an equally divided court), vacatedper curiam, 856 F.2d 1557 (D.C. Cir. 1988). 
Thomas, 847 F.2d at 849. 
which listeners or viewers in a defined area, or of defined programming, challenge an FCC decision that bears on their programming choices. 288 If the FCC refuses to license a classical music station, there is a concrete injury, and it is sufficiently particularized under Lujan. The intention to listen to a station is not as conjectural as the travel intention at issue in Lujan. 
Greater difficulties may arise in some similar actions, as when, for example, consumers challenge an FDA or EPA regulation allowing carcinogens to be added to food. 289 There may be serious standing problems in such cases. A person complaining about such a regulation might be said to be suffering an injury that is speculative or generalized. This is especially likely insofar as the injury is characterized as an actual incidence of cancer. It is extremely speculative to suggest that the introduction of carcinogenic substances into food additives will produce cancer in particular human beings. 
The issue becomes harder if the injury is characterized as a greater risk of cancer. In that event, the injury is less speculative; but it is unclear that it is sufficiently particularized. On Justice Kennedy's view, there is probably enough for standing, for he insisted that standing can exist even if the injury is very widely shared. 290 This is indeed the correct view, because it is the most plausible conception of the injury that Congress sought to prevent.29 1 But the issue is now open. 
Because only four justices concluded that the redressability requirement had not been met in Lujan, the case probably offers no real lessons on that issue. After Lujan, the law of redressability thus remains as it was before: Extremely fuzzy and highly manipulable. It is manipulable, first, because there is no clear metric by which to decide whether it is "speculative" to say that a decree will remedy the plaintiff's injury. It is manipulable, second, because, as we have seen, whether an injury is redressable depends on how it is defined. If the injury in the Bakke case was defined as the right to attend law school, the redressability requirement was violated. If the injury in a standard environmental case is defined as the right not to suffer concrete personal health damage as a result of environmental harm, many environ288. See, eg., Office of Communication of the United Church of Christ v. FCC, 359 F.2d 994, 1002 (D.C. Cir. 1967). 
(D.C. Cir. 1987). 

mental plaintiffs will be unable to show redressability. If, however, the injury is defined as freedom from a certain risk of health damage, there is no problem of redressability. This indeed appears to be the way courts conventionally treat the issue. 
Consider, for example, some of the regulatory cases described above. If an agency changes its policy for determining fuel efficiency, will prospective purchasers of fuel-efficient vehicles be affected? The answer is not clear. Perhaps manufacturers would simply pay civil penalties, rather than change their behavior. 292 It is speculative whether government policies will change the policies of manufacturers soon enough to affect particular consumer choices. 293 If the EPA refuses to allow carcinogens onto the market, perhaps the consumer will get cancer in any event; perhaps he will not get cancer whatever the EPA does. In fact, the EPA decision may well not make the difference in the life of any particular person. Standing might therefore be denied on grounds of redressability. 
If we were to start afresh, the best way to handle the issue would be to say that the question of standing depends on whether Congress has authorized the plaintiff to bring suit. We should be asking whether the injury that Congress sought to prevent would likely be redressed by a favorable judgment.2 94 The redressability requirement might be understood as a crude way of asking that very question under the general rubric of "injury in fact." We might therefore try to answer the redressability question by characterizing the injury in the way desired by Congress, and then seeing if that injury would be removed by a decree in the plaintiff's favor. Through this route, the question of characterization could be resolved through legislative judgments, not judicial ones. And while the resulting issues of statutory interpretation will not always be simple, they raise the right questions. 
E. 
The status of the citizen suit is somewhat obscure after Lujan. At dissenting). 
[Tihe causation and redressability question is meaningful only at the level of determining whether a cause of action should exist for a certain group of plaintiffs under a particular statutory or constitutional provision .... [G]iven the different purposes of different statutory and constitutional provisions, some variation is entirely appropriate from one provision to another.... The question is whether, under the statutory or constitutional provision at issue, the particular provision should be read to protect against the injury asserted by the kind of person who is seeking to bring suit. 
Id. at 242-43. a minimum, we know that Congress cannot grant standing to people who have no personal stake in the outcome of an agency action. But Justice Kennedy, joined by Justice Souter, said that Congress "has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '2 95 This is a potentially crucial phrase. What does it mean? At a minimum, it means that Congress can create rights foreign to the common law. These include the right to be free from discrimination,2 96 the right to occupational safety,2 97 indeed, the vast panoply of statutory rights going beyond common law understandings. It must also mean that Congress has the power to find causation, perhaps deploying its factfinding power, where courts would not do so. 298 Justice Kennedy thus suggests that Congress can find causation and redressability even where courts would disagree. Perhaps courts will review such findings under a deferential standard. 
This view would not change the outcome in Lujan. In that case, there was no injury in fact. But it might well make a difference in the several cases in which the Court has previously rejected standing on grounds of causation and redressability. Congress might well have the power to alter those outcomes. 
Suppose, for example, that Congress found that efforts to produce desegregation were adversely affected by a grant of tax deductions to schools that discriminated on the basis of race. This finding might well call for a reversal of the outcome in Allen v. Wright.29 9 Or suppose that Congress found that failure to attain national ambient air quality standards in New York had adverse health effects on the citizens of New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, and Pennsylvania. Perhaps courts would have to respect this finding. 
The more difficult question involves constraints on Congress' 
Metropolian Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205, 212 (1972) (White, J., concurring). As noted above, the Havens Court found an injury to a "statutorily created right to truthful housing information," which it held sufficient for standing. 455 U.S. at 374. Effectively, Congress had created a kind of property interest in such information. The Lujan Court does not explain why Congress may not do the same for endangered species, or for the rainforest, or for clean air in an area in which one does not live. See supra text accompanying note 202; cf United States Parole Commn. v. Geraghty, 445 U.S. 388, 404 (1980) (noting that a class action does not become moot after the named plaintiff's substantive claim has expired as the representative retains a "personal stake" in obtaining class certification). 

Separation of Powers and Deference to CongressionalFindings in the StandingAnalysis, 59 U. CHI. L. REv. (forthcoming 1992). 
"power to define injuries." Can Congress say that opportunity-type injuries are legally cognizable? Might Congress follow the Bakke strategy and conclude that standing exists in many cases involving increases in risks or attempts to alter incentives? Lujan provides no authoritative answer. But Justice Kennedy's concurrence suggests that Congress does possess power to define these events as injuries for purposes of standing. Justice Kennedy emphasized that standing need not be based solely on common law-like injuries; his concern was that, in creating the citizen suit, Congress had not even identified the injury it was attempting to redress. Congress can meet this concern by identifying injuries, building on the common law framework to recognize probabilistic, systemic, or regulatory harms. The decreased probability of injury, the grant of opportunities, and the provision of appropriate incentives are key goals of the regulatory state. It should not be dificult for Congress to connect these goals to the injuries it seeks to prevent. Nothing in Article III forbids this course, even after 
Many citizen-suit provisions in the environmental laws give the citizen the option of initiating proceedings against the private defendant allegedly operating in violation of federal law. Formally, Lujan did not address this strategy because the case involved a governmental defendant. Does Lujan affect suits against private persons? The answer is unclear. We have seen that a large part of the Court's opinion relies on the fear that, without a particularized injury, courts will be displacing executive power under the Take Care Clause. This concern is entirely inapplicable when the executive is not even a party. 3°° On the other hand, if Article III does indeed require a personal stake, the identity of the defendant should not matter. A case in which a citizen initiates proceedings against a private defendant would indeed test the claim that the Take Care Clause is a major impetus behind the Lujan decision. 
I have argued that this claim makes little sense. If so, and if Lujan remains good law, a citizen should not have standing to proceed against a private defendant unless he can show some kind of personal enforce federal statutory law, there is a lurking issue about private interference with the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, and hence with the President's "Take Care" power. But this issue surely does not have constitutional status. Parallel public and private remedies are most familiar to American law; they do not violate the Constitution. stake. After Lujan, the citizen-suit provisions are probably unconstitutional even when the defendant is a private citizen or corporation. 
G. 
Perhaps Congress can respond to Lujan by granting cash bounties to citizen plaintiffs. Indeed, this possibility might produce some of the most important and difficult post-Lujan issues. If Congress wants to reinstate the citizen suit after Lujan, a cash bounty would be the simplest strategy. Indeed, an exceedingly short amendment to existing law, giving a bounty to all successful citizen plaintiffs, should be sufficient. For reasons that follow, the bounty should create an interest and hence standing. In this way, a system of bounties would fully overcome the post-Lujan doubts about the citizen suit. A bounty system would also be more straightforward than the principal alternative strategy now available to Congress, involving restructured property rights. 30 1 
A bounty system would have the important advantage of building on the clear historical precedents of qui tam and informers' actions, precedents that are firmly established in American law.302 To the extent that the citizen suit is a helpful device,303 Congress should be encouraged to take this step. At least where administrative inaction is both harmful and predictable, and where it cannot be prevented through more fundamental regulatory reform, 304 a bounty system would make a great deal of sense. Indeed, the creation of a system of citizen bounties could well be a major step in administrative law. 
In the first case, Congress might allow citizens to proceed against polluters or others without requiring a conventional injury in fact, but with provision for a financial bounty to victorious citizen litigants. Does the bounty create the requisite personal interest or concrete stake? 
In this context, Lujan is probably inapplicable by its own rationale. There is no risk that courts will usurp executive functions under the Take Care Clause. The executive is not a defendant. Not only is the executive not involved, but the plaintiff has a concrete interest in the form of the bounty. Standing seems perfectly appropriate. In fact, the 
Lujan Court seemed to invite this conclusion: "Nor, finally, is [this] the unusual case in which Congress has created a concrete private interest in the outcome of a suit against a private party for the government's benefit, by providing a cash bounty for the victorious plaintiff. ' 30 5 The qui tam action and the informers' action 30 6 seem to be decisive precedents in favor of this conclusion. In both of these actions, a bounty was provided, and it would be most adventurous to say that these arrangements violated Article III. 
In the second case, Congress might give a cash bounty to litigants who have prevailed against the government. It might, for example, award $500 to plaintiffs in cases involving environmental harms. It might even amend all current citizen-suit provisions in order to provide a cash bounty. A simple statute could accomplish this goal. Would this entail a different outcome from that in Lujan? 
The answer is unclear. On the one hand, the executive remains a defendant, and the Lujan objection from the Take Care Clause remains. On the other hand, the existence of a cash bounty gives the plaintiff the equivalent of a personal stake in the outcome, just like a case in which she has a right to obtain damages from a common law tortfeasor. This personal stake is probably sufficient to create standing. Here the informers' action is a direct precedent. 
The Take Care Clause, even as understood in Lujan, is likely to be held irrelevant where a bounty is at stake. According to the Court, the clause furnishes no objection in a case in which the plaintiff can show that the government's allegedly unlawful inaction impairs her enjoyment of some environmental asset. Hence the Take Care Clause is not a freestanding objection to suits of this general kind. It is called into play only in cases without a personal stake for the plaintiff. If a plaintiff can show that she stands to gain or lose from the outcome of the action, she is no longer interested only in "law enforcement for its own sake." She thus has standing to initiate the action. 
If this analysis is correct, Congress has available a relatively simple corrective to Lujan if it believes that the decision will significantly undermine its regulatory goals. Existing statutes can be simply amended through the grant of a bounty to victorious citizen plaintiffs. No Article III problem would result from this initiative. If Congress wants to overcome Lujan, this is the best and simplest route. It would make the various citizen-suit provisions constitutional in cases in which Lujan draws them into severe doubt. 
I have criticized the injury-in-fact test on the ground that it undermines Congress' power to create property rights where they had not existed before. In Lujan, the plaintiffs might well have asserted that the conferral of a cause of action amounted to the creation of a form of property. Justice Kennedy had an answer to this claim: "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before. '30 7 But here Congress has refused to "identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit. ' 30 8 Apparently, plaintiffs had no property right under the ESA, because Congress failed explicitly to define the relevant injury when it provided for citizen suits. 
Suppose, then, that Congress attempts to create a citizen suit in the following way. It announces, first, that all Americans have a kind of property right - a tenancy in common - in some environmental asset. The asset might be clean air anywhere in the country, or pristine areas, or the continued existence of endangered species in the United States or abroad. If this seems odd, we might note that Congress could surely create property rights in unowned land within the United States; to the extent that such rights do not interfere with the claims of a competing sovereign, Congress can create them with respect to unowned land outside our territorial borders. 309 And surely Congress' capacity to create property rights is not limited to land. If Congress thus defines property rights and injuries and creates a correlative cause of action, has it acted appropriately and met Justice Kennedy's concern? 
The answer would seem to be affirnmative. The advantages of express legislative creation of a property right are that it would build on common law understandings and produce more focused congressional deliberation on the nature of the interest it is creating. The citizen suit 
Argentina produces medicines especially beneficial to Americans. Suppose that the activities of private American companies in Argentina threaten to industrialize that area and thus to eliminate its medicinal capacities. Congress might respond by forbidding these activities and by creating a property right in all Americans, operating only against other Americans, to the continued productivity of the area. This could not possibly raise a constitutional issue, or even a problem of international law. has become a relatively automatic part of environmental law, with little legislative attention to its nature and consequences. If the citizen suit is in fact intended to give all citizens the equivalent of a beneficial interest in environmental quality, it may well be desirable to focus congressional attention on exactly that question. And if Congress concludes that it seeks to create this kind of property, there should be no constitutional problem. 
Indeed, the case would seem to be very close to Havens Realty,3 10 discussed above. If there is a difference, it is that, in the cases under discussion, Congress has created a tenancy in common with respect to a collective good - that is, property that is jointly owned. In Havens Realty, by contrast, the property right could be held by individuals rather than many people at once. 
Under Justice Scalia's conception of standing, this distinction would make a difference. In the collective good case, unlike in Havens Realty, we are hardly dealing with "minorities." Majorities may have less need for the citizen suit. But this conception of standing faces many problems, as elaborated above. In any event, Justice Kennedy clearly disagrees on this point. His opinion plainly says that standing is not to be denied simply because many people are adversely affected. 
If all this is correct, some of the most interesting developments in the law of standing may arise when Congress is explicit in its intention to create new forms of property adapted to the problems and aspirations of modem regulation. If Congress creates property rights in environmental assets of various sorts, and grants correlative causes of action, it should be able to overcome the strictures of Lujan. Faced with such an enactment, the Court would not be dealing with a "citizen suit" at all. Instead it would be faced with a suit brought by property holders equipped with causes of action; and it would be odd if congressional initiatives in this direction would be held inconsistent with Article III. 
CONCLUSION 
At least in general, standing depends on whether any source of law has created a cause of action. To a large extent, that question is for congressional resolution. Congress can create standing as it chooses and, in general, can deny standing when it likes. 311 As an abstraction accompanying text. 
Due Process Clause. On Article III, see Richard H. Fallon, OfLegislative Courts,Administrative Agencies, andArticle II 101 HARv. L. REv. 915 (1988); on due process, see Yakus v. United independent of what the law says, an injury in fact is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for standing. Indeed, the notion of injury in fact is a form of Lochner-style substantive due process. It assumes that there can be a factual inquiry into "injury" independent of evaluation and of legal conventions. There can be no such law-free inquiry. It is a conceptual impossibility, indeed a form of metaphysics. 
Despite the holding of Lujan, Congress should be permitted to grant standing to citizens. The text and history of Article III provide no support for judicial invalidation of congressional grants of citizen standing. On the contrary, England, the American colonies, and early Congresses all granted standing to strangers. No one suggested that this practice violated the Constitution. The Lujan Court's unprecedented invalidation of a provision for citizen standing has no basis in Article III. The Court should not have reached its important conclusion without investigating the relevant history, and the odd evolution of standing doctrine, in much more detail. 
Lujan answers a long-unresolved issue; but it leaves a number of other significant questions unanswered. I have tried to describe how they might be resolved. It seems clear that citizen-suit provisions are now impermissible in the absence of a showing of injury in fact. But Lujan permits environmental actions whenever plaintiffs can show that environmental degradation will affect their geographical area in the form of dirtier air, dirtier water, or inferior aesthetics. Many suits by regulatory beneficiaries will thus remain viable. 
Perhaps most important, Congress probably retains a relatively simple mechanism by which to accomplish the purposes that underlie current provisions for citizen actions. Certainly it can grant citizens standing against private defendants so long as it allows some kind of bounty for a victorious lawsuit. Almost certainly, Lujan permits Congress to allow citizens to bring suit against the government for insufficient regulatory action, if a bounty is made available in the event of success. 
Most intriguingly, Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion leaves open the possibility that Congress has the power to create quite novel property interests, to grant those interests to many people or even to citizens, and to confer standing to enable people to vindicate those interests. It may be that, in cases raising this issue, we will see the ultimate depth of the Court's commitment to Lujan's odd adventure in substantive due process. 
