You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Mon, 25 Jan 2016 20:57:23 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions CASS R. SUNSTEIN 
University of Chicago M ANYpeople think that political outcomes can be "explained" as productsof the influence of self-interested,well-organizedgroups with highstakes in the outcome. Undoubtedlythis is often true. But causation in politics is a complex matter.If we findthat a grouphas benefitedfrom a publicpolicy, we know somethingimportant,but one thingwe do not know is that the policy exists because it benefitsthat group. If controls on automobileemissions are enactedin a periodin whichthe labormovement is weakening, we know something, but we do not know that the controlsare caused by the weakeningof the labormovement.These are prosaic claims, but I think they have large implicationsfor many of the argumentsof interest-grouptheory. 
Peltzman's intriguingarticle' is generally cautious. But in several places, it becomes rather bold. In explainingthe decline of American educationfrom 1960to 1980, Peltzmanclaims, "[T]he plausiblerule of politicsis substantial."2Laterin the article, he says, "Industrypressure does have a substantialeffect on performance."3These claimsarereasonable, but we do not know that they are true. Both of them seem to me inadequatelysupported. I conclude that Peltzman has generated extremelyinterestingdata and shown some suggestivecorrelations.But he has not yet made any real demonstrationof causation. 
* Presented at the John M. Olin Centennial Conference in Law and Economics at the University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, April 7-9, 1992. The author is a Karl N. Llewellyn Professor at the Law School and Department of Political Science at the University of Chicago. 
I Sam Peltzman, The Political Economy of the Decline of American Public Education, in this issue. 
2 Id. at 322. 
3 Id. at 359. [Journal of Law & Economics, vol. XXXVI (April 1993)] ? 1993 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-2186/93/3601-0016$01.50 379 I want to supportthis generalpoint with six particularquestions. strongargumentsfor the view that school performancedeterioratedfrom 1960to 1980,but the propositionremainsa bit blurred.4We do know that ScholasticAptitudeTest (SAT) scores went down, but the SAT is taken by a college-boundelite. Decreases in SAT scores do not necessarily meandecreases in overall school performance.And thereis indeedsome contrary evidence for high school students as a whole. For example, nationalnormstudies-taken from 1955to 1983andincludinga nationally representativesample of high school juniors-suggest a much steadier set of scores. These studies do not reveal the same kindof decline as is shown by the SAT trends. Othertests suggest similarresults. Indeed, a federalstudy, ProjectTALENT, actuallyfounda slightgainin scores by 1970eleventh gradersover those by 1960eleventh graders. 
None of this demonstrates that Peltzman is wrong in claiming that school performancedeteriorated.But it does suggestthe possibilitythat the SAT decline shows a decline in performancefor elites, not for high schoolers as a whole.5If this is so, the causal picturegets more complicated. It may also be true that in 1960-80 the schools emphasizedskills not pickedup by the SAT, a possibilitythatwouldintroduceeven greater difficultiesinto the picture. 
performanceis almostcertainlya functionof family structureandfamilybackground.6Childrenin two-parenthouseholdsappearto do betterthanchildren with only one parent in the home.7We can speculate that school childrendo less well if their parentsare in the midst of a divorce. It is thus possible that the decline in SAT scores was attributableto factors unrelatedto the educationalenvironment,narrowlydefined. 
Peltzmanwould do well to attemptto controlfor this possibility,measuring his educational factors against noneducationalcauses. The absence of such an effort makes it especially difficultto make confident claims about causation. 
and sometimes seems to endorse the view that schools deterioratedin partbecause of (a) the growth in labor unions and (b) shifts in financial 4 See Charles Murray & R. J. Herrnstein, What's Really behind the SAT-Score Decline, 106 Pub. Interest 32 (1992), on which I draw here. 
5 Id. 
6 See John Chubb & Terry Moe, Politics, Markets, and America's Schools, at ch. 4 (1990). 
7 Id. responsibilityfromlocal to state government.But if we look at the aggregate data, we will find some general oddities. Between 1946and 1972, the financingratios between local and state governmentremainedabout the same. From 1946to 1950,the state fundedabout39 percent,whereas local governmentfunded about 58 percent. By 1972, the state was still funding39 percent, and local governmentwas fundingover 52 percenthardlya significantshift. And yet it was in the periodfrom 1961to 1972 that SAT scores were significantlydeclining. The aggregatedata thus suggest a puzzle. The supposedly causal shift in financialresponsibility did not occur at all duringa significantpartof the crucialperiod. 
The data for labor unions raise a similarissue. From 1961 to 1962, there was a hugejump in National EducationAssociation (NEA) membership-from less than 4 percent to 54 percent. But from 1962to 1971, teacherunion density remainedroughlyconstant, risingto a statistically insignificantlyincreasedlevel of 56.9 percent in 1971.Note againthat it was in this very period-from the early 1960sto 1971-that SAT scores were declining.The laborunion datapose an additionalpuzzle for Peltzman since they suggest that teacher union density stayed roughlyconstantwhile educational"output" declined. 
Perhapsthe disaggregateddata take care of the problem.Perhapswe can thinkabout differencesin the natureof the NEA over time or about the rise of the "badunion," the AmericanFederationof Teachers(AFT). Buteven if this is so, Peltzman'sown, moreparticularfindingsundermine the view that the data show a causal effect from unionizationand shifts in financing. 
is mixed, because of matters of timing and detail.8 The disclaimer seems necessary. School performanceactually seems to have improved with the success of the NEA in the 1960sand 1970s.There is therefore no evidence that the NEA contributedto a decline in education.There appearsto be some correlationbetween such decline and success by the AFT, but the data here are merelyfragmentary.The AFT has never had a large percentageof teachers-somewhere between a tenth and a fifth of teachers during the period of national SAT decline. Moreover, we appear to have incomplete informationon AFT membershipbetween 1960and 1971. Surely there is too little evidence to claimcausationas a resultof AFT membership,let aloneunionmembership.At the very best, I thinkthat we have a mildly suggestive correlation. 
the early shifts to state fundingand early declines in SAT performance. 8 Peltzman, supra note 1, at 352-56. Butthereis no correlationat all betweenthe latershiftsto statefundingthose in the 1980s-and SAT performance.For this reason Peltzman concludes, consistentlywith the data, thatthe shift "is a symptomrather than a cause."9 I am not certainwhat he means by this. But at least we can agree that the data do not establish, or even stronglysuggest, that the shift in financingproduceda decline in performance.Thus far, then, the claimof causationseems unprovedwith respectto bothuniondensity and financingpractices. 
performancedeclined in areas in which the use of educatedlaborby politically importantemployees grew the most, and in which newly important industriesused the most educated labor. As Peltzmanemphasizes, the findingis stronglycounterintuitive.If industrypressurewas to have any effect, one would expect school performanceto increase in precisely those areas. 
Without more, we might think that this counterintuitivecorrelation says absolutely nothing about causation. We might see this findingas resemblinga demonstrationthat the performanceof a sportsteam, or the economy of a foreigncountry, was correlatedwith shifts in SAT scores. (Both of these are likely true.) Now it is possible to come up with a plausiblestory to explain the anomaly-as Peltzmanhas in fact done.?1 But it is almost always possible for inventive people to come up with a plausiblestory. The question is whetherwith respect to the causal role of industrypressure, we have anythingmore than that. I think that on the presentevidence, we do not. 
I conclude with a more generalremark,one that extends well beyond Peltzman'sarticleto theoriesof regulationin general."Functionalanalysis" involves the attributionof causalityto a practiceaftera showingof its effects.l1A key partof pseudoscience, it is prominentin Marxism(X is in the interest of capitalists; therefore, it exists because it is in the interestof capitalist)and feminism(X is in the interestof men, therefore it exists because it is in the interest of men). It is also prominentin economics, includinginterest-grouptheory. Havingshownthata practice is efficient,some people thinkthatthey have shownthatit exists because it is efficient;having shown that a practice serves identifiableinterests, some people think they have shown that it exists for that very reason. 9 Id. at 366. 10 Id. at 367-68. 
1 It is well discussed in Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality 28-35 (1979); Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change, at ch. 2 (1983): Jon Elster, Sour Grapes 101-8 (1983). 
Economistsand economicallyinclinedlawyershave become extremely sophisticatedin revealing the effects of legal regulation.We might be able to demonstrate, for example, that occupational safety and health regulationis in the interest of large firms,or that regulationof new risks (andexemptionof old ones) helps to cartelizeexistingindustry.But from this it is often said to follow thatregulationexists because of its beneficial effects on largefirmsor existing industry.I hope that I have said enough to show that this does not follow. Often it is more than enough to be able to demonstratethe social consequences of legal rules, withoutalso claimingto have shown causation.'2 
12Of course, a demonstrationof effects may be relevantto the issue of causation;from effects we can generateplausiblestories about contributingfactors. But there is a large differencebetweenplausibilityandtruth.To assess the matterof truthaboutthe causes of regulation,we need to knowa good deal morethaninterest-groupandpublicchoice theory typicallyprovide. 
A relatedpoint:Sometimeseconomictheoriesof regulationappearinsufficientlyto investigatethe possibilitythat the system precedingthe specificregulationat issue is itself the productof self-interestedactionandthatthatspecificregulationis in some sense a counter or a correctiveto an interest-drivenstatusquo. The lack of investigationhere has led to a significantgap in the literature.It wouldbe exceptionallyinterestingto see whetherfailure to regulateis sometimesattributableto interest-grouppower,or (less ambitiously)to show thatthe absenceof regulationproducespredictablewinnersandlosers. See EinerElhague, Does InterestGroupTheory Justify More IntrusiveJudicialReview? 101 Yale L. J. 31 (1991);Cass Sunstein,After the RightsRevolution2-3 (1990).The issue is not raisedby Peltzman'sarticlehere, however, and hence I do not discuss it. 
lature in times of emergency and when the Parliament is incapable of forming a cabinet. Some provisions indicate that dissolution is considered a solution of last resort to conflicts between the executive and legislative branches, one which is to be avoided by all means. In fact, the detailed preconditions in the Hungarian and Slovak constitutions seem to make dissolution almost impossible. In Hungary, Parliament must vote no confidence at least four times during a twelve-month period, and in Slovakia the cabinet policy statement must be rejected at least three times in six months for the Assembly to be dissolved. 
These prerequisites coexist with other limitations. The Romanian and Yugoslav constitutions prohibit dissolution in the last months of the terms of President and the parliament. The Hungarian President can dissolve the Assembly only twice during his term, while Romanian President can use it only once a year. Almost all the constitutions of the emerging democracies stipulate that the President must consult with other high officials and politicians before opting for dissolution. While the typical procedure is to consult the Speaker of the House, in Hungary the President must confer with the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the leaders ofall the parliamentary factions. Some ofthe constitutions prohibit dissolution in time of presidential succession. Even if all the necessary preconditions are satisfied, an interim President does not possess this power. The 1992 Interim Constitution in Poland, among other novelties, contains a provision of crucial importance-the President is under obligation to dissolve the Parliament if the Legislature fails to adopt a budget bill in the three months following its introduction. 
Due to lack of space, this brief survey of the features of rationalized parliamentarism is by no means exhaustive. Two conclusions, however, seem clear. First, rationalized parliamentarism requires great political skill of the principals in the difficult process of transition from totalitarianism to democracy. Second, the new parliamentarism strengthens cabinets and prevents easy no-confidence motions that can threaten political stability and when used improperly might even invite government paralysis, if unpopular officials use these techniques to prevent the necessary changes that are underway. 
Evgeni Tanchev is a visitingscholarat the Universityof Virginia 
Law School 
Why social and economic rights don't belong inthe new constitutions of post-Communist Europe. 
By Cass Sunstein If we look at the actual and proposed constitutions for Eastern Europe, we will find a truly dazzling array of social and economic rights. The Hungarian constitution, for example, protects not merely the right to equal pay for equal work, but also the right to an income conforming with the quantity and quality of work performed. The Slovak constitution guarantees the right to a "favorable living environment." Almost all of the actual and proposed drafts include the rights to recreation, to paid holidays, to food and shelter, to a minimum wage, and to much more. A chaotic catalogue of abstractions from the social welfare state coexists with the traditional rights to religious liberty, free speech, and so on. (For details, see my "Something Old, Something New," EECR, Spring 1992, page 18.) 
I think that this is a large mistake, possibly a disaster. It seems clear that Eastern European countries should use their constitutions to produce two things: (a) firm liberal rights-free speech, voting rights, protection against abuse of the criminaljustice system, religious liberty, barriers to invidious discrimination, property and contract rights; and (b) the preconditions for some kind of market economy. The endless catalogue of what I will be calling "positive rights," many of them absurd, threatens to undermine both of these important tasks. 
Three qualifications are necessary at the outset. First, the argument against these rights applies with distinctive force to countries in the unique position of transition .from Communism to a market economy. Other countries, especially in the West, are in a much different situation, and here it is by no means clear that social and economic rights would be harmful. We may draw an important and general conclusion from this suggestion. It is often said that constitutions, as a form of higher law, must be compatible with the culture and mores of those whom they regulate. But in one sense, the opposite is true. Constitutions can be understood as precommitment strategies, in which nations use a founding document to protect against the most common problems in their usual political processes. Constitutions should therefore work against a nation's most threatening tendencies. If this is so, there may be a good case for subsistence rights in (say) the United States, but not in Poland or Russia. On this view, it is irrelevant, even if true, that many international human rights documents contain positive rights. While it isunclear whether these rights have done much good, it is also hard to argue that they have produced any real harm; but they may do exactly this for countries making the transition from Communist rule. 
Second, there is a big difference between what a decent society should provide and what a good constitution should guarantee. A decent society ensures that its citizens have food and shelter; it tries to guarantee medical care; it is concerned to offer good education, good jobs, and a clean environment. It undoubtedly makes sense for nations in Eastern Europe to experiment with diverse kinds of market arrangements and with various strategies for redistribution (see John Roemer and Jon Elster's article on page 38). But a constitution is in large part a legal document, with concrete tasks. If the Constitution tries to specify everything to which a decent society commits itself, it threatens to become a mere piece of paper, worth nothing in the real world. (Hence I think that Herman Schwartz is incorrect to suggest that the opposition to positive rights in the constitution actually amounts to opposition to programs creating such rights; see "In Defense of Aiming High," EECR, Fall 1992, page 25.) Opposition to social and economic rights in the Constitution does not entail a belief that nations in Eastern Europe should eliminate social and economic programs that provide crucial protection against the vicissitudes of the free market. 
Third, not all positive rights are the same. The right to education, for example, is more readily subject tojudicial enforcement than the right to a clean environment. Some of the relevant rights pose especially severe risks; others are relatively harmless. But I believe that few of them belong in Eastern European constitutions. Here's why: 
Governments should not be compelled to interfere withfree markets. Some positive rights establish government interference with free markets as a constitutional obligation. For countries that are trying to create market economies, this is perverse. A constitution that prevents the operation of free labor markets may defeat current aspirations in Eastern Europe. Recall that the Hungarian Constitution protects not merely the right to equal pay for equal work, but also the right to an income conforming with the quantity and quality of work performed. This provision will have one of two consequences. (a) If the provision is to mean something, courts will have to oversee labor markets very closely, to make sure that every bargain produces the right wage. We know enough to know that government is ill-equipped to undertake this task. Courts are in an even worse position to do so. Ifcourts are going to oversee the labor market, it will be impossible to have a labor market. (b) The relevant provisions will be ignored-treated as goals or aspirations not subject to legal enforcement. This isa better outcome than (a), and courts in Eastern Europe should be encouraged to reach this conclusion. But it is far from ideal to have a system in which many constitutional rights are ignored. 
The Hungarian provision is an extreme example, but similar problems are raised by provisions calling for specified maximum hours, for paid parental leave, for paid holidays, and much else. Many of these provisions may make sense if they are placed in ordinary legislation. But this is where they belong-not in the constitution. The constitution should not undertake close control of the private sphere, of civil society and economic markets. In the West, the constitution generally does not apply to the private sphere at all; it only regulates government. (The emphasis on positive rights in the Eastern European documents suggests the remarkable and quite general absence ofany distinction between the private and public spheres.) Perhaps some small companies in the East should be allowed to get ahead by paying their workers a great deal in return for long hours, or for less in the way of leave; perhaps not. Perhaps medical care should not be freeespecially for people who have the money to pay for it. These issues should be subject to democratic debate, not constitutional foreclosure. 
Many positive rights are unenforceable by courts. Courts lack the tools of a bureaucracy. They cannot create government programs. They do not have a systematic overview of government policy. In these circumstances, it is unrealistic to expect courts to enforce many positive rights. Consider, for example, another provision in the Hungarian Constitution: "People living within the territory of the Republic of Hungary have the right to the highest possible level of physical health." How could courts enforce this right? The same problem appears for many (not all) of the positive rights, including the right to work, the right to a clean environment, and the right to training for the disabled. 
To be sure, constitutions are not only legal documents, as Schwartz points out. In the United States, the identification of the Constitution with the decisions of courts has been damaging to democratic deliberation. Constitutions can be a catalyst for public discussion. But in Eastern Europe, it is crucial to establish very soon that whatever else they are, constitutions are indeed legal documents-in the sense that an individual citizen may count on the constitution to protect rights, whatever a police officer, a legislature, or even a prime minister or President may say. One of the enduring legacies of Communism is a large degree of cynicism about constitutions-a belief that constitutions may be pretty, but that they do not have meaning in the real world. If the right to "the highest possible level of physical health" is not subject to judicial enforcement, perhaps the same will become true ofthe right to free speech and to due process of law. 
The inclusion ofmany positive rights could work againstgeneral current effort to diminish sense of entitlement to state protection andto encourageindividualinitiative. I have said that a decent society provides its citizens with food, shelter, and much more. But if positive dispensations from the state are seen as a matter of individual entitlement, there can be corrosive effects on individual enterprise and initiative. This effect can be seen in both the West and the East. The risk of corrosion is no reason to eliminate programs that provide for subsistence. But in today's Eastern Europe, it is important to undertake a cultural shift through which people will look less to the state for their support, and more to their own efforts and enterprise. One way to help do this is to provide social welfare guarantees through ordinary legislation, and to reserve the constitution for other matters. In this cultural shift, it will be understood that the state furnishes, among other things, a safety net for those who are unable to make provision for themselves. A constitution that indiscriminately merges guarantees of "justpay" and "recreation" with traditional liberal rights is likely to sendjust the wrong signals. 
Many positive rights would do no afirmativegood, andthis is a seriousproblemforincipientconstitutionalism.Even if all of the foregoing is overstated, most of the positive rights would not make things better for anyone. To be sure, it is possible that such rights would affect legislative deliberations, quite apart from judicial action. Perhaps the existence of a right to a safe environment would prompt legislatures to attend to environmental issues when they otherwise might not. It is also possible that the existence of positive rights or social aspirations will affectjudicial interpretation of existing statutory provisions. We cannot rule out the prospect of some beneficial effects. But if the likelihood is small, there is an independent argument against social and economic rights: If they will probably not make things better, they are mere surplusage, and constitutional surplusage is itself bad for nations that are trying to create a culture of constitutionalism. 
It is true that some of these arguments depend on somewhat speculative assumptions. Analysis ofwhat belongs in a constitution is not like mathematics. Perhaps the positive rights would have little adverse affect on individual initiative; perhaps their existence would not affectjudicial attitudes toward more readily enforceable rights, like the right to free speech. In the end these are empirical questions on which we have no hard evidence. The ultimate question is how to proceed in the absence of such evidence. Here the most we can do is to assess the magnitude of therelevant risks. If what I have said is correct, it seems hard to believe that positive rights would actually help the lives of citizens in Eastern Europe, and it seems very possible that such rights would undermine the prospects for a form of constitutionalism that offers firm protection to basic rights and that furnishes the preconditions for the transition to a market economy. 
In these circumstances, what ought to be done? I suggest three routes for the future. First, people now drafting constitutions for Eastern Europe should delete or minimize provisions that call for positive rights. At least, they should eliminate those rights that fare worst under the criteria I have set out here, and restrict such rights to those that fare best (perhaps the right to social security). 
Second, those now drafting constitutions for Eastern Europe might put the positive rights in a separate section, as President Walesa's draft bill of rights has done in Poland, making clear that such rights are not for judicial enforcement, that they occupy a separate status, and that they are intended to set out general aspirations for public officials and for the citizenry at large. 
Third, judges and lawyers in Eastern Europe should now be at work developing a jurisprudence that minimizes the potential risks and maximizes the potential benefits of positive rights. As a key part of this task, they might adopt the notion that rights are "nonjusticiable"not subject to judicial enforcement-when they call for large-scale interference with the operation of free markets, or when they call for managerial tasks not within judicial competence. Any such notion must, however, make it clear that courts will vigorously enforce the basic political and civil rights whose violation was a daily affair under Communist rule-rights such as free speech, religious liberty, freedom from police abuse, due process, and nondiscrimination on grounds of ethnicity, race, religion, and sex. 
With constitutional rights, as with much else, less may be more. A constitution that purports to guarantee a decent society may, in the process, guarantee nothing at all. This was a central problem with Communist constitutionalism. It would be a cruel irony if the problem were to be duplicated in the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe. 
EAST EUROPEAN CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW 
Constitutional issues inmarket socialism. 
A THIR 
WAY? By John Roemer andJonElster The separation of powers is a central issue in constitutional thought. The separation of executive and legislative powers, discussed elsewhere in this issue, is a prominent case. An independent judiciary is another. In a broader sense, the independence of the central bank and of the state-owned media can also be seen in this perspective. The argument for separation of powers rests both on positive and negative considerations. On the one hand, the separation of powers isa form of division of labor that enhances the efficiency of the political system. On the other, it serves to prevent total usurpation of power by any one state agency. 
One special problem with separation of powers-or lack ofseparation-plagues anumber of political systems. It may be briefly characterized as the need to separate the instruments of economic policy from the tools of social policy. In theory, and in the long run, both economy and society will benefit if policies are oriented towards economic efficiency, thus maximizing the revenues that can be used to alleviate problems of unemployment and poverty. In practice, because policy-makers are often influenced by short-term considerations, there isa temptation to make economic choices on the basis of their immediate social consequences. To maintain employment, governments all over the world support declining industries and inefficient firms, blunting the edge of competition. The bailout of Chrysler in United States and the subsidization of the mining industry in Britain are two prominent examples from the West. With regard to the planned Communist economies, Janos Kornai coined the phrase "soft budget constraint" to describe the position of managers who know that banks or local governments have a strong vested interest in keeping their firms afloat-and the political clout to do so. The results in Eastern Europe, as we know, were disastrous. 
To be more precise, the economic crisis of the Communist countries was due largely to their failure to solve variousprincipal-agenptroblems. A principal-agent problem arises when one actor or group relies on another to carry out orders or provide informatioh, but where the two 
Article II Revisionism 
Cass R. Sunstein* standing injury cuted."' 4 
One of the most striking developments of the last decade has been the new use of Article II in public law adjudication. 
Article II is a prominent feature not only of cases involving the creation of federal institutions that are independent of the President,' but also of new disputes involving reviewability, scope of review, and standing. 2 It is especially interesting that some key standing cases, nominally decided under Article III, have an unambiguous root in a distinctive understanding of Article II.3 Thus it is suggested that certain grants of to citizens, taxpayers, or others without an individuated would compromise the vesting of executive power in the President and the grant of power to the President, rather than to courts or to citizens, to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully exe 
Article II appears to be doing much of the crucial work in the key Article III cases, and Justice Scalia's powerful dissenting opinion in Morrison v. Olson 5 may be enjoying a surprising rebirth in the law of standing. 
All this suggests that Professor Krent and Mr. Shenkman have performed a valuable service in spelling out the argument that Article II, rather than Article III, justifies constitutional limits on legislative * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard.-Ed. I am grateful to Akhil Amar, Larry Lessig, and David Strauss for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 
grants of standing. 6 Indeed, on several important matters, we are very much in agreement. We agree that Article III forbids courts from hearing cases in which the plaintiff has no cause of action, but that, under Article I, Congress can create causes of action whenever it chooses. 7 We agree that the citizen suit, while consistent with Article III, has a mixed record as a matter of simple policy 8 We agree that Article II poses no barrier to suits in cases involving individuated injuries, even when a beneficiary of a regulatory program is seeking greater enforcement of the law.9 I also want to emphasize that Krent and Shenkman have put their finger on a key but underanalyzed feature of the recent standing decisions. 
In this brief space, I will be unable fully to come to terms with L. Rav. 1793 (1993). 

in Northeastern Fla. Chapter of Associated Gen. Contractors v. Jacksonville, 61 U.S.L.W. 4626 (U.S. June 14, 1993). Jacksonville had enacted an ordinance requiring that 10% of the money spent on city contracts be "set aside" for minority business enterprises. A contractors' association, consisting mostly of members who would not qualify as minority enterprises, brought suit, claiming that the set-aside violated the Equal Protection Clause. The lower court denied standing on the ground that no member of the association had demonstrated that, "'but for the program, any AGC member would have bid successfully for any of these contracts."' 61 U.S.L.W. at 4627 (quoting Northeastern Fla. Chapter of Associated Gen. Contractors v. Jacksonville, 951 F.2d 1217, 1219 (11th Cir. 1992)). There was therefore no injury in fact. 
The Supreme Court responded: When the government erects a barrier that makes it more difficult for members of one group to obtain a benefit than it is for members of another group, a member of the former group seeking to challenge the barrier need not allege that he would have obtained the benefit but for the barrier in order to establish standing. The "injury in fact" in an equal protection case of this variety is the denial of equal treatment resulting from the imposition of the barrier, not the ultimate inability to obtain the benefit. And in the context of a challenge to a set-aside program, the "injury in fact" is the inability to compete on an equal footing in the bidding process, not the loss of a contract. To establish standing, therefore, a party challenging a set-aside program like Jacksonville's need only demonstrate that it is able and ready to bid on contracts and that a discriminatory policy prevents it from doing so on an equal basis. 61 U.S.L.W. at 4629 (citations omitted). In an intriguing footnote, the Court added, "[i]t follows from our definition of 'injury in fact' that petitioner has sufficiently alleged both that the city's ordinance is the 'cause' of its injury and that a judicial decree directing the city to discontinue its program would 'redress' the injury." 61 U.S.L.W. at 4629 n.5. 
There is serious tension between Lujan and Associated General Contractors In Lujan, the injury could have been recharacterized in opportunity-like terms, and, in that event, there would have been no problem with injury in fact, causation, or redressability. Indeed, there is real tension between Associated GeneralContractorsand many of the cases denying standing, including Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984), Simon v. EKWRO, 426 U.S. 26 (1976), and Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614 (1973). For a general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? Of Citizen Suits, "Injuries," and Article II, 91 MIcH. L. REv. 163, 193-95 (1992). A prime goal of standing doctrine for the next few years should be to explain when injuries can be characterized narrowly and when broadly. In my view, the question should turn on legislative instructions. See id at 234-35. See also Cass R. Sunstein, StandingInjuries, 1993 Sup. Cr. REv. (forthcoming). their understanding of Article II. I will try, however, to indicate why that understanding seems to be quite adventurous as a matter of constitutional history and structure. In the end, I suggest that their conception of Article II amounts to a form of constitutional revisionism, in the interest of judgments of policy and fact that are plausible but that lack sufficiently clear constitutional roots to be invoked by courts. 
Let me begin with a brief outline of the basic argument. Krent and Shenkman contend that Article II reflects a commitment to a unitary executive, and that the grant of citizen standing fatally compromises that commitment. 10 In their view, it is the President who is entrusted with the authority to oversee all implementation of federal law.1 This idea stems from the constitutional judgment that there should be political accountability for the redress of "public harms," that is, harms shared by the public as a whole.' 2 The political process is the appropriate, and indeed the exclusive, check on inadequate redress of these harms. 13 
To be sure, people with individuated interests can bring suit against executive illegality, even if the illegality amounts to insufficient enforcement of the law. "Privately accountable relators," however, are altogether different. Under Article II, they should not be allowed to bring suit against either private defendants acting in violation of the law14 or against the executive itself. This principle applies even if Congress creates bounties for citizens.' 5 If citizens lacking individuated interests were permitted to bring suit, they would undermine the forms of political accountability that are guaranteed by the system of unitariness in execution of the laws. It is for this reason that Article II bans the citizen suit. 
This reasoning is indeed an understanding of Article II; but is it an understanding with real roots in the Constitution, one that federal judges should invoke in order to invalidate federal statutes? I am skeptical. First, a conceptual point: Krent and Shenkman lean very hard on the distinction between individuated and nonindividuated harms. This distinction seems quite problematic to me, not because there are hard line-drawing problems - although there are 16 - but 
that I believe the Court would resolve the other way. See Sunstein, supra note 9, at 231-33. supra note 9. because the distinction may not be workable for the purposes to which Krent and Shenkman seek to use it. The key point is that we cannot decide whether an injury is individuated in the abstract; this determination depends on whether the law has defined it as individuated. If Congress can enact law to decide whether injuries are individuated, it may ensure that injuries that were once nonindividuated are now in fact individually held, and it may grant standing to individuals to vindicate those interests. 
In a system without private property, for example, property is publicly owned, and no one can claim that "his" property is at stake. There are no individuated ownership rights and hence no individuated harms. It is only when the law creates property rights that individuated injuries begin to exist. So, too, there is no individuated right to many regulatory benefits, such as clean air, when the law has allowed the benefit to be unowned. But once government has ( private ownership rights or a joint tenancy in the relevant benefit and ( said that these rights may be vindicated in court, the case is quite different. Once the government has created ownership rights, the interest has become individuated in the legally relevant sense. 
Of course there are differences between public and nonpublic goods. Perhaps Krent and Shenkman mean to argue that some public goods - things owned by all or many - cannot give rise to standing. But to some extent the very difference between public and nonpublic goods is an artifact of law. Whether a good is public depends at least partly on whether the government has said that it can be owned privately. In any case, I do not think that the differences between public and nonpublic goods have constitutional status for purposes of standing. It is not clear why Congress should be disabled from granting each of us a kind of property right in a certain state of affairs - even if many or all of us share that right - and from saying that each of us is entitled to vindicate that right in court. 
Let me put the conceptual issues to one side and return to the Constitution. As Krent and Shenkman are aware, 17 their understanding of Article II has no support in the history of Article II. In fact, early constitutional practice strongly argues against this understanding. 18 Citizen suits were authorized before, during, and shortly after the founding, and there is no evidence that anyone thought that they from History, 38 AM. U. L. REv. 275, 302 (1989); Krent & Shenkman, supra note 6, at 1803 & n.38. 
raised the slightest question under Article II. Criminal law enforcement by citizens is a well-established device in Anglo-American law. 19 Even if some forms of citizen enforcement of the criminal law might be constitutionally troublesome, we are dealing here with civil actions, where the historical evidence cuts very hard against the invocation of Article II. 
More broadly, I think that the notion of a "unitary executive" needs a good deal more elaboration, certainly in terms of its complex history. The Framers did believe in a unitary executive; but they did not think that this belief entailed the further view that the President is in charge of all implementation of the laws. In fact, they allowed Congress considerable power to structure implementation as it saw fit.20 We know, for example, that in the period after the Founding, much prosecution under federal law took place without presidential control.2 1 Neither the President nor the Attorney General controlled the district attorneys. Citizens could enforce federal law in state court. Moreover, both the Comptroller General and the Postmaster were immunized from the general control of the President. 
In these circumstances, the alleged constitutional commitment to a strongly unitary executive - a president who was to be in charge of all of what we now call implementation of the law - seems to me to have been greatly oversold. Ifjudges are to be bound by history, or to give history a good deal of weight, it is necessary to reject the Article II argument against citizen standing. 
I do not contend that the historical evidence is decisive. Perhaps it would be possible to develop a structural argument for an exclusive presidential role in law implementation. 22 Let us suppose that such an argument can be made. Even if it can, it does not support the view that Article II bans suits brought by people without individuated interests. The key point is that there is no difference between the interference with that exclusive role in cases in which the plaintiff has an individuated interest and the interference with that role when the plaintiff has no such interest. 

Practices, 30 WM. & MARY L. REV. 211, 234-45 (1989) (discussing Congress' power in establishing executive departments); Larry Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The Presidentand the Administration. 93 COLUM. L. Rav. (forthcoming 1993). 
Lessig & Sunstein, supra note 20, make a structural argument stressing changed circumstances but the argument is too narrow to jeopardize the citizen suit. [Vol 92.131 
Imagine, for example, that the plaintiffs in Lujan 2 had purchased airline tickets to the areas in which endangered species were at risk. In that event, they would unquestionably have had a sufficient "injury in fact" to challenge the failure to apply the Endangered Species Act extraterritorially. But if they had airline tickets, would they compromise Article II concerns any less? I do not believe so. Along the Article II dimension, there is no difference between citizen suits and suits by people with individuated interests. If suits against the executive by people with individuated interests do not violate Article II - as everyone agrees - it is hard to see why the same suits violate Article II merely because of the absence of an individuated interest. 
In any case, it is far from clear that citizen suits really compromise any constitutional commitment to presidential exclusivity in implementing the law. 24 We should distinguish here between citizen suits against private defendants and citizen suits against the government itself. If the government is not implicated, we have a civil supplement to public enforcement efforts, corresponding to the ordinary and timehonored parallel systems of public and private law. Tort law and criminal law usually work hand in hand, allowing private and public suits founded on similar complaints, such as assault, battery, theft, and so forth. The creation of a citizen suit against private violators builds on this most conventional of models. I do not see how the Constitution's structural commitments forbid this model. 
Perhaps the citizen suit will interfere a bit with the government's overall enforcement scheme by, for example, allowing an action when the executive has exercised prosecutorial discretion so as to exempt a violator. 5 It is not simple, however, to explain how this interference would violate Article II, any more than civil actions in state court violate state constitutions because such actions interfere with the criminal prosecutor's power to enforce the criminal law. Because the government is not a party, I cannot see why the citizen suit against private defendants creates a problem under Article II, especially if, as noted, an identical suit from someone with an individuated interest does not create any such problem. The disruption of the President's law enforcement authority is the same in either case. This point suggests that we are back to Article III and that Article II is irrelevant after all. 
L REv. (forthcoming 1993) ("Litigation on behalf of the polity is shared with private citize in the United Kingdom and many states (which even today allow private prosecution), and the survival of qui tam actions, veterans of the eighteenth century, shows that litigation has never been a prerogative confined to executive officials."). 

The issue is somewhat different in suits brought by citizens against the government. Perhaps there is an Article II problem if a court says that the executive must act in a certain class of cases. To come to terms with this claim, it is necessary to see what exactly the court will decide and what will be at stake. If the citizen suit is to go forward, the question for judicial decision is whether the relevant agency has violated federal law in circumstances in which the law dictates action of a certain kind. The court has no authority to issue a judgment because of a policy disagreement; it must find illegality.26 If the agency has violated the law, the court will so hold and issue an appropriate decree. The question is this: Why, precisely, do such suits raise an Article II issue? 
The problem does not arise under the "Take Care" Clause. By hypothesis, the President will win in court if he has "taken care" and lose only if he violated that duty. It is not so easy to see why the "Take Care" Clause forbids courts from ordering the President to carry out the law. Indeed, Krent and Shenkman do not really believe that the clause forbids courts from doing this. They believe that, when an individuated injury is at stake, a decree to this effect raises no Article II problem.27 Again: if Article II allows courts to interfere with law implementation by ordering the President to "take care" at the behest of a plaintiff with an individuated injury, why does Article II offer a freestanding objection to such an order at the behest of a citizen? No good reason comes to mind. 
If this reasoning is right, the vesting of executive power in the President seems to add nothing to the problem raised by citizen suits. This clause does not bar the courts from issuing decrees calling for the legally required enforcement of the law at the behest of people with individuated injuries. If it does not, it is unclear how the clause supplies a barrier when citizens bring suit. Of course, the distinction between individuated and nonindividuated injuries grows out of Article III cases, in which it is understandable if misguided (as Krent and Shenkman agree2 8). The unanswered question remains why that distinction is crucial for purposes of Article II. Perhaps the response is that the President should be accountable only to the public as a whole when individuals are not peculiarly affected, and when any particular litigant stands basically for everyone. This position is fully under26. Under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), the agency receives the benefit of all reasonable doubts. 
standable as a matter of policy, but it does not seem to be more than that. 
In the end, the structural claim at issue here amounts to a proposition that the abstract interest in political accountability, grounded in Article II, forbids Congress from allowing citizens to sue either private people acting in violation of the law or executive officials who are defaulting on their legal obligations. This claim raises many puzzles. If we are concerned about political accountability, the argument seems strained. It is after all Congress, the national lawmaker, that has by hypothesis decided in favor of citizen suits, and Congress is accountable for its actions. Moreover, there is at the very least an apparent democratic failure whenever a bureaucracy fails to do what Congress has prescribed. Surely Congress could conclude that the citizen suit provides both an ex ante deterrent and an ex post corrective to this unfortunate result. For these reasons, it seems a bit mysterious to say that the interest in political accountability forbids Congress from granting citizens standing to supplement or to correct agency illegality in enforcement. 
One final point. As the last generation of constitutional law has made clear, there is a thin line between structural arguments having a genuine constitutional source and policy judgments belonging in the political process. If judges are going to strike down enactments of Congress on constitutional grounds, they should be reasonably confident that a real constitutional commitment underlies this result, and that the commitment does not mask instead a controversial set of policy recommendations. The aggressive use of Article II to prevent Congress from creating citizen suits seems to run afoul of this principle. It is not as if the claim has absolutely no connection to something in the Constitution; but the connection is much too attenuated to justify invalidation of federal statutes. This is my basic reaction to the imaginative recent use of Article II in the law reviews and the Supreme Court. 
How presidential powers can legally expand without constitutional amendment. CHANGING 
CONSTITUTIONAL POWERS OF THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT CassSunstein In the United States, the president is controlled by the Constitution and is in all respects subordinate to it. Insofar as it deals with presidential power, however, the American Constitution has proved to be a highly malleable document. With very few exceptions, the constitutional provisions relating to the president have not been changed at all since they were ratified in 1787, but in 1993 those provisions do not mean what they meant in enforced judicially, but its meaning was not fixed when it was ratified. In particular, the contemporary president has far broader powers than the original Constitution contemplated. It is remarkable but true that large-scale changes in the authority of the president have been brought about without changes in the constitutional text but, nevertheless, without illegality. 
This is a paradox. Is it not clear that constitutional changes, if not textual, are illegal? The paradox has considerable relevance to Eastern Europe. The framers of the American Constitution feared legislative power most of all, but from well-known events in the twentieth century it is possible to conclude that it is presidential power that presents the greatest risks for liberty and democracy. 
The president is the most visible leader in the nation by far; he is often the only person in government with a national constituency; and this visibility can lead to a kind of "cult" that threatens constitutionalism itself. On the other hand, a strong president is in a unique position to accomplish enormous good, and it is possible to think that in Eastern Europe and the ex-USSR, a strong president is a precondition for necessary reforms. 
How to produce a strong presidency while limiting the relevant risks is a major task for postcommunist constitutionalism. There are of course significant complexities here. With the exception of the nations ofthe former Soviet Union, the pattern in Eastern European nations is basically parliamentary, and the president is largely ceremonial (at least in comparison to the American president). In the nations of what used to be the USSR, a president-part of a division between the executive and the legislature-has a more important role. But even where the president is largely ceremonial, there will be opportunities for accretions of power over time. Any particular constitutional arrangement is unlikely to be fixed over time. 
There is some dispute about whether the task of producing a strong president without endangering liberty has been successfully accomplished in the United States. 
Some people think that the American president is much too powerful; others think that America has a weak president who is unable to accomplish the tasks for which he is elected. This debate raises complex questions that I cannot discuss here. However those questions may be resolved, it is clear that the original understanding of the presidency called for much less presidential authority than is taken for granted today. Although the prominent American founder, Alexander Hamilton, sought a powerful presidency, and although the new Constitution created an executive where the Articles of Confederation had not, the original American president was exceptionally weak by contemporary standards. Consider the following points, showing the contrast between the eighteenth and twentieth-century American presidencies. 
supposed to have sharply limited authority in domestic affairs, partly because the federal government as a whole had sharply limited authority in the domestic arena. Basic regulation of the economy was to come from state governments, especially from state courts elaborating the common law of tort, contract, and property. Today, by contrast, the president is a principal national lawmakersimply because of a shift in power toward the nation. In implementing national law, the executive branch issues an extraordinary range of regulations affecting the national economy-in large part because of the economic interdependence among various regions, which is now generally acknowledged. It is a simple truth that the national government has far more authority than the framers of the Constitution originally envisaged. It is equally, if less simply, true that as a result of this shift, the president himself has assumed an array of duties and powers not within the original contemplation of the Constitution's authors. 
acts, the president needs congressional (or constitutional) authorization. He cannot exceed any limits that Congress has laid down. But often Congress offers very vague guidance. The president therefore has a great deal of discretion. Particularly in the latter half of the twentieth century, courts have been reluctant to strike down laws on the basis of the "nondelegation doctrine," which required clear standards from the legislature. The downfall of the nondelegation doctrine has meant that the president can exercise tremendous policy-making discretion in the domestic sphere. This sphere includes regulation of the environment, energy, occupational safety and health, communications, and much else. 
to allow Congress to limit the president's authority over the many high-level officials who implement the laws enacted by Congress. This might seem to be a technical matter, but it has enormous importance. If the Secretary of the Treasury can be controlled by the Congress but not by the president, the allocation ofnational powers ismuch changed. It is now generally agreed, however, that the presidenthas broadpower over all high-level oficials who implement the law. The heads of the cabinet, and of most executive agencies, can be discharged by the president whenever the president chooses. Moreover, Congress has no authority to discharge them or to prevent the president from doing so. (Of course both the president and all implementing officials must obey the instructions laid down by Congress.) The result is that most administration of the laws-an extremely large and important category-is subject to the will of the president. 
will submit to Congress both (a)a proposed budget and (b) a great deal of proposed legislation. As a result, the president now has a formidable role in the enactment of national legislation. The Constitution contains no explicit provisions on these points, but it was not originally believed that the president would submit a budget or propose legislation. It was hardly believed that the president would have these powers of initiative, granting him considerable power over the content of national law. The president's current power ofinitiative, with respect to the budget and lawmaking, is quite fundamental. (Ofcourse much legislation is initiated by people other than the president.) 
out to allow him a surprisingly large role in determining the content of national legislation. The founders of the Constitution deliberately and explicitly gave the president the veto power. But they did not contemplate its current importance, and they might well have been alarmed if they had been forewarned. Their principal goal was to allow the president to veto laws on constitutional rather than policy grounds, particularly in order to permit him to prevent Congress from intruding on the president's constitutional powers. This goal was narrow indeed; it did not anticipate a situation in which the power to veto would entail a significant role in lawmaking. 
It is not entirely clear that the framers sought to allow the president to veto legislation solely on the ground that he disagreed with the policy judgments embodied in it (though probably the best reading of the history is that the founders believed that the president could veto legislation on policy grounds). But they thought that this power would be exercised rarely and only in the most extreme cases. The founders certainly did not anticipate the current situation, in which the veto power is a wellunderstood part of all lawmaking and implies a large and continuous presidential role in lawmaking itself. In short, the president's authority is greatly augmented by Congress' knowledge that the president can veto legislation of which he disapproves. 
world power, the president's foreign affairs authority has become far more capacious than was originally anticipated. For the most part this is because the powers originally conferred on the president have turned out-in light of the unanticipated place of the United States in the world-to mean much more than anyone would have thought. In addition, however, the president has been permitted to initiate military activity in circumstances in which the original understanding would have required congressional authorization. On the founding view, a congressionaldeclarationofwar was apreconditionfor war; the only exception was that the president could act on his own in order to repel a sudden attack on the United States. But in the twentieth century, a large amount of presidential war-making has been allowed without congressional declaration of war. 
From all these points we might conclude that the Constitution, at least in the area of presidential authority, is no mere lawyer's document. The original understanding has not controlled the future. The Constitution's meaning is not fixed. It is in large part a function of historical practices and needs, and of shared understandings over time. Often the power ofthe president is understood to be quite different from what it was, say, twentyfive years earlier. 
Yet it would be a mistake to conclude that the president's constitutional power issimply a matter of what seems to him appropriate or necessary, and not a matter of law at all. Often the president loses in the Supreme Court, and in nearly every important case, he has graciously accepted his defeat. To take just a few examples from the twentieth century: President Nixon was forced to hand over his own tape-recorded conversations during the Watergate controversy; President Truman was prevented from seizing the steel mills during the Korean War; President Eisenhower was banned from stopping communists from traveling abroad. These defeats are important in themselves, but they are even more important for the general tone that they set. Every American president knows that his actions are subject to judicial review, and this is a large deterrent to illegal conduct. 
For purposes ofjudicial review, the president's most important constitutional duty is "to take care that the laws be faithfully executed." This provision subordinates the president to the law. It also requires him to adhere to the law, both constitutional and statutory. 
I have suggested that the changing understandings of the president's power have occurred without either textual change or flagrant presidential violations of constitutional requirements. I have also suggested that this presents a genuine paradox. We have a president who is much stronger than the framers of the Constitution anticipated; but at least in general, the current presidency is not thought, and should not be thought, unconstitutional. 
How, then, have the president's powers changed? There are several possibilities. I outline them here because of their potential importance to current dilemmas in Eastern Europe. Flexible provisions and silences, allowing flexible (but not open-ended) interpretation 
Many of the changes have occurred because the relevant constitutional provisions are ambiguous, and they allow adaptation to changing circumstances. For example, the grant of "executive power" to the president leaves much uncertainty. 
The Constitution also contains important silences. 
For example, the Constitution does not discuss whether the president shall submit a budget. But the document is not a blank slate. It is clear that the president must obey the law; it is equally clear that he cannot make law on his own. It is clear that he cannot (for example) dissolve the legislature or the Supreme Court when (as is often the case) they displease him. We should conclude, then, that constitutional change has occurred in part because ofconstitutional ambiguities and silences. A constitution that is not rigid will allow for adaptation without amendment or illegality. 
Emergencies Many constitutions, including all of those in Eastern Europe, contain emergency provisions, allowing the government to have special powers under conditions ofemergency. The American Constitution contains no emergency provisions (although the president is allowed to suspend the writ of habeas corpus during war). It might seem natural to think that in spite of the absence of explicit emergency powers, many increases in presidential authority have occurred as a result of emergencies. In general, however, the president has not been found to have special authority to act during emergencies. A domestic crisis-widespread unemployment, social unrestdoes not give the president any new power. There is no judicial understanding that the president has greater authority if he can point to an emergency situation, or claim that unusual presidential action is crucial. 
Of course, Congress might well decide to confer statutory authority on the president in order to enable him to respond to a crisis. And Congress has made this decision in emergencies. In the New Deal period, for example, Congress gave the president a range of new authorities because of the perceived need for special responses to the 
Great Depression. But the president has not been allowed to act on his own. An emergency does not give the president any unilateral powers. A possible lesson is that constitutionally-granted emergency powers are not necessary and may even be harmful. 
Development of the Constitution through caseby-case decisions over time Some distinguished academic observers (most notably Harry Wellington and David Strauss) believe that interpretation of the U.S. Constitution depends on particular judicial decisions, allowing the meaning of the document to change over time. Indeed, constitutionallaw in America (and in many other nations as well) has many features of the common law process. 
In that process, a hallmark of Anglo-American legal systems, no one sets down broad legal rules in advance. 
Instead the rules emerge narrowly, as judges decide individual cases. Governing principles come from the process ofcase-by-case adjudication, and sometimes they cannot be known in advance. Much of constitutional law in the United States comes not from the constitutional text itself, but from judge-made constitutional law, interpreting constitutional provisions. For this reason, the meaning of the document is not rigidly fixed when the document is written and ratified. 
Something along these lines is certainly true for the powers of the president, and the system of common law constitutionalism helps explain the shifting understanding of presidential power. Consider, for example, the complex question of whether Congress or the president may discharge high-level public officials (the secretary of state, the attorney general, the secretary of the interior). 
The text of the Constitution does not speak clearly on this issue; instead, the governing constitutional principles have been worked out in the process ofcase-by-case adjudication. 
It might be added that much of the president's authority turns not onjudicial decisions at all, but on traditional practices and shared understandings between the president and Congress. The development of these practices and understandings resembles the process of common law development. It is recognized that a certain practice "works." Congress and the president endorse the practice, and the practice therefore operates as a guide for the future. Of course no such practices may violate the Constitution where that document speaks with clarity. Translation Some people (most notably Lawrence Lessig) have argued that, when circumstances have changed, the Supreme Court must "translate" the original constitutional text in order to adapt it to the new conditions. Suppose, for example, that the founders of the Constitution originally sought to allow the president to make war on his own only for defensive purposes to repel sudden attacks on the United States. Suppose, too, that in modern conditions, threats to (say) Canada and Mexico are extremely threatening to the United States because of the strategic importance ofthese nations. Or suppose (as many people believe) that under current conditions, the line between "offensive" and "defensive" use of the military becomes extremely thin. 
if this is true, perhaps the original constitutional provision, translated into a new context, gives the president new and broader authority. Ifwe want to adhere to the original constitutional goal (i.e., to allow the president to act unilaterally when this is necessary), perhaps the president may act unilaterally, not simply to repel sudden attacks on the United States, but in any case in which American interests are at serious risk. Perhaps this view accounts for many of the changes I have described. Thus, for example, we might think that the president's authority over the cabinet must expand in an area in which the cabinet is exercising such extraordinary power over the nation. Perhaps the expansion isjustified if we are to be faithful to the founding commitment to political accountability. The "translation" argument raises many complexities, but it has appeared in several Supreme Court opinions as a way of making sense of the practice ofinterpretation in changed circumstances. 
Several constitutional regimes? Some people think America has had more than one constitutional regime, that at crucial moments in our history, the people have inaugurated large-scale changes in the Constitution. The Civil War, for example, is said to have inaugurated a Second American Republic, with new understandings of the allocation of power between the nation and the states and with new understandings of individual rights. Some people think that President Roosevelt's New Deal also produced constitutional change. In his influential book, We the People:Foundations, for example, Bruce Ackerman argues that the United States has had three constitutional regimes, not simply one. 
If America has had more than one constitutional regime, we might think about presidential power in a somewhat different way. In the New Deal period, for example, the national government appeared to acquire significant new constitutional authority. The president was a principal beneficiary of this shift, especially insofar as the Supreme Court refused to enforce the nondelegation doctrine, which, as noted above, required any legislative delegations of power to the executive to be narrow and clear. Some people think that the New Deal effectively amended the Constitution, giving the president a range of new powers. 
Conclusion There are some diverse explanations of the changing nature of constitutional power in the hands of the American president. I think that the most promising explanations stress the flexibility of the original text and the process of common law adjudication. If these are the best explanations, it seems clear that a special advantage of the original constitutional provisions governing the president is that they allow adaptation over time. Moreover, it emerges that one of the virtues ofthe American constitutional experience is the process of case-by-case adjudication, giving the meaning of constitutional provisions through close encounter with particular cases. 
What lessons can be drawn from this experience for Eastern Europe? It is hazardous to think that the experience of one nation has any lessons at all for another; there are many distinctive features to the American experiment in constitutionalism, and it is reasonable to think that few general lessons can be drawn from what has happened in the United States. But if we are to draw lessons, perhaps two are of special importance. The first involves the limited effects ofconstitutionaltext, at least over time. Constitutional meaning depends, in large part, on shared understandings and practices, and most of these will not be in the constitution itself. Although the Constitution is a legal document, there will be a great deal of opportunity to adapt constitutional meaning to changes in understanding and practice over time. 
A second (and somewhat conflicting) lesson involves the importanceofa culture ofconstitutionalism-towhich judicial review is an important contributor-to ensure against the most egregious abuses of legal authority. In America, judicial review has been important as a check after the fact and, perhaps even more, as a before-the-fact deterrent to presidential illegality. A culture of constitutionalism and the rule of law, spurred by judicial review, has helped deter presidential lawlessness in cases in which the need for action seemed great to the president, and the legal technicalities seemed like an irrelevance. In some such considerations, lies the solution to a remarkable and insufficiently analyzed paradox ofAmerican constitutionalism: a dramatically changed and strengthened presidency brought about without constitutional amendment and nonetheless without significant illegalities. 
Cass Sunstein is the Karl N. Llewellyn ProfessorofJurisprudenceat the University ofChicago,the Law School 
I thank you all for coming on a rainy day. Actually, I am a little preoccupied right now because there was in a Fordham colleague's office a chart which said how much Elvis would weigh on every planet and on the Sun. On Pluto, Elvis would weigh a mere thirteen pounds; and on the Sun, Elvis would weigh over 7,000 pounds. This is actually related to my topic. 
I have two quotations with which to begin. The first is from the United States Constitution, and it goes like this: "No title of Nobility shall be granted by the United States."' 
The second quotation is from a recent winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics, the University of Chicago's own Gary Becker. Here is how the second one goes: "An efficient marriage market"-now, this is personally relevant to some people here, I know, so please do listen: [A]n efficient marriage market assigns imputed income or "prices" to all participants that attract them to suitable polygamous or monogamous marriages. Imputed prices are also used to match men and women of different qualities: some participants... choose to be matched with "inferior" persons because they feel "superior" persons are too expensive.... 
[A]n efficient marriage market usually has positive assortative mating, where high-quality men are matched with high-quality women and low-quality men with low-quality women, although [and this makes it somewhat less depressing] negative assortative mating is sometimes important.2 
I think there is a connection between the quotation from the Constitution and the quotation from Gary Becker, and I hope this will emerge in the course of my comments. 
What I want to do is explore two claims and say something about their implications for law. 
The first claim is that we value things in different ways; that is to say, we value things not only in terms of intensity, but in qualitatively distinct ways. It is not simply the case that some things are valued more; it is also the case that some things are valued differently from others. That is my first claim, about different modes of valuation. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay was presented as the Robert L. Levine lecture at Fordham University School of Law. It has been lightly edited, and footnotes have been added, but it retains the form and style of the oral remarks. For a more formal and detailed presentation, see Cass R. Sunstein, Incommemesurabilityand Valuation in Law, 92 Mich. L. Rev. 779 (1994). 

1661 (Vol. 62 
The second claim is that human goods are not commensurable. This is to say that there is no available metric along which we can align the various goods that are important to us, and that any effort to come up with a metric, like utility or dollars, while nominally designed to aid human reasoning, actually makes human reasoning worse than what it is when it is working well. 
So the first claim has to do with diverse modes of valuation; the second has to do with incommensurability. I do think that these claims have important implications for law, though, unfortunately, it is not the case that these claims lead simply to particular recommendations. So I have to apologize in advance for saying that while these things bear on how legal problems are thought about, it is not true that they lead directly to particular outcomes. But by way of diminishing the level of abstraction, let me say something about the areas of law on which they do bear. 
In environmental law, it often seems as if there is a debate between economists and environmentalists, with economists acting as if they value the environment somewhat less than the fanatical environmentalists who value it a lot. It might be more accurate to say that economists and environmentalists value the environment in diferent ways, with economists thinking that the environment is for human exploitation and use, and environmentalists sometimes challenging that assumption. 
In debates over surrogacy and prostitution, I think it is very hard to make sense of very prominent current views within the law without noting the existence of an objection to surrogacy arrangements and prostitution that says that the way in which those transactions value sexuality and reproduction is unfortunate and deserving of disapproval. 
Many current debates over the role of religion in society have a lot to do with modes of valuation. A big decision the Clinton Administration has to make, I think in the next two weeks, is how to handle the ReaganBush Executive Order' on federal regulation, which moves cost/benefit analysis to the fore. How cost/benefit analysis is thought about has everything to do with modes of valuation. 
The talk will come in three parts: the first will have to do with modes of valuation; the second will discuss commensurability; the third, and longest, will have to do with law; here I will try to bring all of this down to earth. So if the stuff with which I am about to get going seems too abstract, I promise that the examples will come before terribly long. 
I have said that we value things in different ways, that goods are subject to diverse modes of valuation. 
Let's begin with a simple distinction between goods that are intrinsically valuable and goods that are instrumentally valuable. I think Scrooge is the only character I know for whom a dollar bill was intrinsically valuable. For the rest of us, a dollar bill is valuable for what it can do; it is not valuable in itself. Education is something that has both instrumental and intrinsic value; that is, it is valuable in itself and it is valuable for what it can do for you. If we knew somebody who thought that education was solely of instrumental value, it would seem quite strange. 
Goods like friendships are of intrinsic value; they are valuable for themselves and not valuable because of what they are an instrument to. 
So a first distinction is the distinction between instrumental and intrinsic value. 
The category of goods that have intrinsic value is itself quite diverse. There are goods that are intrinsically valuable that produce respect-an acquaintance might do that. There are goods that are intrinsically valuable that produce affection-a friendship. There are things that produce wonder or awe, like a great musical work or a mountain. There are things that produce gratitude or love. And there are things that are solely for use-our category of instrumental goods. 
So every day we make differences among modes of valuation. This is not simply true of good things; it is also true of bad things. Some things produce contempt; others produce anger and so forth. There is a wide range of negative and positive valuations. 
Somebody who didn't make distinctions among modes of valuation might seem really strange, like a character in a science fiction story, or obtuse. If you saw someone who had just pro or con attitudes without making these distinctions, it would be an odd figure indeed, though if we thought for a bit, we could probably think of fictional characters who fit that bill. 
What I want to suggest is that there isn't any super-concept-like happiness, or utility, or wealth maximization, or good-that can make sense out of our reflective evaluations in their diversity. That is to say, there isn't any big thing of which all these things are simply aspects. Any big thing that can be identified must allow room for the qualitative distinctions that modes of valuation embody. 
That is basically an outline of modes of valuation. Conflicts among modes of valuation are really pervasive. 
You can imagine an economist, let's say, who is working hard on a paper and who has scheduled lunch with an out-of-town friend. Let's suppose the economist would like to cancel the lunch, but feels bad about it because it is kind of disrespectful and inconvenient. Let's suppose the economist says to the friend, "I will compensate you- S20, 40, $80, $100, $160-for the cancellation." This would be an absurd response, though perhaps it has happened, and perhaps the so-called victim was, on balance, happy as a result. It would be an absurd response because the payment of cash as compensation for his cancellation of lunch is inconsistent with the way someone values a friend. It is not, I think, quite right to say that the cash is less valuable than the lunch; in fact, if we are talking about aggregates and amounts, the cash might well be less valuable than the lunch. It is that the payment of cash is inconsistent with the way the lunch is valued, and that's what makes it seem like an insult. 
I think that this somewhat absurd example helps with an extraordinary array of cases in which social norms or attitudes or law block the use of dollars as a mechanism for doing some sort of exchange work. Let me just give some examples. 
If an adult neighbor asks another adult neighbor to mow his or her lawn for a fee, it would probably be perceived as an insult, as if the adult neighbor is being treated as a servant rather than as a person worthy of respect. To offer the dollars is turning the neighbor into someone for your use. 
If someone says to you, "I will pay you a lot of money if you go out of town and leave your family for two months," you might do it, but it would seem awful. On the other hand, if an employer says, "As part of this job you have to leave for a month or two, that is part of what the job is"-it's called employment with a New York law firm, let's say-it might be okay. I think that the difference between the two cases is that in one case, absence from family is being sought by the employer, socalled, as a good to be promoted for its own sake; whereas in the other case, the absence is brought about as a kind of by-product of a job. 
The movie "Indecent Proposal" is all about this-the use of dollars as a way of turning someone into a sexual object and what that does to a relationship. To get a little closer to law, suppose that in a case of environmental protection, we are trying to figure out how much to value a mountain. If a certain number of dollars is assigned to protection of the mountain, which is almost certainly a fine thing to do, it might well be jarring to say, in a kind of very simple way, "The mountain is really worth, say, two million dollars." That is jarring, I think, because the way the dollars are valued is different from the way the mountain is valued. The mountain is valued as something worthy of respect for some, or maybe awe and wonder for others, and dollars, though maybe deserving a kind of wonder and awe, get a different kind of wonder and awe from a mountain. 
I think this issue is all over the current debate with respect to surrogacy arrangements, so-called "baby selling," and prostitution. Judge Posner has suggested a market in babies in writing that perhaps (in my view unfortunately) disqualifies him for appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States.4 The argument is very provocative and interesting. One thing it doesn't quite pick up on is the possibility that the way babies are valued is inconsistent with trading them on markets, and that is undoubtedly part of the horror at the public reaction to the proposal. 

I have given many examples in which dollar trading of things is inconsistent with the mode of valuation of those intrinsic goods. But this is not simply a problem for money. If someone treated a cat in the same way that ordinary people treat a spouse, or if someone treated a diamond in the way that most people treat an animal, something odd would be going on. Quite apart from the issue of financial equivalence, people make distinctions in modes of valuation in their reactions to goods or events. 
In lots of areas involving suggested political or legal changes, there is an issue with respect to modes of valuation. We cannot describe the shift from feudalism to capitalism in a sentence, but one thing that happened in that shift was a transition from one mode of valuation to another. With respect to the legal attack on segregation and slavery, a reform occurred in which people who were formerly for other people's use and control were seen as entitled to equal respect. With respect to the exclusion of religious convictions from the public realm, something that seems to have occurred in the last twenty years, sometimes at least, is that certain modes of valuation are being ruled off limits to politics.' 
The movement for animal rights presents a lot of puzzles. This isn't at all the place to come to closure on that complicated issue. But the movement for animal rights might be best taken as suggesting that animals are entitled to either respect or consideration, and not to be treated as something for human exploitation and use. What the movement for animal rights is trying to do is to shift the mode of valuation and not only the intensity or quantity of valuation. 
I have one more notation on modes of valuation and then we are on to commensurability. It often happens in a first-year class that there will be some question raised about the value of a life or a house, and some student will rebel against the effort to monetize, at which point an instructor or another student will say, "Well, that means you must think the life or the house is infinitely valuable," at which point the debate is over. It works as a laugh line and as a decisive objection. I think that victorythe infinite valuation point-is unearned. Often what the student is saying, in the resistance to monetization, is not about infinite value, but about the fact that things are valued in different ways. If the student says that, he or she has to explain a lot. The conversation is hardly concluded, but at least we can start to understand what it is that he or she is getting at. 
So much for modes of valuation. 
INCOMMENSURABILITY 
By "incommensurability," I mean to suggest that some human goods cannot be aligned along a single metric without doing violence to our considered judgments about how those goods are best characterized and experienced. By this I mean that if you develop a single metric, like dollars, by which to align things, you will often do violence to your own judgments about how those things are best understood. 
Here is a story. At an academic conference, a friend of mine was buying a present for his daughter at a bookstore which also had presents for kids. He was somewhat embarrassed to be buying a present for his daughter at an academic conference. He said, "I'm purchasing goodwill." Now, he loved his daughter and he wasn't purchasing goodwill, but he was translating into the terms of commensurability what it was that he was doing; he was acting as if what he was doing was partaking of monetary exchange. 
This is a jarring description. By telling the story, I mean to suggest is that sometimes there is no single metric available by which to order our assessments of various different goods. This is not to say that judgments among incommensurable goods are irrational or not subject to reasoned valuation. We decide all the time whether to take a job in one city or another, whether to do one thing or another during the evening, whether to take a vacation or not. Often incommensurable goods are at stake and judgments are made, and they can be reasonable or not. I am suggesting that if these various goods are aligned on a single metric, then we are doing violence to our best characterizations of what those things are. 
It would not be conceptually impossible to make things commensurable-to line up, for example, vacation and work, or being with family or not, along a single metric, to use something like utility or dollars in order to get analysis going. Mill, the great utilitarian, was extremely tortured on the commensurability point. But this would be a way of doing violence, I think, to the way we really think about these things. 
There is a relationship between my claim that there are diverse modes of valuation and my claim about incommensurability, but I want just to bracket that for a moment; to say a few more words about incommensurability, and then to get to some specifics. 
One point about incommensurability is that in its most extreme form, it blocks certain reasons for action completely. Sometimes the existence of incommensurability rules off-limits certain bases for doing things that are on-limits in other places. Consider what might happen if a parent is asked, "For how much would you sell your child?" It is not as if the parent is insulted because the amount is too low; it is not as if one is asked, "Could I buy your suit for a dollar?" It is not as if the amount seems scandalously low. It's as if there is something extremely inappropriate about entertaining the choice at all. 
This is also the case, I think, in areas of constitutional rights, where Ronald Dworkin describes rights as "trumps," 6 and where the Supreme Court says administrative convenience is not a basis for intruding on a 
CONFLICTING VALUES IN LAW1 fundamental right.7 I think our notion of what rights are is inflected, at least, with an understanding that they cannot be compromised for certain kinds of reasons, as well as that they cannot be compromised unless the reason is very strong. You have to have a certain sort of reason as well as a reason of a certain level of intensity. 
Some of the most interesting cases of incommensurability are ones in which the existence of no single metric makes certain reasons for action, like the acceptance of dollars, wholly illegitimate as a basis for action. But incommensurability is not just a barrier to action; it also makes possible certain valuable human relations. Without incommensurability, our understanding of what a friendship is, or what it means to be a parent, or what a beach is, would be compromised badly. So we ought not to think of the existence of incommensurability as simply an obstacle. It is also freedom-promoting, in the sense that it makes possible certain valuable human connections and relationships. 
Some people think that claims of this sort-and I am going to stay abstract just for a moment longer-are not so important because it is equally accurate to say that certain things are valued a whole lot more than others. It is just as accurate to say things are valued more than others as it is to say that they are valued differently. The philosopher Donald Regan writes that, "when someone refuses to sell friendship for dollars, I think what such a person is most likely to mean is that friendship is more valuable than any amount of money, or, in other words, that the value of friendship is in comparably greater."' Says Regan, "When someone refuses to sell a child, it is closer to the truth to say that we regard the value of parenthood as incomparably greater than the value of money than to say that we regard these values as incommensurable." 9 
Regan is suggesting that these cases are best made sense of by saying that some things we value a lot, and in his view, it clouds things to say that they are valued differently. I think that Regan's challenge to incommensurability-as a description of what people mean and what they experience-is unsuccessful. It is possible to imagine someone who thinks that the value of parenthood or friendship is much higher than dollars and not that the value is different from dollars, but it would be a strange person if his assessment of why the child would not be sold was really, "I just like this child a lot more than even ten million dollars, even ten billion dollars." In other words, part of what it means to be a parent is to rule off-limits, even as a consideration, the exchange of the relationship for dollars. 
I promised I was going to get more concrete, and I am about to. Now I'm going to talk about law. 
Two qualifications. It is not the case that law automatically maps, or 
Freedom, 62 S. Cal. L. Rev. 995, 1058 (1989). 
translates our best valuations into, legal requirements. We might think, for example, that there is something about prostitution that is debasing to human sexuality, and so it is good to have a social norm that says that prostitution is not the preferred sexual mode. But we might think, at the same time, that the law ought not to ban prostitution. It would be perfectly reasonable to say that surrogacy arrangements are not the best way of producing children, but the law won't ban that. So one might think that the legal system ought not to do what social norms do. 
My other qualification is this: I am going to go now over a wide range of areas of law and suggest how these issues might bear on current legal disputes, without attempting at all to resolve these issues. I am going to sacrifice depth for breadth. 
The unifying theme has to do with what we might call the expressive function of law. By the expressive function of law, I mean not simply the social consequences of law, which are what are typically described, but also what sorts of values the law expresses. This, I think, plays a tacit role in lots of legal debates. 
For example, there is a lot of work among economists and some lawyers about whether the antidiscrimination laws of the 1960s actually changed the world at all. Are the lives of black people better off because of those laws? Some people think that the evidence is not fully in. If what I am about to say is right, it still counts in favor of those laws that they express an appropriate valuation of the role of skin color in human relations-even if we cannot show and do not know whether those laws have resulted in higher welfare for the groups they are intended to benefit. That is to say that the values that the law expresses are themselves of interest independent of the direct social consequences. 
We should break up this idea of the expressive function of law into two different notions. The first is that we might care about the expressive function of law because the value the law expresses will itself have consequences for social attitudes. If it is the case that prostitution is regularly admitted into society, it might be that social attitudes will shift in a way that is unfortunate. 
I think a lot of debate over such things as affirmative action, capital punishment, surrogacy arrangements, prostitution, and drug legalization have to do with the social effects of the mode of valuation that law expresses. And here we are talking about consequences: Is the expression of an appropriate mode, in a way that will affect social attitudes for the better or for the worse? 
But there is another notion which is not quite about effects on social attitudes. Here I have a quotation for you that grabbed me while I was writing this paper. It is a quotation from a civil rights demonstrator in the 1960s: 
If I had known that not a single lunch counter would open as a result of my action I could not have done differently than I did. If I had known violence would result, I could not have done differently than I 
did. I am thankful for the sit-ins if for no other reason than that they provided me with an opportunity for making a slogan into reality, by turning a decision into an action. It seems to me that this is what life is all about.10 
Now, this is a very stark version of the expressive function of law-the notion that the valuation that law expresses is worth attention independent of social consequences. In this lies the stuff of fanaticism, so one wants to be cautious about the endorsement of the law's expressive function quite apart from social consequences. But I think it is hard to get a full handle on legal debates without seeing that the expressive functioneven in this stark, totally nonconsequential sense-is part of what the debates are about. 
Now for some specifics. In our society, the law carves up the world into different social spheres: politics, religion, family, labor unions, markets. One way to get a handle on what is done through this legal differentiation is to see it as a way a liberal society-"liberal" in the old sense-makes space for different modes of valuation. The family is typically the sphere for affection and love; religion is the sphere for devotion; the market is the sphere for use; politics is the sphere for the exchange of reasons. 
Social criticism often consists of saying that one sphere does not live up to its aspiration; that the family, nominally a sphere for love, is actually a sphere for domination; or that politics, nominally a sphere for the exchange of reasons, is actually a place where money and use are very important. I do not mean to question these possibilities. All I mean to suggest is that social differentiation in this really critical sense is best understood as an effort to make space for different evaluative modes. 
The Establishment Clause of the Constitution is very hard to make sense out of. What social work is it doing, in saying that the government cannot establish an official religion? As it has come to be understood, one thing that it does is to exclude from the political realm a certain mode of valuation which is perfectly acceptable in the private realm, that is, one of devotion to a deity. That mode of valuation-let's call it worship-is acceptable privately; but it has no role in the public sphere. The Establishment Clause, I think, at its inception and now is best understood as excluding a mode of valuation from political life. 
The Equal Protection Clause can be seen as a big generalization of the titles of nobility clause with which I began. It has a similar aspiration. At least one of the things the equal protection clause is trying to do is to say that modes of valuation that reflect inadequate respect for blacks or women are not an acceptable part of political debate. An effort to pass a law because of a belief that one group is below another is systematically out of bounds. 
The Supreme Court has placed an emphasis on the legitimacy of rea10. James Miller, "Democracy is in the Streets" 52 (1987). sons for governmental action. 1 A literacy test that is disguised to produce good electors is fine; a literacy test that it supposed to exclude blacks is not fine. 12 If all we cared about is consequences, it might not be extremely easy to make sense out of that. Consequentialists are very agile; but I think we do not make full sense out of what is happening in the area of equality law without seeing that the mode of valuation is crucial to judicial determinations of whether the equality norm is violated. 
In the law of environmental protection, there are a lot of puzzles. Recently, Americans were asked whether they agreed with the statement that "the environment is more important than anything and worth protecting regardless of the cost." Guess how many Americans said yes? Eighty percent. 3 
In response to surveys, when people are asked, "How much would you have to be paid in order to allow degradation of a park or the air of a certain percentage?" over half refused to answer.' 4 If people are asked, "How much would you pay to allow continued existence of the park, or continued existence of an endangered species?" they will give an amount that it is not always that high. But if they are asked how much would they have to be paid, they say something like, "Get out of here, surveyor. I don't answer those questions." 
If we look at our cost/benefit charts-expenditures per life savedthere are wild disparities, ranging from about zero dollars per life saved to the billions."' One regulation apparently cost over a trillion dollars per life saved-a pretty dumb regulation. 
I think that it is not easy to make sense out of this without adverting to the fact that people are often saying things that suggest that the way they value the environment is inconsistent with exchange for cash straight up. Now again, this is not a claim for infinite valuation of the environment. It is a claim that one can get some purchase on the seemingly weird results by attending to what people actually say when they start to spell these things out-which has to do not with infinite valuation, but different kinds of valuation of what it is that the environment is for. When they say such things as, "No amount of money would be compensation for the extinction of a species," they are talking quite the way parents would if asked how much they would have to be paid to give up their daughter. 
If this is right, the problem with cost/benefit analysis is not that it is distributionally wrong, or that it is inferior to the status quo; it is probably better than the status quo of crazy quilt patterns and irrational regulations. The problem with cost-benefit analysis is that it is obtuse. It is obtuse because it does not disaggregate its various ingredients and allow participants in the democratic process a full picture of the differently valued goods that are at stake. If you are told that the cost/benefit analysis for an OSHA regulation has flunked, you know much too little. What is important to know is what those numbers represent. Do they mean more unemployment, more poverty, or higher food prices? A more disaggregated picture of consequences, while more unruly, would give a better account. 
All this does not just relate to public law; it relates to private law, too. In the law of contracts, courts sometimes give specific performance remedies; that is, not dollar damages but a right to the thing itself. I guess Kim Bassinger was almost compelled to do a specific performance for a movie that has been released with another actress. 
Here a real puzzle in Anglo-American law: When is specific performance granted? For economists, this quite a puzzle. The conventional answer is that specific performance is granted when the thing in questionlet's say it is a painting or a piece of land-has value to the plaintiff that is too hard for courts to assess, so the costs of assessment are so high that the courts will order specific performance. 16 
There is undoubtedly something to that, but I do not think it is the whole picture. I think part of what is going on when the court orders, "You deliver the painting or the land," is that the court is thinking that the person is entitled not to something that is valued as much as the thing for which he or she contracted; the plaintiff is entitled to something that is valued in the same way as the thing for which he or she contracted. The insistence on specific performance remedies in various areas of contract law has to do with the difficulty of thinking of compensatory remedies, in terms of dollars, as really restoring a status quo ante. 
If that is right, it has large implications for thinking about tort law and contract law, where it is usually thought that the purpose of the law is to restore the plaintiff to the position he would have occupied if not for the injury. It might be the case that this view is not quite accurate; that the restoration of the status quo ante is not feasible; and that what the law is doing if specific performance is not available is something different. 
I have two more notations to make. One is about feminism and the other is about legal reasoning. 
For feminism, I have two quotations for you. Richard Rorty, the philosopher, has paraphrased Catharine MacKinnon very prominently as saying that "being a woman is not yet a way of being a human being."' 7 
Mike Tyson, the boxer, during his rape trial, and this was widely quoted-even more widely quoted than Richard Rorty or Catharine MacKinnon-Mike Tyson said, "I love women." I wanted to find that and cite it, speculating that something more interesting than appears might be at work. I put it in the computer and I got, for just a two-year period, 125 references to the words "I love women," many of them involving men accused of sexual harassment or sexual assault. 
I think that there is a connection between the Tyson quotation and the MacKinnon quotation. I do not think Tyson was lying. I think he was reflecting a mode of valuation which is sincere. I think at work in Rorty's paraphrase of MacKinnon is a claim that women are typically valued either for use or through love and not sufficiently through respect or in ways that human beings deserve to be valued, that is, for their dignity. 
I think a lot of feminism in law has to do with an insistence that the typical modes of valuation, having to do with intense affection or use, are not adequate and that respect or dignity ought to be the substitutes. This claim obviously bears on-even if it does not resolve-such matters as the distribution of work within marriage, abortion, prostitution and surrogacy, sexual harassment, and much, much more. 
Many of the debates over surrogacy and prostitution have to do with the claim that women's sexual and reproductive capacities are being turned into objects for the use and control of others, in ways that are inconsistent with law's appropriate expressive function. 
LEGAL REASONING 
In many places analogical reasoning is not popular. Much more popular is top-down reasoning: here is a desirable end-let's call it efficiency, or utility, or equality, or dignity, or something else-and let's use the specified value to work problems through. Analogical reasoning is not now treated with much dignity, though it is the stock in trade of the lawyer. 
A famous if perhaps apocryphal story at the University of Chicago goes like this: Edward Levi was the Dean of the University of Chicago, and his great book is actually a tribute to analogical reasoning.'" When he was Dean, Levi also helped introduce law and economics into the legal culture. The way he did this was to have a fellow named Aaron Director, who never published much but was really very influential, come in and teach every fifth antitrust class. The way the story goes, Levi would spend four brilliant classes doing analogical reasoning. Did he have a theory? No. But he certainly could manipulate the cases. Director would come in the fifth class and show that what Levi had been doing made no sense. Director had a theory. By the end, the story goes, even Levi was converted. 
This is something that has happened in many places in the legal culture, and in many different areas of law. In antitrust, Director may well have rightly converted everyone, but it is not clear that the victory has been earned everywhere. The analogical thinker is unequipped with and unburdened by a unitary conception of the good or the right; he is alert to particulars; and he is able to see the diverse modes of valuation at stake in many legal disputes. It may well be in some areas of the lawtorts is a candidate, free speech is another candidate-a plurality of values is at stake. Precisely because the analogical thinker does not have a top-down theory, but instead is open to the possibility of plural and diverse theories of value, the analogical thinker has something to be said on his or her behalf. 
It is time to conclude. I have not said much about the important issue of choice-that is, choice between modes of valuation and among incommensurable goods. I have asserted, and I want to assert it once more, that some decisions are reasonable and others not, so one ought not to identify incommensurability with reasonlessness or indeterminacy. 
But I do want to say that the loss of diverse modes of valuation would be for the legal culture as for the political culture, something of a tragedy, not least because it would make the very notion of tragedy puzzling or even incomprehensible. 
I have a quotation from Mill and then a final note. The quotation from Mill comes from his "Essay on Bentham." Mill thought that Bentham was like a one-eyed man. Because he had only one eye, he could see farther than anybody else, but he could not see everything that other people see. Wrote Mill: 
Nothing is more curious than the absence of recognition in any of his writings of the existence of conscience, as a thing distinct from philanthropy, from affection for God or man, and from sel-interest in this world or in the next.... 
Nor is it only the moral part of man's nature.., that he overlooks; he but faintly recognises, as a fact in human nature, the pursuit of any other ideal end for its own sake. The sense of honour, and personal dignity.., the love of beauty, the passion of the artist; the love of order .. .the love action, the thirst for movement and activity.... the love of ease:-None of these powerful constituents of human nature are thought worthy of a place. .... 9 
My largest suggestion is that an insistence on diverse modes of valuation may be one of the most important lessons that emerges from the study of public and private law. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 14 
(2D SERIES) ENDOGENOUS PREFERENCES, ENVIRONMENTAL LAW 
How can we explain the rise of environmental law? By what criteria should we evaluate regulation of pollution? Why do some cities require recycling? Should we tax waste disposal instead? Should we subsidize mass transit in order to reduce automobile pollution, or should we regulate cars? Why do we do one rather than another? 
In the last generation, considerable progress has been made on all of these questions. Most of the progress results from the application of varieties or offshoots of welfare economicsexpected utility theory, social and public choice theory, and game theoryto environmental problems. If we assume, for example, that participants in the political process are trying to maximize their utility, we can help explain many oddities of American environmental law. We can see why some statutes seem to benefit regional interests.1 We can understand why old pollution sources are regulated more severely than new ones.2 We can see why Congress enacts measures that are expensive and only moderately helpful to the environment, but that promise to deliver large benefits to wellorganized groups.3 Perhaps most important, we can understand the omnipresence of largely symbolic environmental legislationmeasures that appear on their face to promise vigorous and even draconian regulation, but that in the enforcement process amount to little more than mere words. The pervasive paradox of rigid but underenforced environmental legislation may well match the electoral self-interest of legislators.4 
*Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful for very helpful comments from Douglas Baird, Gary Becker, William Landes, Martha Nussbaum, Randall Picker, and Richard Posner, and from participants in a workshop at the California Institute of Technology. Gabriel Gore provided excellent research assistance. For financial support I am grateful to The Russell Baker Scholars Fund and The James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. 
2This approach is pervasive in environmental law. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. 7475; 42 U.S.C. 7411; 33 U.S.C. 
With similar tools, we can also think about how best to protect the environment.5 Many people do want a cleaner environmentto protect life, health, recreational opportunities, endangered species, and so forth. Many people want other things as well, including lower prices, less poverty, and greater employment. In light of the plurality of goods at stake, it is familiarly suggested that we might try to achieve the optimal level of environmental protection, understanding the notion of optimality by reference to peoples real desires. This approach might claim a salutary neutrality among diverse goods and among different conceptions of the good. It takes people and preferences simply as they are. 
Approaches of this general sort have provided illuminating work on the genesis of state and federal environmental law. No predictive tool has similar power, and if we want to understand the structure of environmental regulation, much progress remains to be made through use of the same analytic strategies. On the normative side, things are more complex. But at least it seems fair to say that we now lack an alternative framework for normative thinking in the environmental area that can claim to combine the virtues of real-world administrability and substantive plausibility. The extraordinary influence of welfare economics in the regulatory sector of the federal government6 is undoubtedly at least in part attributable to this fact. 
At the same time, the last decade has witnessed a number of intriguing qualifications, refinements, or criticisms of rational actor models, coming mostly from economists, but also from philosophers, political scientists, and psychologists.7 Some of the work involves anomalies of various sorts. The institutional implications of these qualifications and refinements are only beginning to receive sustained elaboration.8 My principal goal in this essay is to identify some of those implications in the distinctive context of environmental regulation. Some of the apparently normative challenges to rational actor models turn out to have important positive implications. The challenges point to facts about human behavior and motivation that help explain some of American environmental law, and indeed do so in a way that might add much to the descriptive and predictive work of existing approaches. My particular interest is in the endogeneity of preferences and the social demand for regulation, which turns out to have peculiar dimensions. 
Throughout the paper, I will attempt to show how qualifications of rational actor models generate testable hypotheses, and to explore whether such qualifications offer plausible ways to understand the odd shape of current environmental policies.9 In many cases, however, our current tools do not enable us to sort out the role of plausible but competing explanations for regulatory phenomena. An important task for the future, both conceptual and empirical, is to develop better strategies for assessing causal explanations that although strikingly different, would produce similar outcomes. Moreover, some challenges to preference satisfaction as a normative ideal have unusual characteristics in the environmental area. It is worth elaborating on those characteristics. 
The paper is organized into four sections. The first suggests that there is sometimes no such thing as a fully acontextual preference and that preferences are endogenous to existing legal policy, including the setting of the legal Economic Way of Looking at Life, University of Chicago, Law & Economics Working Paper No. 12, pp. 1519 (1993). A helpful collection is Rationality in Action (Paul Moser ed. 1990), especially Part IB. 
8A leading essay is Roger Noll & James Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud. 747 (1990). See generally Herbert Hovenkamp, Legal Policy and the Endowment Effect, 20 J. Legal Stud 225 (1991); Elizabeth Hoffman & Matthew Spitzer, The Divergence Between Willingness-to-Pay and Willingness-to-Accept Measures of Value, Wash. U. L. Q. (forthcoming); Elizabeth Anderson, Some Problems in the Normative Theory of Rational Choice, With Consequences for Empirical Research (Univ. of Mich., Dept. of Philosophy, unpublished manuscript). See also Gary Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life, University of Chicago, Law & Economics Working Paper No. 12, at 19 (1993): An important step in extending the traditional analysis of individual rational choice is to incorporate into the theory a much richer class of attitudes, preferences, and calculations. 9I have discussed some of these issues elsewhere, but with a view to normative rather than positive issues. See Cass R. Sunstein, Preferences and Politics, 20 Phil. & Pub. AV. 3 (1991); Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution ch. 6 (1993). In this essay, I stress positive issues, and in a number of places extend or qualify some of my earlier normative claims. Except for a brief section of Part II, I do not discuss the important distorting effect of various heuristics used to assess risk. See Noll & Krier, supra note 8; W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs ch. 7 (1992). The use of these heuristics also has important positive and normative implications. entitlement. This point helps both to explain legislative outcomes and to unsettle some common views about environmental protection on the predictive and normative sides.10 
The second section claims that private preferences for environmental goods may be adaptive to existing environmental options, and that this can sometimes help explain the social demand for regulation and also impeach the preferences that serve as inputs into environmental decisions. The second section also briefly describes the role of the availability heuristic, intrapersonal collective action problems, and the phenomenon of social cascades. 
The third section argues that there may be a disparity between private consumption choices and collective judgments, as these are expressed in politics. Partly because of some unusual free-rider problems, preferences may be endogenous to the setting in which they are expressed, and in a way that casts additional doubt on the assumption that preferences can be taken as acontextual. 
The fourth and most speculative section argues that people may not always think that there is commensurability between environmental quality and the things against which this good must be traded off. The social resistance to commensurability helps explain some apparent oddities in the demand for legislation and in public thinking about environmental problems. I also suggest that despite its apparent oddity, the resistance to commensurability is plausible as a normative matter. The assumption that environmental and other goods can be assessed along the same metric does violence to some of our considered judgments about how (not how much) to value pristine areas, species, and other environmental amenities. 
a. Prefatory note and overview. 
fail to deal, with environmental issues. ( problems, conventionally defined. This is a usual understanding of the state of affairs under the common law. (2) It may actually solve collective action problems, conventionally defined. This is a part of the optimistic, public interest account of environmental legislation. ( power of well-organized private groups, redistributing wealth in their favor 10I do not discuss the normative issues associated with the criterion of private willingness to pay, which is often said to be crudely correlated with utility. Despite its crudeness, it might be used because of (a) the difficulty of finding other proxies that are realistically usable by policy makers and (b) the wellknown (though in my view overstated) difficulty of making intrapersonal comparisons of utility. On the latter issue, see Interpersonal Comparisons of Well-Being (Jon Elster and John Roemer eds. 1991). while failing to improve and perhaps even impairing social welfare. This view is prominent in public choice theory. (4) It may be relatively chaotic and arbitrary, reflecting the order in which issues arise rather than aggregating preferences in an accurate way or embodying any coherent social judgment about the public good. This possibility, discussed in political science and economic writing following Arrows impossibility theorem,11 has been infrequently explored in the regulatory and environmental setting. ( deliberation among citizens and representatives in which private preferences for environmental amenities are transformed and shaped through exposure to new information and new perspectives. 
possibilities. For example, ( easily test whether some measure claimed to be ( keep these possibilities in mind while thinking about both the positive and normative issues. 
In this section, I argue that sometimes there are no acontextual preferences with which to do normative or positive work. Preferences can be a function of the initial allocation of the legal entitlement. valuation of environmental goods is sometimes an artifact of law. When this is so, policy makers cannot simply identify preferences and try to satisfy them, since the preferences are influenced by law, and since there is no way to identify the preferences that would exist in the absence of law. 
b. A conceptual problem. 
The initial problem is that it may be impossible to describe something as a preference without undertaking some controversial normative tasks. Suppose someone decides not to recycle all newspapers, or to vote against a law requiring recycling. This preference might be understood as simply a choice, as in the idea of the revealed preference. It is of course illuminating to catalogue and explain choices. But if this is what we are doing, it is unnecessary and perhaps misleading to use the notion of a preference, which seems to be intended to explain or to back something called choices. If preferences are reducible to choices, we can dispense with the idea entirely. But if we do this, much of the explanatory value of expected utility and rational choice theory will be lost,12 since it will be necessary to give up on the notion of an underlying causal relationship between choices and internal mental states. An important goal of rational choice theory has been to help show how choices connect with preferences, defined independently of choices. It would be unfortunate to have to dispense with this goal. 
On the other hand, the notion of a preference is often meant to refer to not to choices themselves, but to something that lies behind and accounts for choices.13 But this idea introduces difficulties of its own, difficulties that the revealed preference idea was intended to overcome. What is this thing called a preference"? Is it a steady mental state? A physical entity? How can it be identified or even described? In light of the extraordinary complexity of internal mental statesincluding whims, second-order preferences, aspirations, judgments, drives of various kinds, and so forthit is not simple to identity a preference as something that stands behind choices and explains them. In the environmental area, the problem is serious. For example, a decision not to recycle is a choice, but the relationship between that choice and an independent entity called a preference is often obscure. I will not belabor these complex matters here,14 and will instead proceed as if it were possible to overcome the relevant difficulties. 
c. The Coase theorem and the endowment effect. 
With respect to environmental issues, it is natural to begin with the Coase theorem.15 Notably, the theorem was originally developed in the context of an environmental problem arising in the law of tort. Coases conclusion was of course that in the absence of transaction costs, the initial assignment of a legal entitlement will be irrelevant to (a) the ultimate use of property or (b) the level of the relevant activities. The theorem suggests, for example, that where transaction costs are zero, it does not matter whether an entitlement is given to breathers or to polluters, to railroads or to farmers. The two will in any case bargain to a result which is both efficient and (more striking) the same. 
It should be plain that the Coase theorem (like most illuminating work in economics) takes preferences as both static and given. This is a key feature of the claim that the ultimate use of property, and ultimate activity levels, are unaffected by the allocation of the entitlement. 
13See George Stigler & Gary Becker, De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum, 67 Am. Econ. Rev. 76 (1977). 14Some of these issues are discussed in Amartya Sen, supra, note 12; Elizabeth Anderson, Some Problems in the Normative Theory of Rational Choice (University of Michigan, Department of Philosophy, unpublished manuscript 1991); Jean Hampton, The Failure of Expected Utility Theory as a Theory of Reason (University of Arizona, Department of Philosophy, unpublished manuscript 1992). 
But insofar as the theorem says that the result will be the same independently of the legal rule, it rests on an intriguingly false assumption, one that suggest that it may sometimes be impossible for government to take preferences as they are. The problem is that whether people have a preference for a good, a right, or anything else is often in part a function of whether the government, or the law, has allocated it to them in the first instance. There is simply no way to avoid the task of initially allocating a legal entitlement,16 at least short of anarchy (the only system without initial allocations). What people have is partly a product of what the law protects. And with respect to environmental amenities, what people have is, simply as a matter of fact, a creation of legally-conferred rights.17 
The key point is that the decision to grant an entitlement to A rather than B can affect the valuations of that entitlement by both A and B. More specifically, the initial grant of the entitlement to A frequently makes A value that entitlement more than he would if the right had been allocated to B. (It also makes B value it less than he otherwise would.18) The initial allocationthe legal rule saying who owns what, before people begin to contract with one anotherserves to create, to legitimate, and to reinforce social understandings about presumptive rights of ownership. That allocation can help produce individual perceptions about the entitlement in question.19 It should be clear that if this is so, the demand for environmental regulation will be importantly affected by the initial allocation. 
16When a loss is left where it falls in an auto accident, it is not because God so ordained it. Rather it is because the state has granted the injurer an entitlement to be free of liability and will intervene to prevent the victims friends, if they are stronger, from taking compensation from the injurer. . . . [A]n entitlement to a good or to its converse is essentially inevitable. We either are entitled to have silence or entitled to make noise in a given set of circumstances. We either have the right to our own property or body or the right to share others property or bodies. We may buy or sell ourselves into the opposite position, but we must start somewhere. Guido Calabresi & A. Douglas Melamed, Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral, 85 Harv. L. Rev. 1089, 1091, 1100-1101 (1972). 
17I am not speaking here of wealth effects, to which Coase does refer. See Ronald Coase, The Firm, the Market, and the Law 170-74 (1988). Wealth effects consist of the consequences for social demand of shifts in wealth brought about by the allocation of the entitlement. In most real-world cases, it has been persuasively argued that wealth effects are likely to be small. See R.D. Willig, Consumers Surplus Without Apology, 66 Am. Econ. Rev. 589 (1976), though the point is controversial, see note 36 infra. The empirical work on endowment effects has shown consequences for willingness to pay that do not depend on material changes in wealth. See citations in notes 20 & 26 infra. There is thus an important difference between wealth effects and endowment effects. They are not equivalent phenomena. 
18The popular notion that the grass is always greener suggests that preferences may be strongest for things to which people do not have entitlements; but there is apparently no empirical support for this intuitively plausible view. 
19I do not claim that private preferences are always an artifact of law. In some cases, people order their affairs on the basis of social norms that operate independently of law, and the preferences that undergird those norms are not legally constructed. See Robert Ellickson, Order Without Law (1991). 
The effect on preferences of the initial allocation of a commodity or an entitlement is commonly described as the endowment effect.20 The endowment effect suggests that any initial allocation of an entitlementand government cannot refuse to make an initial allocationmay well have effects on preferences. 
considerable empirical confirmation, often in the context of environmental amenities. Studies based on survey research have found endowment effects in many settings. One such study found that people would demand about five times as much to allow destruction of trees in a park as they would pay to prevent the destruction of those same trees.21 When hunters were questioned about the potential destruction of a duck habitat, they said that they would be willing to pay an average of $247 to prevent the lossbut would demand no less than $1044 to accept it.22 In another study, participants required payments to accept degradation of visibility ranging from 5 to more than 16 times higher than their valuations based on how much they were willing to pay to prevent the same degradation23 According to yet another study, the compensation demanded for accepting a new risk of immediate death of .001% was one or two orders of magnitude higher than the amount of willingness to pay to eliminate an existing risk of the same magnitude. 
A related survey showed similarly large status quo biases in willingness to pay for changes in risks. Thus only 39% of respondents would accept $700 to have their chance of a serious accident increased by 0.5% (from 0.5% to 1.0%); the substantial majority of 61% would refuse the trade. By contrast, only 27% would trade an identical decrease in accident risk (from 1% to 0.5%) for $700; here an even larger majority of 73% would refuse to do. In another study, people were willing to pay $3.78 on average to decrease the risk from an insecticide, but 77% refused to buy the product at any price, however reduced, if the risk level would increase by an equivalent amount.24 In short: A powerful status quo bias affects reactions to environmental risks or losses.25 
There are of course notorious problems with survey evidence, which is hardly a reliable guide to real-world behavior. But experimental studies reveal similar effects. For example, a recent study showed that people who were given certain objectspens, coffee mugs, and binocularsplaced a much higher valuation on those objects than did those who were required to purchase them. People initially given such things required a relatively high price from would-be purchasers; people not initially given such things would over a relatively low price to wouldbe sellers.26 No such effects were observed for money tokens in otherwise identical experiments. 
A similar study gave some participants a mug and others a chocolate bar, and told members of both groups they could exchange one for the other. Participants in a third group, not given either, were told that they could select one or the other; 56% of these selected the candy bar. By contrast, 89% of those initially given the mug refused to trade it for the candy bar, and only 10% of those initially given the candy were willing to trade it for the mug.27 The different evaluations apparently could not be explained by reference to anything other than the initial endowment. 
Another experiment found a significant disparity between willingness to accept (WTA) and willingness to pay (WTP) in the especially interesting context of irreversible choices about preserving species and other environmental amenities. In one experiment, the authors tried to ascertain the existence value of a houseplant that grows like a pine tree. The subjects were told that any trees not sold or kept would be killed at the end of the experiment. The mean willingness to pay to avoid the kill option was $7.81. The mean willingness to accept payment to allow a tree to be killed was $18.43.28 
27Knetch, supra note 26. 
In some studies, the disparity between WTA and WTPthe extent of the endowment effectappears to diminish with repeated participation in a market. But it rarely disappears entirely, and many studies show that the disparity persists.29 The range of the disparity appears to vary from slight disparities to a ratio of more than four to one, with WTA usually doubling WTP. In field studies, environmental goods tend to reflect a disparity of factors from two to over ten.30 In some environmental experiments involving trees, the WTA/WTP ratio is extraordinarily high, ranging between 60/1 and 90/1.31 
higher value on rights or goods that they currently hold than they place on the same goods when in the hands of others. The disparity is puzzling; but there are many possible explanations. 
Some studies suggest that that assignment creates the basic reference state from which judgments of fairness are subsequently made, and those judgments affect preferences and private willingness to pay.32 On this account, people perceive things as fair if they stay close to the status quo, and judgments of fairness connect to preferences. An especially influential approach to the endowment effect stresses loss aversion, which refers to the fact that a negative change from the status quo is usually seen as more harmful than a positive change is seen as beneficial. Here too there is a status quo bias.33 
Perhaps, too, people prefer what they have to what they might have because of psychological attachments to existing allocations. Endowment effects may thus reflect an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance. High valuation of what one owns, and low valuation or what one does not, is a means of reducing dissonance, and in some respects it is highly adaptive. It may well be welfarepromoting.34 Perhaps the initial allocation has an important legitimating effect.35 29See the overview in Hoffman & Spitzer, supra note 39. 30See Boyce et al., supra note 28, at 1366. 
35See Edward Zajac, supra, note 92. It may suggest that the entitlement naturally belongs where it has been placed, and therefore put a social burden on even voluntary changes. In some cases the divergence between willingness to pay and willingness to accept is probably a product of the change in social attitudes brought about by the change in the allocation of the entitlement. With respect to sexual harassment, for example, the mere shift in the entitlement appears to have had significant attitudinal effects. The example may be generalizable. 
There are other possibilities. Endowment effects may come from experience; people who use a product or have an entitlement may learn to appreciate its value. They may be a product of strategic considerations. Someone may be unwilling to give up a right because the concession would reveal weakness in bargaining. Sometimes apparent endowment effects might be produced by the wealth effect of the initial allocation of the entitlement. Different allocations produce differences in wealthsomeone with more entitlements is to that extent richerand perhaps some allocations have wealth effects sufficiently large to affect the point to which people will bargain.36 
Alternately, such effects might derive from what we might call anticipated ex post regret.37 People who trade one good for another may fear that in the event of disappointment, they will be left not only with a good of uncertain value, but also with a feeling of personal responsibility and thus intense regret for having brought about that very fact. In the environmental context, the explanation may be connected with the fact that substitutes do not exist for some public goods.38 Recently it has been suggested that the disparity is connected with intrinsic moral values involving the assignment of moral responsibility for the destruction of environmental assets. The WTA measure assigns responsibility to the individual. The WTP measure does so more ambiguously.39 Perhaps some of the disparity can be attributed to the desire to avoid or to minimize the feeling 
39This is an apparently pervasive social judgment about responsibility, but it must of course be defended; it is not self-evident. that one has been morally culpable for producing the loss of an environmental amenity.40 
Notably, some of these explanations do not depend on real preference change at all. They account for endowment effects while holding preferences constant. But these sorts of explanations do not appear sufficient. 
For present purposes, it is enough to say that the initial allocation often shapes preferences, and that no legal system can operate without an initial allocation. When this is so, there is no acontextual preference with which to do legal or political work. A government deciding on environmental issues cannot be neutral among preferences whenand this is the key pointit does not know what preferences are until it has acted, and when there is no sense in which it can refuse to act (again, short of anarchy). 
It is tempting to respond that government might indeed refuse to actas, for example, by failing to create liability at all. A railroad might be freely permitted to emit air pollution, for example. Is this not a case of inaction? Might not a system of this sort turn out to be neutral, in the sense that it simply allows people to do what they want in light of their (pre-legal) preferences? 
The answer is that such a system would not be neutral, that it would not involve inaction, and that it would not simply allow people to do what they want. A decision to permit railroads to emit pollution is a grant, by law, of a legal entitlement. It allocates the relevant right to the railroads. It is not helpful to point to what would happen in anarchy, or in the state of nature. In anarchy or nature, the state does not enforce entitlements at all. In anarchy or nature, the state does not prohibit people from taking corrective action (of whatever sort) when they perceive themselves to be injured. In any legal system, however, a right to pollute is indeed backed by the force of law. It is accompanied by stateenforced prohibitions on certain sorts of corrective action by victims, including physical violence, or the attempted taking, by victims, of relevant property interests. It is in this sense that the state, so long as it exists, inevitably allocates entitlements. 
Now let us return to the Coase theorem. In light of the endowment effect, the theorem appears at least sometimes to be inaccurate insofar as it predicts that the allocation of the entitlement will not affect ultimate outcomes. (The theorem remains true insofar as it shows that the result will be efficient regardless of the initial allocation. There is no problem with the theorem to the extent that it says that under ideal conditions, private and social costs are equal.) The difficulty for 40See Rebecca Boyce et al., An Experimental Examination of Intrinsic Values as a Source of the WTAWTP Disparity, 82 Am. Econ. Rev. 1366 (1992). this prediction is that it overlooks the effects of the initial allocation on preferences. The endowment effect means that contrary to the Coase theorem, the entitlement will tend to stay where it has been initially allocated. People to whom the entitlement has been initially allocated will value it most, and precisely because of the initial allocation. For example, a grant of the initial entitlement to breathers will probably make them value clean air more than they otherwise would. 
d. Status Quo Bias. 
The endowment effect can be understood as a special instance of a much more general phenomenon: status quo bias. In many settings, people appear to give more weight to the status quo than would be predicted by conventional models of rational choice. The phenomenon appears to occur in many places. 
Samuelson and Zeckhauser have shown that the affinity for the status quo appears to affect such diverse forms of behavior as brand allegiance, choice of insurance plans, changing public policies, marketing techniques, and investment decisions.41 This affinity may be fully rational. It may well reflect the high costs of any transition. It may be that the goods people own become integrated into daily life, so that a form of relocation cost is incurred whenever currently owned goods are lost. Or status quo bias may reflect search costs. Whether or not rational, the phenomenon of status quo bias probably has some of the same roots as the narrower phenomenon of endowment effects. Loss aversion is plausibly at work here; so too with the effort to reduce cognition dissonance, the desire to avoid anticipated ex post regret, and the concern about ones moral responsibility for introducing changes in the status quo. In any case, there is evidence that people are more strongly biased toward the status quo than would be predicted by usual theory about decision-making under uncertainty. 
e. Positive implications. 
If all this is correct, large consequences follow. We can predict that much governmental behavior in the environmental context will be a product of endowment effects. Private and public reactions to risks should reflect a status quo bias. Both supply and demand will be affected. Government regulation of new risks will predictably be more stringent than government regulation of (equivalent) old risks. This is so precisely because the public demand for regulation will be a product of status quo bias. 
41William Samuelson and Richard Zeckhauser, Status Quo Bias in Decision Making, 1 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7 (1988) 
This is in fact what we observe. It is a defining characteristic of the current system of environmental controls.42 New risks are regulated far more stringently than old ones, even though this strategy sometimes creates extremely perverse results, by perpetuating the life of the especially severe old risks and thus damaging public health and safety. New stationary sources of air pollution must meet technological requirements not imposed on old sources; new cars are regulated far more heavily than old ones.43 
The disparity is sometimes explained on the ground that old industries seek to use regulation to stop new entry.44 This is a plausible explanation. But without more evidence, we cannot be sure that it is true. The disparity may well result in part from status quo bias. It would be useful to attempt to test the competing hypotheses, perhaps by seeing whether more stringent controls on new sources result when the producers of old sources are better organized. 
More generally, political participants should be able to exploit endowment effects by attempting to describe the regulatory status quo in a way that takes advantage of the phenomenon of loss aversion. Politicians are frequently successful when they are able to identify and control the perception of the status quo. One example is provided by constant political efforts to lower expectations by describing the status quo as systemically worse than in fact it is, so that the citizenry will rarely perceive deviations as losses but instead only as gains. 
There are many examples in the area of environmental regulation. Consider, for example, the controversial and probably irrational Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) program.45 The PSD program says roughly that states that met national ambient air quality standards in 1977 cannot suffer a deterioration in air quality, even if the air would remain very clean, and even if there are good reasons for allowing new development. The use of the 1977 benchmark seems puzzling and even senseless. There is no clear reason to conclude that the air cannot become dirtier than it happened to be in 1977, so long as it is consistent with the other national benchmark standards in the Clean Air Act. 
How, then, can we explain the existence of the PSD program, which seems hard to justify on public interest grounds? Certainly part of the explanation comes from public choice theory. Representatives in clear air states disproportionately opposed the program, and those in dirty air states disproportionately supported it, no doubt in order to prevent the exodus of 42See Peter Huber, The Old/New Division in Risk Regulation, 64 Va. L. Rev. 613 (1984). 43See Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution (1990). 44See Chicago Studies in Political Economy (G. Stigler ed. 1987). 
4542 U.S.C. 7470 et seq. revenue-producing, polluting companies to clean air states.46 But the apparently broad appeal of the PSD program may owe a good deal as well to the endowment effect. The perception that air quality ought at least to stay where it isthat the government should prevent deterioration from the status quo seems to have widespread appeal. This is so despite the fact that other things being equal, regulatory efforts to make the air cleaner than it now is often face strong political roadblocks. The asymmetry cannot be fully explained on public interest grounds, for prevention of deterioration can be far worse than actual improvements. It probably has a good deal to do with status quo bias and with the initial endowment reflected in air quality at the time the legislation was under consideration. 
Or consider one of the most-criticized features of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts, the persuasive requirement that companies adopt the best available technology (BAT).47 This strategy has been challenged on the ground that there is at best an incidental relationship between cost-effective environmental policy and adoption of BAT.48 In principle, it seems unreasonable to require everyone to adopt the best available technology. Instead government should allow companies a high degree of flexibility in achieving air quality goals. Some companies should switch to clean energy sources, rather than put expensive technology on dirty energy sources; some companies should go out of business because once they pay the environmental costs, their activity is not worthwhile; some companies should not use BAT at all, since they do business in regions in which adoption of expensive technology is not sensible in light of the variables at stake. 
An interest-group explanation is not entirely implausible for BAT requirements.49 But perhaps the requirements can also be understood as an outgrowth of the status quo bias. If the technological status quo is thought to be an appropriate benchmark for legal requirements, its use in environmental law may not be so puzzling. There may be general agreement that the technological 46Pashigian, supra note 1. 4742 U.S.C. 7475; 42 U.S.C. 7411; 33 U.S.C. 301. 
49There are two possibilities here. (a) Industries may Wnd BAT the best of their various options. Predictably, there will be a great deal of pre-enforcement administrative and litigative activity before adoption of BAT; hence the BAT approach will produce comparatively less regulation than (for example) a fee imposed on polluting activity. (b) BAT may be linked with the electoral self-interest of legislators. When statutes requiring BAT are enacted, legislators can claim credit before their constituents, and blame the relevant agencies for the (predictably) low level of enforcement activity. status quo is the best and fairest foundation for environmental law, even if this view will not survive critical scrutiny.50 
It is notable too that it appears very difficult (though not impossible) to bring about even rational environmental regulation through tax increaseson, for example, polluting vehicles or gasoline. Green taxes are supported by strong justifications; but they are an almost invisible part of national environmental policy.51 Perhaps the difficulty can be attributed to the influence of the automobile industry; but some of the spokesmen for the industry have actually favored gasoline taxes. The difficulty may well be understood in terms of the endowment effect, as that effect operates to define the public demand for regulation. The existing price of gasoline marks the status quo from which departures are measured. Government efforts to raise the price therefore meet strong resistance. Hence the public is generally quite hostile to any effort to increase the price of gasoline.52 
By contrast, there are many popular regulatory requirements that ultimately raise the cost of energy and automobiles, but that do so mostly by affecting new sources. By almost any measure of social welfare, the direct tax approach would be preferable to the regulatory approach.53 I do not deny that there are many possible explanations for currently dysfunctional environmental policy. But a contributing factor may be that a tax or fee imposes highly visible losses as compared with the status quo, whereas the regulatory approach does no such thing. 
Or consider the fact that subsidies to mass transit might well be an especially sensible and inexpensive environmental strategy. If automobiles are a major contributor to air pollution, an important goal is to reduce vehicle miles traveled, as well as (or instead of) improving pollution control devices on cars. This much seems clear from the fact that regulatory requirements have not succeeded in 50See the discussion of fairness in Daniel Kahneman, Jack Knetch, and Richard Thaler, Fairness and the Assumptions of Economics, supra note 32. 
51There is a partial exception in the most recent amendments to the Clean Air Act. The new provisions governing acid deposition create a process by which polluters may purchase the right to emit sulfur dioxide in excess of allowed levels. The purchase will occur both through direct sales and through an innovative auction system. See 42 U.S.C. 7651o. For a good general discussion of green taxes, see W. Kip Viscusi, Wesley Magat, Alan Carlkin, and Mark Dreyfus, Environmentally Responsible Energy Pricing (Duke University, Department of Economics. unpublished manuscript, 1993). Of course President Clintons proposed energy taxes, defended in part on environmental grounds, may make green taxes an important part of national policy. 
52Cf. the discussion of price increases in Thaler, supra note 20. reducing aggregate automobile pollution levels, because the decrease in air pollution per mile traveled has been more than offset by increases in total car use.54 It follows that an imperative for environmental policy is to create incentives that will decrease the use of the underlying polluting activity. But this idea has played little role in policy, especially in the area in which it makes most sense: government expenditures devoted to mass transit and highways. 
Here too the political influence of the automobile industry is a plausible contributing factor. But status quo bias may play a large role as well. Because Americans have adapted their behavior to frequent use of the automobile, it is especially difficult to change their behavior in the direction of mass transit. This explanation helps to account for the remarkable comparative popularity in Europe of environmental strategies that do deter automobile use and promote mass transit.55 In Europe, people have not so deeply adapted their practices and preferences to automobile use. 
The point is very general. Public policy often takes the status quoincluding, very prominently, the existence of particular firmsas if it were a given. Laws that endanger current institutions are subject to special social scrutiny. To some extent this is fully rational in light of the real costs of transition. But I hypothesize that a large part of the phenomenon is attributable to a bias in favor of the status quo that is far stronger than traditional theory would predict. 
f. Normative implications. 
Thus far we have seen that many puzzles in current environmental policy might be an outgrowth of the endowment effect and status quo bias. What about on the normative side? 
The most general point is that the preference-shaping effects of legal rules cast doubt on the idea that environmental regulation should attempt to satisfy or follow some aggregation of private preferences. If legal rules have inevitable effects on preferences, it is hard to see how a government might even attempt to take preferences as given in any global sense.56 When preferences are a function of legal rules, the rules cannot be justified by reference to the preferences.57 Social rules and practices cannot be justified by practices that they 54Roger Crandall, Regulating the Automobile (1986). 55See Marcia Lowe, Shaping Cities, in State of the World 1992, at 119 (Lester Brown ed. 1992). 56A qualification is necessary here. The words in any global sense are crucial. Usually the incremental work of law and economics makes perfect sense, because the particular issue does not affect preferences. Local neutrality among preferences is therefore fully possible. have produced. Sometimes there is no such thing as a prelegal or prepolitical preference that can be used as the basis for decision. 
The point has normative implications for environmental policy. One would expect that a decision to farmers a right to be free from water pollution will have an impact on social attitudes toward clean water. The allocation will affect the valuation of the rights by both current owners and would-be purchasers. In this senseagain speaking globallyneutrality as among preferences cannot be achieved through legal rules, because the preferences will sometimes be a function, or a creation, of legal rules. In setting policy, it may therefore be important to make some choice about the sorts of preferences that ought to be encouraged, rather than to act as if preferences can be kept constant.58 
None of this suggests that it is generally impossible for those interested in environmental law to work from existing preferences. Sometimes the endowment effect is small, and in any case we can generate a relatively narrow range of prices from which to make policy choices. But in valuation of natural resources, the endowment effect can create a significant problem, one that is impairing efforts to make contingent valuation of resources not traded on markets.59 It follows that some ground should ultimately be identified for choosing between the different outcomes that would be produced by preferenceshaping legal rules. 
Private preferences are endogenous to current practices, current opportunities, and past consumption. This conclusion follows from the endowment effect. In this section, I generalize the point. 
a. Adaptive Preferences. 
People may well adapt their conduct and even their desires to what has been available. Consider here the story of the fox and the sour grapes. The fox does not want the grapes because he considers them to be sour; but his belief to this effect is based on the fact that the grapes are unavailable. It is therefore hard to 58It is highly notable in this regard that the institutions of the market and democracynow often defended as neutral among preferenceswere originally justified as producing good preferences. On democracy, see J.S. Mill, Considerations on Representative Government (1991; originally published 1861); on the market, see especially the discussion of doux commerce in Albert Hirschmann, The Passions and the Interests (1983). justify their unavailability by reference to his preferences.60 In the environmental context, it might be hypothesized that the preference for environmental quality will be especially weak among people who have not been exposed to pristine areas, clean water, and clean air. If the point is right, it will have important implications for positive and normative work.61 
To be sure, it will be hard to test this hypothesis in any authoritative way. There is an overlap between a lack of information on the one hand and an adaptation of preferences to what is available on the other. People unexposed to beautiful areas may be uninterested in them not because of an adaptation, but because they lack relevant information. Moreover, people whose preferences are said to have adapted to the absence of environmental quality are likely to be deprived in a general way. If so, it may be best to say not that their preferences have adapted, but that they are choosing rationally and as best they can among a limited set of opportunities. Both of these phenomenalack of environmental information and apparent devaluation of environmental quality under conditions of deprivation, because of the need to trade it off against other goodsundoubtedly explain a good deal of private and public behavior. They help account for the fact that poor people seem comparatively uninterested in many forms of environmental protection. There is, however, a third possibility, sometimes realized in the world, in which peoples preference for environmental quality is low because of an adaptation to what is available. 
If this is so, we should be able to explain both private and public behavior accordingly. Akerlof and Dickens have argued, with some modest evidence, that workers may be unwilling to confront the real magnitude of environmental risks faced in the workplace, because it is too distressing for them to do so.62 On this view, workers, having adapted their preferences and beliefs to a relatively risky status quo, attempt to reduce cognitive dissonance by concluding that the dangers are trivial. The claim is speculative and the relevant evidence is largely anecdotal. But there is some empirical support for the general view. Consider the fact that after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant accident, it was the people who lived on Three Mile Island who, of all those polled, believed that the relevant risks were lowest.63 60Jon Elster, supra note 57. 
If the general claim is right, it would follow that the demand for environmental legislation might be relatively low among people deprived of exposure to environmental quality, and the phenomenon would be attributable to adaptation of preferences to what is available. It is extremely difficult to test this hypothesis against more conventional alternatives stressing learning and rational choice under conditions of deprivation. We might, however, begin to investigate the demand for environmental protection across regions and across nations. It would be especially valuable to see how the demand for environmental quality changes over time, perhaps with exposure to pristine areas, perhaps with a social belief that the degradation of environmental amenities is not inevitable, perhaps with the rise of organizations solving collective action problems of various sorts (see below). 
As a normative matter, it might also follow that existing preferences are an uncertain basis for environmental policy, since we cannot without circularity justify environmental outcomes by reference to preferences that those outcomes have generated. Of course there is a risk of totalitarianism here. Of course it is right to insist that government should respect private preferences, partly because of the frustration and resentment that are produced by efforts to bring about change, partly because of the constant risk of ignorance and bias on governments part. But if what I have said here is true, it will be necessary to rethink the underanalyzed and vexing issue of paternalism, in environmental law and elsewhere.64 b. Intrapersonal collective action problems. 
A closely related problem arises when environmental preferences are a function of past acts of consumption and when such acts alter peoples desires or beliefs in such a way as to cause long-term (subjective) harm to them. In such cases, the two key facts are (a) that preferences are endogenous to past consumption decisions and (b) that the effect of those decisions on current preferences is pernicious. The effect is pernicious when the aggregate costs of consumption, over time, exceed the aggregate benefits. The phenomenon is a general one, but it is especially important in the context of environmental protection, where it is often said that it is necessary to alter social or individual habits by inducing people to engage in a different kind of behavior. A pervasive and difficult question involves the cost, especially the transition cost, of the attempted alteration. If preferences are endogenous to past consumption 64Cf. Amartya Sen, Inequality Reexamined (1992); Hilary Putnam, Renewing Philosophy 183-85 (1992). For a defense of a form of liberal perfectionisma belief in a principle of autonomy not necessarily tied to existing preferencessee Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1986). behavior, we might hypothesize that the cost will often be lower than anticipated, and precisely because of the change in preference that is brought about by new behavior. 
Consider the extreme case of an addiction. Here the problem (if there is one65) is that the costs of not consuming the addictive substance increase dramatically over time, as the benefits of consumption remain constant or fall sharply.66 A possible result is that the aggregate costs, over time or over a life, of consumption exceed the aggregate benefits, even though the initial consumption choice provides benefits that exceed costs. As a result, people can be made much worse of even by their own lights. In such cases, people, if fully informed, might well not want to become involved with the good in the first place.67 
This situation might be described as involving an intrapersonal collective action problem,68 in which the costs and benefits, within a particular person, of engaging in the same activity change dramatically over time. The key point is that consumption patterns bring about a significant change in preferences and in a way that makes people worse off in the long-run.69 
While addiction is the most obvious case,70 it is part of a broad category, and the broader category includes a wide range of environmental examples. Consider, for example, myopic behavior, defined as a refusalbecause the short65It is certainly possible to imagine a case in which people rationally choose to become addictedthat it, they might do so with full information about costs and benefits over time. The subjective benefits may dwarf the subjective costs, even if the benefits diminish and the costs increase. I am suggesting only that this is not always the case. See also note 70 infra. 
69Of course all consumption has an effect on preferences. For example, exposure to classical music usually increases appreciation. But the pattern under discussion is a rare one; it is that pattern, producing miserable lives, to which a democracy might respond. To be sure, in practice the response might make things worse rather than better. 
70There is a growing literature on the issue of rational addiction, a literature with interesting applications for environmental protection. See K.M. Murphy and Gary Becker, A Theory of Rational Addiction, 96 J. Pol. Econ. 675 (1988). I do not believe that there is a substantial difference between the account offered in the text and that offered by Becker and his followers. It does not much matter whether we say that preferences stay constant, and choices change, or that preferences change as a result of choices. (See the discussion supra of the problematic character of the notion of a preference.) It is possible to say on either account that an addiction is rational; and an intrapersonal collective action can also arise on either account. term costs exceed the short-term benefitsto engage in activity having long-term benefits that dwarf long-term costs. We can see this at both the social and individual levels. Akrasia, or weakness of the will, has a related structure (though it may also reflect a problem of incommensurability71). Another kind of intrapersonal collective action problem is produced by habits, in which people engage in behavior because of the subjectively high short-term costs of change, notwithstanding the fact that the long-term benefits exceed the short-term benefits. 
Habits that pose intrapersonal collective action problems are a prominent target of environmental regulation. Consider, for example, the issue of compulsory recycling. It may be that the costs of recycling are initially quite high, simply because the change of behavior is unsettling. The costs may include transition costs and the costs produced by private annoyance and irritation. But once people are in the habit of recycling, some of these costs decrease (perhaps because of learning, perhaps because of preference change), and for many people these costs may even turn into benefits. As a possible analogy, consider the habit of brushing ones teeth in the morning. Even for those who dislike brushing most, a failure to brush may be still more costly than brushing, simply because one is in the habit, and because the habit brings about internalized norms. 
It may even be that people in the habit of recycling develop certain social norms72 that help turn the hedonic costs of environmental protection into hedonic benefits and thus help solve the collective action problems pervasively at stake in environmental regulation.73 If so, there is much more to be said on behalf of recycling, as a policy alternative to a disposal tax, than at first appears.74 The legally-induced change of preferences may well have salutary long-term consequences, though before proceeding, it is important for government to be certain of this fact. 
The same considerations bear on the creation of incentives to use mass transit rather than automobiles. It may be that expenditures on mass transit will be 71See Martha Nussbaum, Plato on Commensurability and Desire, in Loves Knowledge 106 (1990). 72See Gary Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life, University of Chicago, Law & Economics Working Paper No. 12 (1993), at 17: Economists have too narrow a perspective on commitments. Manipulating the experiences of others to influence their preferences may appear to be inefficient and fraught with uncertainty, but it can be the most effective way available to obtain commitment. Economic theory, especially game theory, needs to incorporate guilt, affection, and related attitudes into preferences in order to have a deeper understanding of when commitments are credible. 73Cf. Jon Elster, The Cement of Society (1990). 
74An excellent argument against compulsory recycling is Peter Mennell, Beyond the Throwaway Society, 17 Ecology L.Q. 655 (1990); but Mennells treatment does not take adequate account of the endogeneity of preferences. firmly resisted at first. Indeed, the relevant incentives will have to be very strong in order to encourage people to change their behavior, adaptive as this has been to the cheap automobile transportation. Here is a case in which preferences are highly adaptive to past consumption choices, a fact that helps account for the high premium placed on automobile transportation in the United States as compared to (for example) Germany and Sweden. But once behavior has changed, preferences may change as well, and the subjective costs of using mass transit may well decrease. 
This is a speculative hypothesis, and it would be good to test it. Some evidence could be produced from examining experience with compulsory seat belt usage. I hypothesize that after seat belt use has been compelled, the costs of buckling up decrease, and may even turn into benefits, in the sense that an unbuckled belt will produce discomfort and annoyance. It would follow that states that have enacted and then repealed seatbelt laws should see a large shortterm increase in seatbelt use even after a highly publicized repeal. c. Cascades. 
Habits and customs can be vulnerable to large-scale shifts on the basis of relatively mild government interventions. Sometimes the practice of many people is dependent on what other people do. Once some people change their practices, a wide range of others change as well. Thus it has been shown that mass behavior is often fragile in the sense that small shocks can frequently lead to large shifts in behavior.75 
This is so especially in view of the fact that the modest changes sometimes have a large signaling effect for other people. The point has implications for the positive and normative theory of environmental protection. Compulsory behavioror disclosure of informationmay produce a large-scale cascade in a certain direction as a result of new social norms. Something of this kind may have happened with respect to recycling and green marketing. As a result, the effects of government policy may be quite different from what would be expected if it were assumed that preferences were rigid and fixed. The costs of regulatory change may therefore turn out to be lower than expected. 
If this idea is to be used for policy purposes, it would be valuable to come up with precise predictions about the circumstances in which such cascades will occur. But we already have sufficient reason to believe that current tastes and habits are sometimes vulnerable to large-scale shifts. d. The availability heuristic. 
A final problem is that perceptions of the world are endogenous to what events are psychologically available, in the sense that they come readily to mind.76 This problem should be grouped with the others in this section, for here too, we are dealing with preferences and beliefs that are adaptive to context, and in a way that might have positive implications and also impeach their reliability for policy purposes. 
If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. Assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. One would predict that the availability heuristic would create a kind of crazy-quilt pattern in regulation, with some events calling for stringent regulation and others calling for little or no regulation at all. The regulation would not be closely associated with actual risk levels. This is the pattern we observe.77 Studies of American government show extraordinary disparities in expenditures per life saved.78 
The disparities are plausibly attributed at least in part to the availability heuristic. The dramatic difference between expert and public assessments of risk levels79 is very likely an outgrowth of this heuristic, and the difference maps closely onto actual differences in expenditures per life saved. The public demand for regulation therefore appears to be a product of the availability heuristic, which is itself endogenous to the nature and levels of public and private publicity. 
Thus, for example, there are enormous expenditures designed to counteract cancers in the workplace, and relatively low expenditures designed to prevent injuries in automobile accidents. The comparative overregulation of certain environmental risks may well be a product of the fact that those risks, when they come to fruition, are highly publicized. Through this route too we might be able to explain the other inexplicably severe controls on nuclear power. We might also be able to explain the extraordinary safety of air travel as compared with other means of transportation.80 
76See Noll & Krier, supra note 8; Kahneman & Tversky, supra note 7; W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992). 
77See appendix B in C. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution (1990); Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (1993).. 
78Id. 79See Breyer, supra note 77. 
The availability heuristic also has normative implications. It produces serious biases, and it is important to ensure that these are reduced or eliminated. A comprehensive system of uniform warnings about risk levels81 might well make public assessments less dependent on sensationalistic anecdotes, which very much affect the operation of the availability heuristic. Government information policies might bring public and expert judgments more closely into line. If this proves difficult, institutional changes might be introduced so as to introduce the distorting features of the public demand for regulation.82 
Environmental measures might reflect the use of law to embody not the preferences that people hold as private consumers, but instead what might be described as collective judgments, which sometimes solve collective action problems with unusual characteristics. In political processes, peoples preferencesor what backs their choicesare quite different from what they are in market arrangements. They are subject to different norms and different constraints. They are endogenous to the setting in which they appear. It should hardly be surprising that they yield different outcomes.83 
Consider the fact that some people seek stringent laws protecting the environment or endangered species even though they do not use the public parks or derive material benefits from protection of speciesand even though in their private behavior, they are unwilling to do much to protect environmental amenities. The mere existence of certain environmental goods seems to be highly valued by political participants, even if they are not willing to back up the valuation with dollars in private markets. Of course many people are so willing, and many people give to organizations that will do so. But it seems clear that the choices people make as political participants are different from those they make as consumers. It is in part for this reason that democratic outcomes are distinct from those that emerge from markets. 
a. The disparity. 
The widespread disjunction between political and consumption choices presents something of a puzzle. There are many plausible explanations for the disjunction. It would be possible to suggest that markets reflect individual choice more reliably than politics; that democratic choices differ from market outcomes 81Cf. Viscusi, supra note 76. 82This is suggested in Breyer, supra note 77. 
83Cf. the discussion of dual utility functions in Howard Margolis, Selfishness, Altruism, and Rationality: A Theory of Social Choice (1982); see also Mark Sagoff, The Economy of the Earth (1987). largely because of confusion, as voters fail to realize that they must ultimately bear the costs of the programs they favor; that voting patterns reveal a free-rider problem, reflected in a general willingness to support governmental provision of certain goods so long as it is mostly other people who are footing the bill; and that the disparity stems from rational ignorance, as voters, often uninformed about public policy issues, produce political outcomes that are especially unreliable. 
Undoubtedly there is something true about each of these claims. Consumer behavior is sometimes a better or more realistic reflection of actual preferences than is political behavior. Moreover, there are distinctive problems in collective behaviornot only because of the foregoing considerations, but also because of the risks of government manipulation of both preferences and choices, and because of the sheer power of collectivities, especially when backed by the force of law. But in light of the fact that preferencestaken either as a motivation for behavior or as behavior itselfdepend on context, the very notion of a better reflection of actual preferences is a confusing one. There is no such thing as an actual (in the sense of unitary or context-free) preference in these settings. Moreover, the difference between market choice and political choice might be explained by the fact that in the environmental arena, political behavior can reflect a variety of influences that are distinct to the context of political deliberation, and that may even justify giving special weight to what emerges through the political setting. These include four possible phenomena. 
First, citizens may seek to implement their aspirations in political behavior, but not in private consumption. As citizens, people may seek the aid of the law to bring about a system that they consider to be in some sense higher than what emerges from market ordering. In the environmental arena, this idea may include, for example, protection of the interests of future generations or of nonhuman life. 
Second, some people may, in their capacity as political agents, attempt to satisfy altruistic, justice-related, or other-regarding desires. These can diverge from the self-interested preferences sometimes characteristic of markets.84 Discussion among political participants may affect the development and expression of preferences. There is a body of empirical work to this effect.85 The narrowest explanation is that implicit contracts, arrived at and understood as 84See Howard Margolis, SelWshness, Altruism, and Rationality: A Theory of Social Choice (1982). 85See, e.g., Norman Frohlich & Joseph Oppenheimer, Choosing Justice (1992). such through discussion, can help solve collective action problems; but the phenomenon is almost certainly broader than this.86 
Third, political decisions might vindicate what might be called metapreferences or second-order preferences. People have wishes about their wishes. Sometimes they try to vindicate those second-order wishes, including considered judgments about what is best, through law. Here environmental law may not only protect against collective action problems, but also vindicate second-order judgments about (for example) the importance of aesthetic and recreational values. 
Fourth, people may precommit themselves, in democratic processes, to a course of action that they consider to be in the general interest. They may do so in order to protect themselves against what they know to be their own selfishness, myopia, or impulsiveness. The story of Ulysses and the Sirens is the model. The point may well help explain certain aspects of environmental policy, including compulsory recycling statutes.87 
I emphasize that these are only possible accounts of some of what can be observed in the environmental arena. It is undoubtedly true that much of environmental behavior reflects the self-interest of powerful private groups seeking to bring about or to prevent environmental regulation, or to ensure that any such regulation serves their parochial interests. I suggest only that a full explanation of public behavior will have to take account of the phenomena I am describing. 
86Robin Dawes et al., Explaining Discussion-Induced Cooperation, 54 J. of Personality and Social Psych. 811 (1988). 
87Some qualifications are necessary here. First, these claims might be proved false in any particular case. It might well be that a law justified as reflecting altruistic desires in fact results from the pressures of well-organized private groups, and has nothing to do with altruism at all. This phenomenon is of course a common one. A detailed study of the forces that produce particular legislation, and of divergences between public and private choices, is necessary to evaluate the claims made here. There is thus a rich source for empirical work. 
Second, to point to these various possibilities is not at all to deny that market and private behavior frequently reflects considered judgments, altruism, aspirations, or far more complex attitudes toward diverse social goods than is captured in conventional economic accounts about self-interested preferences. There are numerous counterexamples to any such claim. All I mean to suggest is that divergences between market and political behavior will sometimes be attributable to phenomena of this sort. 
Third, a democratic system must be built on various safeguards to ensure that its results are in fact a reflection of deliberative processes of the sort described here. Often such processes are distorted by the fact that some groups are more organized than others, by disparities in wealth and influence, and by public and private coercion of various kinds. b. Explanations. 
Thus far I have suggested that people may seek, through law, to implement collective desires that diverge from market choices. Might we come up with more concrete explanations for the differences? There are a number of possibilities. 
First, the collective character of politics, permitting a response to collective action problems, may be relevant. People may not want to implement their considered judgments about environmental protection, or to be altruistic toward future generations, unless there is legal assurance that others will do so as well. More simply, people may prefer not to contribute to a collective benefit if donations are made individually, with no guarantee that others will participate; but their favored system, obtainable only or best through democratic forms, might be one in which they contribute if (but only if) there is assurance that others will do so. Perhaps people feel ashamed if others are contributing and they are not. Perhaps they feel victimized if they are contributing and others are not. Social norms thus help explain the disparity between public and private behavior. 
In any case, and most fundamentally, the satisfaction of environmental aspirations or altruistic goals will sometimes have the characteristics of the more conventional provision of public goods or the solution of prisoners dilemmas. Both altruism and aspirations have some of the features of a public good. Aspirations are not conventional public goods, because the market does not fail according to ordinary understandings of market failure. But if the most preferred option is to reflect and carry out aspirational or altruistic goals, political action may be the best alternative. Market behavior, even when working well, may fail to do the job. 
Second, the collective character of politics might overcome the problem, discussed above, of preferences and beliefs that have adapted, or to some extent adapted, to an environmentally unsatisfactory status quo or to limits in environmental opportunities. Without the possibility of collective action, the status quo may seem intractable, and private behavior and even beliefs will adapt accordingly. But if people can act in concert, preferences might take on a quite different form. Social movements for environmental protection are plausible examples. 
Third, social and cultural norms might incline people to express aspirational or altruistic goals more often in political behavior than in markets. Such norms may press people, in their capacity as citizens, in the direction of a concern for others, for justice, or for the public interest. 
Fourth, the deliberative aspects of politics, bringing additional information and perspectives to bear, may affect preferences as expressed through governmental processes. A principal function of a democratic system is to ensure that through representative processes, new voices, or novel depictions of where interests lie and what they in fact are, can be heard and understood. It should hardly be surprising if preferences, values, and perceptions of environmental welfare are changed as a result of that process. 
Fifth, and finally, consumption decisions are a product of the criterion of private willingness to pay. Willingness to pay is a function of ability to pay, and it is only a proxy for utility or welfare.88 Poor people may be unwilling to pay much for an environmental good, like clean air, that they very much want; rich people may be willing to pay a good deal for things toward which they feel relatively indifferent. Because of the one-person one-vote rule, political behavior helps remove this distortion (which is emphatically not to deny that it introduces many distortions of its own). 
c. Qualifications. 
The argument for respecting collective desires seems irresistible if the measure at issue is adopted unanimously. But more serious difficulties are produced if (as is usual) the law imposes on a minority what it regards as a burden rather than a benefit. Suppose, for example, that a majority wants to require recycling, but that a significant minority hates the idea. It might be thought that those who perceive a need to express an aspiration should not be permitted to do so if the consequence is to deprive others of an opportunity to satisfy their preferences. 
The foreclosure of the preferences of the minority is unfortunate, but in general it is hard to see what argument there might be for an across-the-board rule against collective action of this sort. If the majority is prohibited from vindicating its considered judgments through legislation, an important democratic arena will be eliminated. The choice is between the considered judgments of the majority and the preferences (and perhaps considered judgments as well) of the minority. On the other hand, the foreclosure of the minority should probably be permitted only when less restrictive alternatives, including private arrangements, are unavailable to serve the same end. In the environmental context, often such alternatives are indeed available. 
If what I have said in this section is correct, some environmental measures will result from desires and aspirations that have a distinctive character precisely because they emerge in the political context. It is not right to think that the consumption choice reflects a true or accurate picture of preferences, and that politics reveals a blunder. Nor is it right to say that the political choice 88See note supra 10, on intrapersonal comparisons of utility and willingness to pay. reflects the true picture. The preference and the choice are endogenous to the setting in which they are expressed. There is no unitary preference that can be described as accurately reflected individual choice. 
I emphasize that I have offered a portrait of what politics might sometimes be, not what it actually, always, or usually is. To know whether the various phenomena are truly at work, it is necessary to investigate the details. But it would be surprising if we could not explain at least some of the disparities between market and political choice on this general ground. At the same time, the disparities provide a reason to value political over market choices, at least under ideal or very favorable conditions. 
The last point is the most speculative and complex, and its implications for positive and normative work are far from clear. The point starts with the fact that most positive theories assess environmental issues by reference to preferences for environmental quality viewed abstractly, through a unitary scale, along the same metricthat of utility or of willingness to pay. This approach is perfectly reasonable in light of the fact that people must make choices under conditions of scarcity, and it therefore seems sensible to say that people behave as if they make things commensurable even if they do not do so knowingly or willingly. 
The puzzle stems from the fact that ordinary people appear to resist the use of a unitary scale and the claim of commensurability along a single metric.89 I claim that two goods are incommensurable if they are not valued in the same way and if their assessment along a single metric therefore does violence to our considered judgments about how (not how much) these goods should be valued. This section attempts to see if it is possible to use this fact to make sense out of 89The philosopher Joseph Raz understands incommensurability in terms of a failure of transitivity: Two valuable options are incommensurable if (I) neither is better than the other, and (2) there is (or could be) another option which is better than one but is not better than another. Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom 325 (1986) (emphasis in original). On this view, A may not be better than B, or vice-versa, but C may be better than A but not better than B. 
This statement seems to point to a puzzling or even incomprehensible state of affairs, but Raz shows that it sometimes obtains. I may be indifferent between lunch with a friend and a $50 gift. At the same time, I would prefer a $60 gift to a $50 gift. But I am still indifferent between lunch with a friend and a $60 gift. Or: There are two political initiatives that seem to me equally good: Saving two endangered species, or cutting the budget deficit by $1 billion. I would prefer a $1.5 billion reduction in the budget to a $1 billion reduction. But I am indifferent as between a $1.5 billion reduction and saving two endangered species. When incommensurability occurs, there is a failure of transitivity. I put to one side two complex questions: (a) whether a failure of transitivity is irrational and (b) whether incommensurability of this sort is frequent. Razs conception of incommensurability is closely related to that in the text. The failure of transitivity stems from the absence of a single metric from which the three alternatives can be evaluated. Two may be ranked along the same metric, but a third may not. some otherwise puzzling phenomena relating to the publics environmental judgments. Through this route it may be possible to understand some features of the apparent demand for regulation, and this is so even if we ultimately conclude that the demand is built on confusion or irrationality. Consider a few examples. 
a. Some people feel extremely insulted when asked how much they would accept for a specified level of environmental deterioration, treating the question as outrageous or a form of bribery, rather as if they had been asked to sell a child, or a friendship, or a part of their body. Studies using WTA questions have consistently received a large number of protest answers, such as I refuse to sell or I want an extremely large or infinite amount of compensation for agreeing to this, and have frequently experienced protest rates of 50 percent or more.90 b. Some people say that environmental goods have infinite value or that the effort to achieve a clean environment should not be traded off against other important values. In opinion polls, people sometimes say that we should achieve a clean environmental regardless of cost. 
c. Some apparently popular statutes reflect a kind of environmental absolutism. The Endangered Species Act91 forbids balancing except in the rarest of circumstances. Some statutes, including the Delaney Clause,92 forbid any entry of carcinogenic substances onto the market, banning tradeoffs of any kind. 
d. As noted, there are extraordinary disparities in federal expenditures per life saved. In some environmental programs, risks are prevented at enormous cost; the government is willing to spend relatively little to stop other risks. All current efforts to produce uniformity in expenditures have failed. 
Phenomena of these sorts may in the end reflect irrationality, confusion, interest-group power, or sheer chance. But it would be useful to explore whether there might not be some other kind of explanation. When people are thinking in these various ways, exactly what are they doing? 
We might hypothesize that peoples apparently irrational valuation of environmental goods comes partly from an insistence that diverse social goods should not be assessed according to the same metric. Some people think that these diverse goods should be valued in qualitatively different ways. This is not to deny that people make trade-offs among incommensurable goods. But with 90E.M. Mitchell and K.S. Carson, Using Surveys to Value Public Goods 34 (1989). These extreme responses reflect the feelings of outrage often seen when communities are faced with the prospect of accepting a new risk such as a nuclear power plant or waste disposal facility. Daniel Kahneman, Jack Knetch, and Richard Thaler, The Endowment Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, 5 J. Econ. Persp. 193, 203 (1991). 
9116 U.S.C. 1531 et seq. this hypothesis, some apparent anomalies dissolve or become more readily explicable. Some people, for example, rebel against the idea that we should see all of the following, environmentally related consequences as costs: unemployment, higher prices, greater poverty, dirtier air, more cancer, respiratory problems, the loss of species. It is tempting to say that this is simply an irrational thought. In a way, of course, all of these things are indeed costs; they are harmful things that society should, other things being equal, attempt to reduce. Moreover, the effort to render them commensurable by assimilating them to a unitary categorycostsis more than plausible. That effort is motivated by the view that through such assimilation, we will render tractable certain social decisions that otherwise become amorphous and unmanageable.93 If we have six, seven, or a thousand desiderataif we have plural utility functionsand we assume that these are qualitatively distinct, we may not know what to say or do. A choice among them will be rendered too chaotic. Predictions will become impossible. 
But it is also possible to understand the resistance to commensurability, captured in the insistence on qualitative distinctions, on diverse modes of valuation, and on the plurality of social goods. The resistance, with roots in John Stuart Mill,94 stems from the view that if we make diverse goods commensurable in this way, we will do violence to our considered judgments about how all these should be characterized, experienced, and understood.95 Some people think that those considered judgments are not embarrassing, but instead are part of what it means to think well. If all these things are understood as costs, to be assessed via the same metric, important qualitative distinctions may become lost. Simply as a positive matter, it might be hypothesized when people refuse to trade off environmental quality and other goods, they are making a claim about the diversity of goods and about incommensurability. They are claiming that one set of goods is superior to another not in the sense that it is infinitely valuable, or in the sense that a small amount of it is more valuable than a large amount of 93For remarks on the origins of this idea, see Martha Nussbaum, Plato on Commensurability and Desire, in Loves Knowledge 106 (1990). 
94See J.S. Mill, Utilitarianism (1991; originally published 1861), especially the discussion of higher and lower pleasures. A more detailed normative discussion of incommensurability can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability in Law (University of Chicago Law School, unpublished manuscript 1993). 
95See Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, 80 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1980-81); see also Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1986); Charles Taylor, The Diversity of Goods, in C. Taylor, Philosophy and the Human Sciences 230, 243 (1985); Anderson, Values, Risks, and Market Norms, 17 Phil. & Pub. AV. 54, 57-59 (1987); Pildes & Anderson, Slinging Arrows at Democracy: Social Choice Theory, Value Pluralism, and Democratic Politics, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2121 (1990); Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (forthcoming 1993); Nussbaum, Plato on Commensurability and Desire, in Loves Knowledge (1991). something else, but in the sense that it is important to see that it is to be valued in a distinctive way and that is therefore stands higher in a hierarchy.96 
This point leaves many ambiguities, and I will not be able to address them all here. But let us consider, for example, the issue of environmental risks in the workplace. It is clear that people take jobs that expose them to certain risks to health and safety. From this it is tempting to say that a risk of level A is really worth a dollar amount X, or that people value their lives at a certain dollar amount.97 In a way this makes obvious sense. But suppose that people firmly resist (as is predictable) the conclusion that the view that to them, risk A, or their life, is really worth X. Suppose they claim that this is not in fact their view. To the evidence of their behavior, suppose they respond that they did indeed take the job, but they adamantly resist any broader inference about their tradeoffs between risk and dollars. Is it clear that they are not making sense? 
Even if they are indeed not making sense, we might be able to use their responses to understand some otherwise peculiar features of the social demand for environmental regulation. And it is even possible that they are making sense.98 If so, it is because their valuation is not an acontextual one or a global judgment about optimization, but instead highly dependent on and geared only to the particular setting in which the choice is made. When a worker accepts a risky job for cash, it may be wrong to say that he really thinks that the risk is equivalent to that amount of cashif the word really is intended to capture an abstract, acontextual judgment. Instead he has simply taken the job, and this decision, in its context, may mean nothing more general. Of course it remains possible that the valuation that is expressed through the occupational choice should be the relevant one for those who make policy. 
Through this route, it might be possible to help account for phenomena (a) through (d) above. For example, the risk charts might reflect qualitative distinctions among different sorts of hazards. People might not be interested only in cost per life saved, but also in whether the risk was voluntarily assumed; whether the exposed person, the employer, or the employee knows the facts; whether the underlying activity produces valuable goods; whether the hazard is common; whether the exposure is essential to productive activity; whether the 96See the discussion of hierarchical incommensurability in Pildes & Anderson, supra note 95. One should not make too much of this claim even if it is descriptively accurate and normatively plausible. It may still be most parsimonious to study behavior as if people believed in commensurability even if they do not, or believe that they do not. Moreover, the fact that people make choices among diverse goods may be all we need to engage the assumption of commensurability. 
97See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk by Choice (1984); W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992). 
98See Pildes & Anderson, supra note 95; Anderson, supra note 95. risk is encountered occupationally or elsewhere; whether the people subjected to risk were able to participate in making relevant decisions.99 With such questions, it may emerge that peoples valuations of different risks will vary a good deal with context. Hence the varying valuations may reflect not irrationality or interest-group pressure, but diverse judgments about qualitatively diverse risks. 
I do not claim that the actual disparities can be justified in this way. In view of their obvious irrationality, that conclusion would be extravagant. But it may well be rational to allow widely varying expenditures in light of the diverse factors outlined above, and at least some of the current variations might have some such foundation. 
It might also be possible to understand some of the reactions to opinion polls and perhaps environmental legislation as well. Begin with an exotic example. If a pet owner were asked how much he would accept to allow his pet cat or dog to be used for laboratory experiments, he could be insulted and might well respond very much like the people in (a)100 This is so even though economic valuation of pets, in terms of purchase price, sale price, and medical expenditures, is perfectly common. This response stems from the fact that the pet owners ordinary attitude toward his pet is incompatible with the idea that that pet is solely for human experimentationthough that attitude is not incompatible with imposing budgetary limits on sale price and on medical expenditures. In these circumstances the problem is not that the offered price is too low, or that the pet is infinitely valuable, but that the very idea of sale for the purpose of experimentation seems inappropriate. Some people think of freedom from certain environmental risks, and the protection of pristine areas, in just this way. They value the relevant goods not for their use but for their beauty. The emphasis on use value inadequately captures the way they value the relevant goods. We might conclude that much of public discussion about the environment is about the appropriate mode (not only the appropriate level) of valuation for diverse human goods. 
If something of this kind is right, it may be that people think that the loss through human action of an endangered species is incommensurably (not infinitely) bad, and that this thought should be expressed through regulatory 99Some of these factors are discussed in William Lowrence, Of Acceptable Risk (1976). 
100Cf. Anderson, supra note 95. Note some related puzzles: people do not ask their neighbors to mow their laws, or clean up their house, even for a high price; people do not ask other people to exchange their place in queues for cash; people offer to drive each other home, but they rarely offer to pay for taxis. Some of this is discussed in terms of social norms in Jon Elster, The Cement of Society (1989), but I think that an approach that investigates issues of commensurability will be more helpful. proscriptions. To say the least, this view raises many complexities. All I mean to suggest is that it is a common idea.101 
In some cases, the claim of incommensurability is understandably but wrongly converted into a claim of infinite value. It is wrongly so converted because people do and must make choices under conditions of scarcity. We might think that (say) a loss of a species cannot really be made commensurable with the loss of jobs, but that neither of these is of infinite value, and that it is appropriate even if tragic to sacrifice one incommensurable good for another. The hard questions, not yet fully elaborated in the philosophical literature, remain: How does one make choices when noncommensurable social goods are at stake, and when some of these must be sacrificed? When noncommensurable goods are at stake, how can choices be assessed as reasonable or not? I cannot attempt to answer these questions here. But attention to valuation of the diverse goods at stake in environmental regulation may well provide relevant information on this subject. 
Recent refinements and qualifications of rational choice theory have important implications for the study of government regulation. Above all, the endogeneity of preferences offers a large area for positive work. Some environmental outcomes can probably be explained by status quo bias and the endowment effect. In particular, these phenomena help account for the asymmetry between old and new risks and the public antipathy toward strategies that create incentives to decrease use of automobiles. 
Both private and public behavior in the environmental context are an outgrowth of the fact that environmental preferences are endogenous to available opportunities, to shifting social norms, and to past acts of consumption. Some environmental outcomes may well be a reflection of the asymmetry between political and consumption choices, an asymmetry sometimes attributable to the peculiar features of political deliberation. It is incorrect to say that the consumption choice accurately reflects a preference, whereas a political choice does not. The preference is itself endogenous to the setting in which it is expressed. 
Finally, and most tentatively, I suggest that environmental absolutism may sometimes result from a resistance to claims of commensurability between environmental and other goods. From these admittedly speculative claims, there 101An especially good discussion can be found in Elizabeth Anderson, supra note 95, chapters 1, 2, and is obviously large room for empirical testing, though we do not yet have the tools to find all that is required. 
I have made some normative suggestions as well. Private preferences are an inadequate basis for environmental policy insofar as these are adaptive to an environmentally inadequate status quo. At least under ideal conditions (met rarely in the real world), democratic choices about the environment are probably to be preferred over private consumption choices, even if free-rider and informational problems could be solved. Finally, claims of incommensurability among diverse environmental goods are at least plausible so long as they are not confused with claims of infinite valuation. Much remains to be done on this important and difficult subject. 
In the end, I believe, these sorts of suggestions will point to the need to question whether private preferences should be the exclusive touchstone of environmental policy. We might venture as well an account of what human beings need for good lives102 and try to set up conditions under which democratic decisions about environmental matters can be most fully informed, so as to ensure appropriate valuation of diverse environmental assets.103 To undertake such endeavors would be to recover important aspects of the old discipline of political economy But an account of these abstract and complex claims would take me well beyond the present discussion. 
102This is the direction suggested in Amartya Sen, Inequality Reexamined (1992); Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (1985). 
103This is the direction suggested in Elizabeth Anderson, supra note 95. 
This Working Paper is a preliminary version of an article that will be published in The Journal of Legal Studies. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 1992). (February 1992). 1992). (July 1992). 
Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 1992). 
Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Cass R. Sunsteint 
Much of the law of free speech is based on half-truths. These are principles or understandings that have a good deal to offer, that have fully plausible origins in history and principle, and that have mostly salutary consequences. But they also have significant blind spots. The blind spots distort important issues and in the end disserve the system of free expression. 
In this essay, I deal with the four most important of these half-truths. (1) The First Amendment prohibits all viewpoint discrimination. (2) The most serious threat to the system of free expression consists of government regulation of speech on the basis of content. (3) Government may "subsidize" speech on whatever terms it chooses. (4) Content-based restrictions on speech are always worse than content-neutral restrictions on speech. Taken together, these half-truths explain a surprisingly large amount of free speech law. All in all, they may do more good than harm. But they also obscure inquiry and at times lead to inadequate outcomes. 
The four half-truths are closely related, and it will probably be beneficial to understand their many interactions. Above all, I suggest that the doctrinal distinctions embodied in the half-truths are taking on an unfortunate life of their own; it is as if the doctrines are operating for their own sake. In some ways, the distinctions are threatening to lose touch with the animating goals of a system of free expression, prominently including the creation of favorable conditions for democratic government. Indeed, it sometimes seems as if free speech doctrine is out of touch with the question of whether the free speech principle is animated by identifiable goals at all. My effort to challenge the half-truths is spurred above all by a belief that whatever else it is about, the First Amendment is at least partly designed to create a well-functioning deliberative democracy. When free speech doctrine disserves democratic goals, something is seriously amiss. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School. 
Some of the discussion here draws on the more detailed treatment in Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (Free Press, 1993). I. 
It is commonly said that government may not regulate speech on the basis of the speaker's viewpoint.1 Indeed, viewpoint discrimination may be the defining example of a violation of the freespeech guarantee. Thus, for example, government may not prohibit Republicans from speaking on subways, even though government may be able to prohibit advertising on subways altogether, or even regulate the content of speech on subways if it does so in a viewpoint-neutral way. 
If the First Amendment embodies a per se prohibition on viewpoint discrimination, then government's first obligation is to be neutral among different points of view. This principle recently received prominent vindication in R.A.V. v City of St. Paul,2 in which the Supreme Court invalidated a "hate-speech" ordinance in significant part because it embodied viewpoint discrimination.' The prohibition on viewpoint discrimination has also played a central role in the key modern case on pornography regulation.4 
As a description of current free speech law, the first half-truth has considerable merit: Upon first examination, there are very few counterexamples, and we can find a good deal of affirmative support for the prohibition on viewpoint discrimination. Whatever its descriptive force, the prohibition on viewpoint discrimination is not difficult to explain in principle. It can be defended by reference to two central constitutional concerns: the removal of impermissible reasons for government action; and the ban on skewing effects on the system of free expression. 
The notion that the First Amendment bans skewing effects on public deliberation seems reasonably straightforward, but the prohibition on impermissible reasons is perhaps less clear. It should be connected with the requirement that judges be neutral.' A judge in a civil case may not have a personal stake in the outcome, even if that stake would not affect his ruling. This ban on judicial bias operates regardless of whether it affects the outcome. So too, the First Amendment is best understood to mean that government, in its regulatory capacity, may not censor speech on the basis of its own institutional interests. 
How might these ideas justify the ban on viewpoint discrimination? Imagine that a law forbids criticism of the current administration. Here the reasons for government action are most suspicious, for this sort of distortion of debate provides a good reason for distrusting public officials. The free speech clause declares offlimits certain reasons for censorship, and the ban on viewpoint discrimination seems admirably well-suited to ferreting out those reasons. 
Quite apart from the issue of impermissible reasons, viewpoint discrimination is likely to impose harmful skewing effects on the system of free expression. The notion that the First Amendment bans skewing effects on public deliberation is connected with the idea that government may not distort the deliberative process by erasing one side of a debate. Above all, government may not distort the deliberative process by insulating itself from criticism. The very freedom of the democratic process depends on forbidding that form of self-insulation. 
Thus far I have spoken of government censoring speech about itself, and this is indeed the most disturbing form of viewpoint discrimination. But even if viewpoint discrimination does not have this distinctive feature, there may still be cause for concern. Imagine that government says that speech in favor of the antitrust laws is permitted, but that the opposite message is forbidden; or that state law prevents people from criticizing affirmative action programs; or that a city concludes the pro-life point of view cannot be expressed. In these cases, too, the governmental motivation may be out of bounds and, even more fundamentally, the skewing effects on the system of free expression may not be tolerable. 
From both precedent and principle, it is tempting to conclude that viewpoint discrimination is always or almost always prohibited. Indeed, the Supreme Court sometimes acts as if that is the case, and this view may be coming to represent current free speech orthodoxy. But there are many counterexamples, and these greatly complicate matters. 
6 See Geoffrey R. Stone, Content Regulation and the First Amendment, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev 189, 227-33 (1983). 
7 See R.A.V., 112 S Ct at 2545-48. 
For example, there is a good deal of viewpoint discrimination in the area of commercial speech. Government can forbid advertising that promotes casino gambling,' even if it does not simultaneously forbid advertising that is opposed to casino gambling. This prohibition is unquestionably viewpoint-based. Moreover, government can and does forbid advertising in favor of cigarette smoking on television, 9 although government does not forbid television advertising that is opposed to cigarette smoking. On the contrary, there is a good deal of such advertising. Precisely the same is true for advertising relating to alcohol consumption. In commercial speech, then, there is a good deal of viewpoint discrimination.10 
As another example, consider the area of labor law, where courts have held that government may ban employers from speaking unfavorably about the effects of unionization during the period before a union election if the unfavorable statements might be interpreted as a threat against workers.11 Regulation of such speech is plausibly viewpoint discriminatory, because government does not proscribe employer speech favorable to unionization. 
As a final example, consider the securities laws that regulate proxy statements. Restrictions on viewpoint can be found here, too, as certain forms of favorable statements about a company's prospects are banned, while unfavorable views are permitted and perhaps even encouraged. 
Almost no one thinks that there is a constitutional problem with these various kinds of contemporary viewpoint discrimination. The restrictions are based on such obvious harms that the notion that the restriction is "viewpoint based" does not even have time to register. For example, casino gambling, cigarette smoking, and drinking all pose obvious risks to both self and others. Government controls on advertising for these activities are a means of 
s Posadas de Puerto Rico Associates v Tourism Co. of Puerto Rico, 478 US 328, 344 (1986). 
' See Public Health Smoking Act of 1969, 15 USC  1335 (1988) (prohibiting television and radio advertising of cigarettes and cigars after January 1, 1971). 
10 It would be possible to say that there is no such discrimination, because there is not quite a category called "advertising against" smoking, or gambling, or alcohol consumption. 
On this view, messages that oppose these activities are not really "advertising against," and hence there is no discrimination on the basis of point of view. This claim might be supported by the fact that ideological messages arguing for smoking in general are not banned. 
Perhaps government must be viewpoint-neutral with respect to messages, as it is, and perhaps the ban on advertising does not run afoul of the prohibition. I think that this response is mostly semantic; it redefines categories to claim that there is no discrimination when in fact government is suppressing one side of the debate. 
" See NLRB v Gissel Packing Co., 395 US 575, 618-19 (1969). controlling these risks. It is not entirely implausible to think that a liberal society should regulate or indeed ban some of these activities,12 though this is extremely controversial, and our government has generally not chosen to do so. If government has the power to ban the activity, but has decided instead to permit it, perhaps it can permit it on the condition that advertising about it be banned. 
This was the Supreme Court's reasoning in the casino gambling case. 13 
One could respond that this reasoning is wrong because it permits a distinctively objectionable form of paternalism. Some people think that the First Amendment is undergirded by a principle of listener autonomy, one that forbids government to ban speech because listeners might be persuaded by it.'4 On this view, the ban on advertising for cigarettes, gambling, and alcohol consumption invades the autonomy of those who would listen to such speech. If we were serious about the principle of listener autonomy, perhaps we would rarely allow government to stop people from hearing messages. This is a reasonable position, but it is not relevant to my current claim, which is purely descriptive: laws that discriminate on the basis of viewpoint are indeed upheld in certain circumstances. 
It is here that the first proposition emerges as a half-truth. 
Viewpoint discrimination is indeed permitted, and the Court should not pretend that it is always banned.' 5 We might conclude from the cases that viewpoint discrimination is not always prohibited and that the Court instead undertakes a more differentiated inquiry into the nature and strength of government justifications in particular cases. What is the nature of that more differentiated inquiry? I suggest that it begins with the view that viewpoint discrimination creates a strong presumption of invalidity. In certain narrow circumstances, the presumption is overcome because (a) there is at most a small risk of illegitimate motivation, (b) low 
" See Robert E. Goodin, No Smoking: The Ethical Issues (University of Chicago Press, 1987). 
iS Posadas,478 US at 345-46. The Court said that when the Constitution protects the subject of advertising restrictions, the state cannot prohibit such advertising. Id at 345. In the case at hand, however, the Court noted that the Constitution does not prohibit the Puerto Rican legislature from banning casino gambling by the residents of Puerto Rico. "[T]he greater power to completely ban casino gambling necessarily includes the lesser power to ban advertising of casino gambling." Id at 345-46. 
" See, for example, Strauss, 91 Colum L Rev at 334 (cited in note 5); T. M. Scanlon, A Theory of Free Expression, 1 Phil & Pub Aff 204 (1972). See also Ronald M. Dworkin, The Coming Battles Over Free Speech, NY Rev of Books 55 (June 11, 1992). 
1"R.A.V., 112 S Ct at 2547-48, seems to state this. value or unprotected speech is at issue, (c) the skewing effect on the system of free expression is minimal, and (d) the government is able to make a powerful showing of harm. In the commercial speech cases, for example, we are dealing with low-value speech, and the risk of illegitimate motivation is small. In the case of securities regulation, there is no substantial skewing effect on free expression, and there is a highly plausible claim that government is protecting people against deception. 
For present purposes, it is not necessary to devote a good deal of attention to these various considerations. My point is only that current law does not embody a flat ban on viewpoint discrimination. Certain forms of discrimination are found fully acceptable. 
They are not seen in this way only. because the presence of realworld harms obscures the existence of selectivity. The pretense embodied in our first half-truth has impaired the analysis of a number of free speech issues, including those raised by hate speech and pornography. Instead of relying on a per se rule, we should decide such cases by inquiring more particularly into the nature, legitimacy, and strength of government justifications. There may be sufficiently neutral justifications for apparent viewpoint discrimination in some such areas. I do not, however, suggest such justifications here.' 6 
II. HALF-TRUTH NUMBER Two: THE REAL THREAT TO THE SYSTEM OF FREE EXPRESSION COMES FROM CONTENT-BASED 
GOVERNMENT RESTRICTIONS ON SPEECH 
The second half-truth is a generalization of the first. It derives from the same basic framework. I think that it is even more misleading; in any case, it is the most important. 
Our free-speech tradition, it is commonly said, is especially hostile to content-based restrictions on speech.'" The principal recent exponents of this view see such restrictions as the most important obstacles to the system of free expression.' 8 It is as if the other obstacles are invisible, or not worth attention at all. Indeed, the Court itself treats these restrictions as the defining illustra 
" I do try to do this in Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note 3); Cass R. Sunstein, Neutrality in ConstitutionalLaw, 92 Colum L Rev 1, 13-29 (1992). See also Akhil Reed Arnar, The Case of the Missing Amendments: R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul, 106 Harv L Rev 124, 151-60 (1992). 
1 See Stone, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev at 196-97 (cited in note 6). See also Harry Kalven, Jr., A Worthy Tradition 6-19 (Harper & Row Publishers, 1988). 
18 I draw here upon Stone, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev at 194-233, 251-52 (cited in note 6); Kalven, A Worthy Tradition at 6-19 (cited in note 17). tions of threats to democratic self-governance. 9 Although there is much to be said for this idea as a matter of principle, it is in large part an artifact of our particular history. The free speech tradition in America grows out of the clear-and-present-danger cases featuring the powerful dissenting opinions of Justices Brandeis and Holmes,2" and culminating in the great case of Brandenburg v Ohio.1" In all of these cases, the government attempted to censor political speech on the basis of its content. 
The image bequeathed to the American legal tradition by these cases is exceptionally pervasive. It suggests that the real threats to free expression are indeed a result of content-based regulation of speech. Outside of the arguably distinctive context of politics, government censorship of literature and the arts also attests to the dangers of content-based regulation. The symbolic power of the great Brandeis and Holmes dissents is unrivalled, but other defining cases involve content-based restrictions as well. 
Consider in this connection the famous Ulysses litigation 22 and the more recent, highly publicized case involving the work of Robert Mapplethorpe.2 s 
The antipathy to content-based regulation thus derives great support from history. Moreover, it is not hard to see the basis for the antipathy. If we are fearful of illegitimate reasons for government regulation, or if we are concerned about skewing effects from regulation, then content-based regulation is especially dangerous. 
The basis for these judgments has been spelled out in great and often convincing detail2. 4 Throughout the twentieth century, ' See, for example, New York Times Co. v Sullivan, 376 US 254 (1964). 
20 See Abrams v United States, 250 US 616, 628 (1919) (Holmes dissenting) ("It is only the present danger of immediate evil or an intent to bring it about that warrants Congress in setting a limit to the expression of opinion where private rights are not concerned. Congress certainly cannot forbid all effort to change the mind of the country."); Whitney v California,274 US 357, 373 (1927) (Brandeis concurring) (The state may not place restrictions on speech "unless [such] speech would produce, or is intended to produce, a clear and imminent danger of some substantive evil which the State constitutionally may seek to prevent[.]"). 
395 US 444, 447 (1969) ("[T]he constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action."). 
22 See United States v One Book Entitled Ulysses, 72 F2d 705 (2d Cir 1934). See also Edward de Grazia, Girls Lean Back Everywhere: The Law of Obscenity and the Assault on Genius (Vintage Books, 1993), which recounts the historical saga of the publication of Uly~ses in the United States. 
23 See Contemporary Arts Center v Ney, 735 F Supp 743 (S D Ohio 1990). 
24 See Stone, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev at 217-27 (cited in note 6); Geoffrey R. Stone, Content-NeutralRestrictions,54 U Chi L Rev 46, 54-57 (1987); Laurence H. Tribe, Amerimajor dangers have come from government regulations designed to impose on the polity a uniformity of opinion, to stifle artistic or literary diversity, and to entrench the government's own self-interest. In an era in which many countries are emerging from communist rule, it is especially salutary to focus on the risks posed by content-based regulation of speech. 
But is it correct to say that the greatest threats to free expression stem from content-based regulation of speech? In contemporary America, I believe that an affirmative answer will divert attention from other important issues. Under current conditions, the second half-truth may even have become an anachronism. It renders other problems invisible. It sees the First Amendment through the wrong prism. It focuses attention on comparatively trivial problems-pornography prosecutions, commercial speech, private libel-and loses sight of the large picture. 
Consider, for example, a conventional view about freedom of expression. If we were to examine recent books on this topic, we would generally find a firm consensus that the system of free expression is at risk to the extent that government censors sexuallyexplicit speech, purportedly dangerous speech, or commercial speech on the basis of its content.2 5 The war against Ulysses is said to have found a modern parallel in the attack on violent pornography. The effort to deter a civil-rights advertisement through use of libel law in New York Times Co. v Sullivan" is said to be fundamentally the same as the continuing application of libel law to falsehoods about private people.2 The restriction of the speech of political dissidents is said to have a modern analogue in the regulation of false and misleading commercial speech.2 8 
Views of this sort are widespread. Moreover, it may even be right to say that the principal threats to free speech come from content-based restrictions; but the claim needs to be evaluated by reference to some sort of criteria. It should not be treated as an can ConstitutionalLaw ch 12 (Foundation Press, 2d ed 1988); John Hart Ely, Flag Desecration: A Case Study in the Roles of Categorizationand Balancing in First Amendment Analysis, 88 Harv L Rev 1482 (1975). 
25 See, for example, de Grazia, Girls Lean Back Everywhere (cited in note 22) (discussing government censorship of authors and publishers); Rodney A. Smolla, Free Speech in an Open Society 3-17 (Alfred A. Knopf, 1992); Anthony Lewis, Make No Law (Random House, 1991); Nat Hentoff, Free Speech For Me-But Not For Thee (Aaron Asher Books, 1992). 
11 376 US at 254. $7 See Dworkin, NY Rev of Books at 62-64 (cited in note 14). 
"8See Alex Kozinski and Stuart Banner, Who's Afraid of Commercial Speech?, 76 Va L Rev 627, 644 (1990). axiom. Let me suggest provisionally that we should evaluate any system of free expression at least in part by attending to two matters: the amount of attention devoted to public issues and the expression of diverse views on those issues. Use of these criteria accords well with the original Madisonian vision of the First Amendment.2 9 It also draws support from a range of important writings, most prominently those of Alexander Meiklejohn. 0 Many people are skeptical of the idea that the free speech principle should be understood wholly through the lens of democracy." But one need not think that the First Amendment is exclusively or even primarily connected with democratic self-government in order to conclude. that something is wrong if the system deals little with public issues and contains little diversity of views. 
If these are our governing criteria, I suggest that the principal current problem is not content-based restrictions on speech but rather a speech "market" in which these values are poorly served. 
It is comparatively unimportant if the government is overzealous in its regulation of child pornography, or if government regulates commercial advertising that is not terribly deceptive. But it is far from unimportant if the system of free expression produces little substantive attention to public issues, or if people are not exposed to a wide diversity of views. If we are interested in ensuring such attention and such exposure, we may not be entirely pleased with the operation of the so-called free market in speech. 
In large part, this claim is a factual one. To evaluate the claim, we need to have a very thorough empirical understanding of the free speech "status quo," and here there is a distressingly large gap in the free speech literature. There are few more important tasks for the study of free expression than to compile information on existing free speech fare. But a number of things do seem clear3.2 
" See, generally, Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note 3). 
so Alexander Meiklejohn, Free Speech and its Relation to Self-Government 27 (Harper & Brothers Publishers, 1948) ("The principle of the freedom of speech springs from the necessities of the program of self-government. It is not a Law of Nature or of Reason in the abstract. It is a deduction from the basic American agreement that public issues shall be decided by universal suffrage."). See also Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 Ind L J 1 (1971); Owen M. Fiss, Free Speech and Social Structure, 71 Iowa L Rev .1405, 1409-10 (1986). 
11 See, for example, Martin H. Redish, The Value of Free Speech, 130 U Pa L Rev 591 (1982). 
0' 1 draw here on Phyllis C. Kaniss, Making Local News (University of Chicago Press, 1991); Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note 3). An especially valuable empirical treatment is C. Edwin Baker, Advertisingand a DemocraticPress,140 U Pa L Rev 2097 (1992). In most of the broadcasting that people watch, there is exceedingly little attention to public issues. The "soundbite" phenomenon assures that during electoral campaigns, public attention will be focused on marginally relevant matters-the "Murphy Brown" controversy, escalating allegations of various kinds-rather than on the real issues at stake. Such attention as there is often centers on sensationalistic anecdotes, usually with an unwarranted whiff of scandal. 
Coverage of public issues often involves misleading "human interest" anecdotes, in which people are asked how they "feel" about policies that appear to have harmed them. Frequently public issues are entirely absent. For example, the local news sometimes consists of discussion about the movie that immediately preceded it. Marketplace pressures, including the desires of advertisers, encourage the press to avoid substantive controversy. Often advertisers affect content, partly by discouraging serious discussion of public affairs, partly by avoiding sponsoring controversial programming, and partly by encouraging a favorable context for their products.38 In the place of genuine diversity of view, offering perspectives from different positions, most of the broadcasting that people watch typically consists of a bland, watered down version of conventional morality. It would therefore be extremely surprising if commercial television were able to take a firm "pro-choice" or "pro-life" position in a news special or a prime-time movie, or a strong defense or critique of affirmative action. 
In these circumstances, some major threats to a well-functioning system of free expression, defined in Madisonian terms, come not from content-based regulation, but from free markets in speech. Market pressures are compromising the two goals of a system of free expression. This is of course only a contingent fact. It is a product of a particular constellation of the current forces of supply and demand. If market forces were different, we might see a great deal of attention to public issues and a large amount of diversity of view. But under current conditions, this is hardly the case. 
We might go further. The contemporary problem lies not merely in market forces, as if these were brute natural facts, but more precisely in the legal rules that underlie and constitute those markets. Broadcasters and newspapers are of course given property rights in their media. Without such government grants, the speech " See Baker, 140 U Pa L Rev at 2139-68 (cited in note 32). market would be entirely different. It is these rights-generally of exclusive use-that make it possible for owners to exclude people who would like to speak and be heard. If a critic of a war, or of Roe v Wade,34 cannot get onto network television, it is not because of nature or "private power," but because legal rules prevent him from doing so. Property laws at both the federal and state levels make any efforts to obtain access to television airwaves a civil or criminal trespass. 
Market forces are a product of law, including the law that allocates entitlements. That law, like all other, should be assessed for conformity to the First Amendment. The law of property, granting rights of exclusive use, is of course content-neutral rather than content-based. When CBS excludes someone from the airwaves, it is not because government has made a conscious decision to exclude a particular point of view. But it is also untrue to say (as current law perhaps does) 5 that government is not involved, that we have a problem of "private power," or that there is no state action for free speech purposes. There is a content-neutral restriction on speech. The question is whether that content-neutral restriction is helping or harming the system of free expression. To make this assessment, we should compare it with other possible systems. Alternatives might include a "fairness doctrine" that calls for attention to public issues and diversity of view; a point system creating incentives to license applicants who promise to cover important issues; a system of subsidies and penalties designed to increase coverage of important issues; or legal restrictions on the power of advertisers over programming content.3 6 
If our current system of free expression is functioning poorly, it is because of the content-neutral law that underlies current markets. I believe that many important problems for the current system of free speech in America lie not in content-based regulation-which generally involves peripheral issues and almost never strikes at what I am taking to be the core of the free speech guarantee-but instead in the operation of the free market and in the legal rules that constitute it. In these circumstances, it is worse than ironic that people interested in the theory and practice of free speech focus on such comparatively trivial issues as commercial speech, disclosure of the names of rape victims, and controls on 84 410 US 113 (1973). 88 CBS v Democratic Nati Committee, 412 US 94 (1973). 
6 For details, see Baker, 140 U Pa L Rev at 2178-2219 (cited in note 32); Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (cited in note 3). 36 obscenity. The principal questions for the system of free expression lie elsewhere.3 7 III. HALF-TRUTH NUMBER THREE: GOVERNMENT "PENALTIES" ON SPEECH ARE FUNDAMENTALLY DIFFERENT FROM SELECTIVE FUNDING 
OF SPEECH 
In the next generation, some of the most important free speech issues will arise from selective funding of speech. What if government funds some artists but not others, imposes conditions on what libraries may obtain, or regulates political expression by refusing to pay for the literature of certain causes? On the constitutional question, the Supreme Court's cases are exceptionally hard to unpack. We might distinguish five different propositions, which in concert seem to reflect the current law.3a Once we have them in place, we will be able to see the key role of the third halftruth. 
(A) Government is under no obligation to subsidize speech. 
Government can refuse to fund any and all speech-related activities. In this sense, it can remain out of the speech market altogether. 
(B) Government may speak however it wishes. Public officials can say what they want. There is no free speech issue if officials speak. Speech of this kind "abridges" the speech of no one else. 
(C) Government may not use its power over funds or other benefits so as to pressure people to relinquish rights that they "otherwise" have. This is an obscure idea in the abstract, but it can be clarified through some examples. Government could not say that as a condition for receiving welfare, people must vote for a certain political party. Government could not tell people that if they are to have drivers' licenses, they must agree not to criticize the President. In both cases, government makes funding decisions so as to deprive people of rights of expressive liberty that they would otherwise have. 
But-and this is an important qualification-government may indeed "condition" the receipt of funds, or other benefits, on some limitation on rights, if the condition is reasonably related to a neu 
' See Lee C. Bollinger, Images of a Free Press chs 2, 5 (University of Chicago Press, 1991); Commission on Freedom of the Press, A Free and Responsible Press107-33 (University of Chicago Press, 1947) ("Hutchins Report"). 
88 Rust v Sullivan, 111 S Ct 1759 (1991) (allowing selective subsidy); Harris v McRae, 448 US 297 (1980) (same); FCC v League of Women Voters, 468 US 364 (1984) (banning penalty). tral, noncensorial interest. For example, the government could forbid you from working for the CIA unless you agree not to write about your CIA-related activities, or could prevent you from political campaigning if you work for the federal government. 9 In both cases, the government has legitimate justifications that do not involve censorship. Its limitation on CIA employees is designed to ensure the successful operation of the CIA, which entails a measure of secrecy. Its limitation on government employees is designed to ensure that political campaigning does not compromise basic government functions. Of course this principle will create some difficult line-drawing problems. 
(D) Government may not "coerce" people by fining or imprisoning them if they exercise their First Amendment rights. Fines and imprisonment are the most conventional examples of free speech violations. They do not raise "unconstitutional conditions" issues at all, and may be approached far more straightforwardly. 40 
(E) The government may apparently be selective in its funding choices. In other words, government may direct its resources as it chooses, so long as it does not run afoul of principles (C) and (D) above. Government may give funding only to those projects, including those speaking projects, of which it approves. Thus government may fund art, literature, or legal and medical care and impose limits on the grantees, even on their speech, if the limits regard what may be done with government money. 
Rust v Sullivan, a highly controversial Supreme Court decision, is the source of this last proposition.41 In Rust, the Court suggested that so long as government is using its own money, and not affecting "private" expression, it can channel its funds however it wishes. The problem arose when the Department of Health and Human Services issued regulations banning federally-funded family-planning services from engaging in (a) counseling concerning, (b) referrals for, and (c) activities advocating abortion as a method of family planning. The plaintiffs claimed, among other things, that these restrictions on abortion-related speech violated the First Amendment. In particular, they argued that the restrictions discriminated on the basis of point of view. The Court disagreed, '9 Snepp v United States, 444 US 507 (1980). " I will question this view below. 41 111 S Ct at 1759. holding: 
The Government can, without violating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encourage certain activities it believes to be in the public interest, without at the same time funding an alternate program which seeks to deal with the problem in another way. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other.42 In response to the claim that the regulations conditioned the receipt of a benefit on the relinquishment of a right, the Court held that "here the government is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply insisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized. '43 
Rust seems to establish the important principle that government can allocate funds to private people to establish "a program" that accords with government's preferred point of view. In this area, even viewpoint discrimination is permitted. In fact, the Court seems to make a sharp distinction between government "coercion"-entry into the private realm of markets and private interactions-on the one hand and funding decisions on the other. Hence we arrive at our third half-truth: Government may not "penalize" speech (propositions (C) and (D)), but it may fund speech selectively however it chooses, by allocating its funds to preferred causes (propositions (A) and (E)). 
This view captures an enduring principle, one that will inevitably play a role in the constitutional law of freedom of expression. 
Often government has legitimate justifications for treating funding decisions differently from criminal punishments. As noted, it may conclude that people who work for the CIA must refrain from speaking on certain matters, on the ground that the speech could compromise national security. Hence government could conclude "' Id at 1772. The Court added: To hold that the Government unconstitutionally discriminates on the basis of viewpoint when it chooses to fund a program dedicated to advance certain permissible goals, because the program in advancing those goals necessarily discourages alternate goals, would render numerous government programs constitutionally suspect. When Congress established a National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles, 22 USC  4411(b), it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and Fascism. 
Id at 1773. 
" Id at 1774. that if it is to provide people with the benefit of CIA employment, it may condition their speech. So too, the President could conclude that Cabinet-level employees must speak in ways of which the President approves. Without imposing this kind of condition on speech, the President's power to execute the laws would be severely compromised. The condition is therefore acceptable. It can be justified by reference to sufficiently neutral justifications. 
But the sharp distinction between penalties and subsidies is inadequate. It is far too simple. It sets out the wrong sets of categories. Most generally, there are no such fundamental distinctions among the law that underlies markets, the law that represents disruption of markets, and the law thatcalls for funding decisions. All are law, and the First Amendment directs us to assess each in terms of its purposes and effects. 
To make the point a bit more dramatically: All constitutional speech cases are in an important sense unconstitutional conditions cases. When the government says that someone will be fined for speaking-our category (D) above-it in effect imposes an unconstitutional condition. It is generally saying that your property-which is, as a matter of fact, governmentally conferred" -may be held only on condition that you refrain from speaking. 
To be sure, a case of this sort is not seen as one of unconstitutional conditions at all. But this is only because existing holdings of property are seen, wrongly, as pre-political and pre-legal. To support the outcome in category (D), it would be more precise to say that a condition is usually unconstitutional when government is using its power over property that it has created through law to deprive you of something to which you are otherwise entitled-and you are always otherwise entitled to property that you now own. But to put things in this way would be to place funding cases and other cases on the same analytic ground. The sharp split drawn in Rust is therefore misconceived. It is here that the distinction between penalties and subsidies is merely a half-truth. 
We may go further. The First Amendment question is not whether there is a subsidy or a penalty. For two reasons, it is wrong to ask that question. First, the question is exceedingly hard 
" This has no normative implications. By saying that property rights are a creation of law, I do not mean in any way to disparage the institution of private property, which is crucially important to, among other things, individual liberty, economic prosperity, and democratic self-government. I mean only to suggest that to have a system of private property, government controls are necessary, as people in Eastern Europe have recently learned very well. to answer; it forces us to chase ghosts. Second, it is essentially irrelevant.45 We might have a perfectly acceptable "penalty," and we might have an impermissible refusal to subsidize. 
The first problem is that in order to decide whether there is a subsidy or a penalty, we need a baseline to establish the ordinary or normatively-privileged state of affairs. When government denies Medicaid benefits to artists, has it penalized speech, or has it refused to subsidize it? We cannot answer that question without saying what it is that artists are "ordinarily" or "otherwise" entitled to have.4" The Constitution does not really answer that question, and without a textual resolution it is very difficult for courts to resolve it on their own. 
More important, the First Amendment does not say that "penalties" on speech are always prohibited and that "subsidies" are always allowed. Even if we could tell the difference between the two, we would not have accomplished very much. Perhaps government can "penalize" speech when it has legitimate justifications for doing so. Perhaps government must sometimes subsidize speech when its failure to do so is grounded on an impermissible reason. The notions of penalty and subsidy seem to truncate analysis at a too early stage. 
I do not claim that funding decisions affecting speech should be treated "the same" as other sorts of government decisions that affect speech-whatever this ambiguous claim might mean. The development of constitutional limits on funding that interferes with expression raises exceedingly complex issues. But for now, we have reason to doubt whether our third half-truth, and Rust, would be taken to their logical extreme. Can it seriously be argued that government could fund the Democratic Convention but refuse to fund the Republican Convention? Is it even possible that government could give grants only to academic projects reflecting governmentally-preferred viewpoints? More likely, Rust will come to be understood as a case involving private counselling rather than public advocacy, in the distinctive context in which a ban on abortion counselling is ancillary to a ban on the performance of abortions. It will not be taken to authorize government selectively to subsidize one point of view in a controversy over some public issue. 
Unconstitutional Conditions, 102 Harv L Rev 1413 (1989); Cass R. Sunstein, The PartialConstitution ch 11 (Harvard University Press, 1993). 
,1 See Robert Nozick, Coercion, in Sidney Morgenbesser, ed, Philosophy,Science and Method: Essays in Honor of Ernest Nagel 440 (St. Martin's Press, 1969). 
In short: Adherence to the First Amendment requires an analysis of the effects of selective funding on the system of free expression, and of the legitimacy of the government justifications for selectivity. A sharp split between penalties and subsidies will not do the job; some penalties are acceptable and some selective subsidies are not. The third half-truth is thus rooted in anachronistic ideas about the relationship between the citizen and the state. It poses a genuine threat to free speech under modern conditions. 
IV. HALF-TRUTH NUMBER FOUR: CONTENT-BASED RESTRICTIONS ON SPEECH ARE WORSE THAN CONTENT-NEUTRAL RESTRICTIONS 
ON SPEECH 
We arrive finally at the last and most general half-truth. From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that the Supreme Court is especially skeptical of content-based restrictions and especially hospitable, toward content-neutral restrictions. 7 Contentbased -restrictions are presumed invalid. Outside the relatively narrow categories of unprotected or less protected speech-libel, commercial speech, fighting words, and so on-the Court rarely upholds content-based restrictions. By contrast, content-neutral restrictions are upheld so long as they can survive a form of balancing. In undertaking that balancing, the Court is often highly deferential to government judgments about the need for contentneutral restrictions. One of the most striking developments in recent law is the Court's increased hostility to content-based restrictions and its increased deference to content-neutral ones. Indeed, the distinction between the two kinds of restrictions seems to become sharper every term. Thus it is striking to compare the recent invalidation of a relatively narrow content-based restriction-the ban on cross-burning-with the recent validation of a broad content-neutral restriction-the ban on solicitation in airports.4 
There is much to be said in favor of this fourth half-truth.4 9 As noted, it does tend to capture current law. Moreover, it makes considerable sense as a matter of principle. Generalizing only slightly from the previous discussion of viewpoint-based restrictions, we might conclude that content-based restrictions are pecu47See generally Stone, 54 U Chi L Rev at 54-117 (cited in note 24). 
48 See R.A.V., 112 S Ct at 2547-49, discussed in text accompanying notes 2 and 3; Intl Society for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. v Lee, 112 S Ct 2701, 2705-09 (1992) (holding that an airport terminal is not a public forum and that the port authority's ban on solicitation was a reasonable means of minimizing inconvenience and disruption of travelers). 
9 See Stone, 54 U Chi L Rev at 54-57 (cited in note 24). liarly likely to stem from an illegitimate government reason, and peculiarly likely to have intolerable skewing effects on the system of free expression. A law that forbids AIDS-related advertising on subways, for example, is more objectionable than a law that forbids all advertising on subways. Content-neutral restrictions are far more trustworthy, for the reasons for regulation are apt to be more legitimate and the skewing effects less worrisome. On this basis, a legal system could do far worse than to set out a presumption against content-based restrictions and a presumption in favor of content-neutral ones. 
These presumptions should not, however, be pressed too hard. 
There are cases in which content-neutral restrictions are especially damaging, and cases in which content-based restrictions are not so bad. Suppose, for example, that government forbids all speech in airports, train stations, and bus terminals. Here we will have a fundamental intrusion on processes of public deliberation. Indeed, one of the most effective strategies of tyrants is to limit the arenas in which public- deliberation can take place. Surely this sort of intrusion is more severe than what arises when, for example, small public universities ban a narrow category of racial hate speech. The content-neutral restriction may seriously restrict the number of expressive outlets and thus impair the system of democratic deliberation. It may also have content differential effects: when people are prevented from engaging in door-to-door canvassing, or from using public parks, there are severe adverse effects on poorly financed causes. Moreover, some content-based regulation-consider a limited ban on racial hate speech or narrow classes of violent pornography-is at least plausibly a modestly intrusive corrective to an already content-based status quo. Whether or not such contentbased regulations should be upheld, it seems wrong to think that regulations of this sort are automatically more objectionable than regulations that are content-neutral. 
I do not suggest that the distinction between content-based and content-neutral regulations is a failure, or that it should be abandoned. The danger arises if the doctrine becomes too rigid and mechanical. There is a risk, for example, that the current Court will become exceptionally receptive to content-neutral restrictions on speech, giving them the strongest presumption of validity. It is possible that something of this kind has already occurred. There is also a risk that outside of a few narrow categories, the Court will invalidate all content-based restrictions without looking seriously at the reasons for regulation in the particular case. But many content-neutral restrictions have extremely harmful consequences and some content-based restrictions are founded on adequate justifications. The fourth half-truth is dangerous above all because in its rigidity, it operates as a substitute for close analysis of particular problems.50 
CONCLUSION 
With any well-elaborated body of legal doctrine, there is a pervasive danger that the doctrinal lines and distinctions will take on a life of their own. The purposes and goals that gave rise to those lines and distinctions sometimes become increasingly remote. This is, I believe, the source of the problem with all four half-truths. 
The larger goals of free speech doctrine have often been abandoned in favor of continued attention to particular doctrines that serve those goals in only partial and indirect ways. 
It is of course possible to debate the content of those larger goals. Much ink has been spilled on that highly-contested question." But we need not enter into especially controversial territory in order to assert that at least a part of the justification for a strong free speech principle is its contribution to the American conception of self-government. This conception-associated with the Madisonian view of free speech-helps explain the persistence of each of our half-truths. All of them can be seen at least in part as efforts to protect against skewing effects on democratic deliberation and illegitimate government efforts at self-insulation. It is for this reason that the propositions I have discussed can fairly be described as half-truths, rather than as simple illusions. 
But the four half-truths have indeed taken on a life of their own, and in important ways they disserve the system of free expression. In their generality and abstractness, they distract attention from current threats to the system of free expression and, even worse, they threaten to make those threats invisible as such. 
One of the extraordinary characteristics of the American system of free expression is its capacity to grow and change over time. If the 
50 Of course, it may sometimes be worthwhile to insist on rules that are crude but that reduce the costs of individualized inquiry. Some of the oversimplification in free speech law might be justified on this ground. 
" See, for example, Scanlon, 1 Phil & Pub Aff at 204 (cited in note 14) (autonomy theory); T. M. Scanlon, Freedom of Expression and Categoriesof Expression, 40 U Pitt L Rev 519 (1979) (partial retraction of that theory); Strauss, 91 Colum L Rev at 334 (cited in note 5) (autonomy theory); Kent Greenawalt, Free Speech Justifications,89 Colum L Rev 119 (1989) (overview of theory of free speech value); Frederick Schauer, Free Speech: A PhilosophicalInquiry chs 2-5 (Cambridge University Press, 1982) (same); Redish, 130 U Pa L Rev at 591 (cited in note 31) (autonomy theory). system is to promote democratic goals in the twenty-first century, I suggest that the four half-truths should be recognized not only for their contributions to human liberty, but also for their limitations and their damaging effects on some of the most important current free speech controversies. 
New constitutions could require governments to keep track of what counts. INFORMATION, PLEASE By Cass R. Sunstein Many Eastern European constitution-makers are exploring intriguing innovations in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. In keeping with this spirit of experimentation, it might well make sense for Eastern Europeans to consider an entirely new constitutional provision, one that would require their governments to compile and publicize an annual Human Development Index (HDI). The HDI might be based on an understanding of what matters most to human lives, including longevity, educational achievement, and average income. An annual HDI could be a substantial step toward promoting greater political accountability, toward improving inadequate information-gathering capacities, and toward concentrating governmental attention on what matters most. 
If the HDI requirement isnot included in the constitution, it should probably be required by another form of law, one that is understood to be both fundamental and enduring. 
Thus far, the new Eastern European constitutions have focused on human development through vague aspirations requiring the government to provide medical care, environmental quality, leisure time, just pay, and much more (see "Something Old, Something New," EECR, Winter 1993). Aspirations of this kind might well prove unenforceable, and in any case there is reason to doubt whether they will do much good. By contrast, a constitutionally-compelled HDI might well serve as an important spur to public and private efforts-both national and international-to counteract existing social problems in Eastern Europe. Rather than offering an endless catalogue of broad and probably meaningless positive rights, Eastern European nations would do well to impose on their governments a continuing obligation to inform their citizens, and the international community, of how current policies have actually affected human lives. Such a provision would also fit extremely well with the right, generally recognized in the new constitutions, to receive information. 
The idea of a "human development index" comes out ofthe United Nations Development Program, which has published annual Human Development Reports since comprehensible measure of the nature of people's lives in different nations and, by allowing comparative assessments, to get a sense of progress over time and of what sorts of government strategies work best. The precise ingredients of the HDI are of course a matter for discussion and debateitself a potentially beneficial process-and there is no reason to insist that any nation should limit itself to any specific set of guidelines. The key point is to ensure that nations focus on what matters most, that is, the nature of human lives under the existing political regime. 
What is HDI? The HDI isa simple concept. The current United Nations approach grows out of attention to the (a) longevity, (b) knowledge, and (c) income of individuals. Thus understood, the HDI is superior to many other possible indicators of human welfare, such as gross national product or average income, standing alone. Even if average income is high, a nation is doing poorly when too many of its people are dying young. Similarly, the gross national product-though a popular measure of national performance-is only crudely correlated with things that are important. Even if we wanted to, we could not measure "utility" directly; and such economic notions as "mnaximized wealth" seem an inadequate measure of what matters most. 
Under the UN approach, "longevity" is calculated on the basis of life expectancy at birth. "Knowledge" is determined by a formula based on adult literacy and mean years of schooling, with literacy counting for two-thirds of the measurement. The "income" ingredient, growing out of per capita gross national product, is calculated from a formula that adjusts this figure to take account of the particular nation's poverty level, purchasing capacities, and distribution of wealth. Unlike long life and literacy, income of course has purely instrumental (rather than intrinsic) importance. Income matters only because of what it allows people to do or to be. Nonetheless, income is undoubtedly connected with a wide range of human capacities, and it is easier to measure directly than are many of those capacities. The UN measurement affords equal weight to each of the three variables. 
There is nothing inevitable about the current UN approach, and it is by no means clear that Eastern European nations should do exactly what the UN has done. The creation of an index-a single number-to capture "human development" raises many complexities. 
For example, it is highly controversial to give equal weight to each variable. Perhaps longevity deserves more weight; perhaps other variables should be considered. Nor is it clear that Eastern European countries should adopt the current formula for measuring "knowledge." Any "index" for assessing these matters is likely to have a degree of arbitrariness. It is especially important to ensure that the disaggregated ingredients ofany conclusions are made public. 
Interesting variations on HDI can be found in other nations, especially Scandinavia. The Swedish assessment of "standard of living" is more disaggregatcd and less mathematical than the UN approach. It takes account of health and access to health care; education and skills; housing; security of life and property (including freedom from crime); availability of recreation and cultural resources; employment; income and wealth; and political participation. Of special interest is the Swedish insistence that well-being is not to be measured in purely subjective terms. 
People sometimes adjust their aspirations to a status quo containing deprivation and injustice, and for this reason it isimportant to see what goods and opportunities people actually have, not merely what they think about their situation. Compared to the UN approach, a particular advantage of the Swedish approach is that it is relatively robust; the disadvantage is its complexity. 
An interesting alternative is a comparative survey in Scandinavian countries, growing out of the University of Helsinki. In addition to the Swedish factors, the Finnish approach emphasizes the quality of the biological and physical environment, including air and water pollution; the nature of relations with other people in the local community, in the family, and within the workplace; and opportunities to enjoy nature. The comparative survey is intended to include both objective and subjective indicators of welfare. 
Whatever the particular approach, it is both possible and important to show variations between men and women and among different regions and various ethnic groups. We will learn a great deal if we are able to show that certain well-defined groups come out consistently below others. Information ofthis kind can improve democratic debate, which too often depends on intuition and anecdote rather than on solid facts. I will return to this point shortly. 
Current results in Eastern Europe and elsewhere The 1993 United Nations report shows some intriguing results. The report ranks 173 countries. The first six are Japan, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, Sweden, and the United States; the last six are Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, and Guinea. 
Of the Eastern European countries, the highestranking is Czechoslovakia, ranked 26th; Hungary is number 28, Lithuania 29, Estonia 34, Latvia 35, Russia 37, Bulgaria 40, Ukraine 45, Poland 48, Georgia 49, Kazakhstan 54, Azerbaijan 62, Moldova 64, Romania 77, and Albania 78. The first fifty-five countries are classified as having "high human development"; thus only Azerbaijan, Moldova, Romania, and Albania fall outside of that category. 
Notably, though, sone of the trend lines for Eastern Europe show substantially less improvement since 1960 than the parallel trends in other nations. In Eastern Europe, life expectancy has generally stayed constant or improved by about two years in this thirty-year period, whereas there has been an eleven-year increase in Japan and about a six-year leap in Canada, the United States, 
Germany, and Austria. Also notably, Eastern European countries have compiled relatively little information about quality of life for their citizens, so comparative data over time are unavailable. On the other hand, the report indicates that previously Communist countries have a good deal of available human capital for the current transition, especially because of significant recent investments in education and health. 
There are interesting relationships among the three variables of longevity, knowledge, and income. Some countries with relatively high income ranks (including Algeria, Namibia, and South Africa) have relatively low HDI ranks. Some countries have HDI ranks that are well above their income ranks (including China, Colombia, and Uruguay). 
There are also important variations among groups within a single country. In America, for example, whites, standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI, whereas blacks rank around 31st, and Hispanics around 35 (next to Estonia). In addition, and significantly, women fare much worse than men in terms of HDI. Unfortunately, existing information from Eastern Europe appears extremely sketchy, and does not allow full comparisons between men and women, among ethnic groups, or among geographic regions within countries. As we will see, the absence ofadequate information from Eastern Europe itself provides an argument in favor of a new constitutional requirement, 
At the present time, few constitutions require the compilation of reports and information. I think this is an unfortunate gap in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. It would be most valuable to add to Eastern European constitutions a provision of the following sort: "Each year, the government shall compile and make availablea human development index. This index shall be designed to reflect the quality of life in the nation in the previous year.It shall contain information about longevity, educationalattainments,per capita income, and other relevant variables." The particular wording of the provision is not critical; what is important is the general idea. 
An HDI should be a powerful educative force, promoting democratic processes and at the same time counteracting the very problems that the HDI measures, such as premature death, lack of education, and poverty. A special advantage of an HDI is that it focuses attention EAST EUROPEAN CONsrTuIONAI. REVIEw on what matters most; it gives a shorthand but informative formula for measuring whether things are getting better or worse. There are several reasons, moreover, for constitutionalizing an HDI requirement. 
First, a constitutional requirement ofcompilation and disclosure of an HDI could do a great deal to promote political accountability. It could do this by ensuring that the public is aware of what governmental policies have done for those subject to them. This awareness might well be a large aid to democratic processes. In this respect, the HDI can be seen as a structural part ofthe constitution, one that is designed to provide some of the preconditions for a well-functioning democratic system. The point is especially important for Eastern Europe, where the key question for the next generation has to do with the realworld effects of various initiatives, many of which will be highly experimental in character. A constitutional commitment to cataloguing the effects of those initiatives would be an important and salutary step. 
Second, the use of an HDI should help focus governmental and public attention on the right questions. Many nations already recognize this general point at the subconstitutional level. Thus they require annual reports about unemployment, poverty, economic trends, and the gross national product. The existence of relatively objective information on these issues helps hold government accountable for what matters. it also helps inform democratic debate, day-to-day policymaking, and the electoral process itself. 
Third, an HDI could help counteract the feeling, now apparently widespread among many citizens in Eastern Europe, that the new order is treating free markets as an inherent or independent good, quite apart from what markets are doing for people subject to them. In defending social and economic rights, Wiktor Osiatynski has powerfully invoked this concern about the relationship between political legitimacy and explicit governmental focus, at the constitutional level, on social and economic difficulties. Perhaps the concern is best met through an HDI, putting private and public attention on what markets are accomplishing, rather than by enshrining social and economic rights. 
Fourth, the HDI should help private and public forces to redress the very problems that it catalogues. By drawing national and international attention to such issues as longevity, education, and incomes-and to variations between men and women and among relevant groups and regions-the relevant information can spur valuable initiatives. We already have a good deal of empirical knowledge about the potential effects ofsuch techniques. Public disclosure of information about hunger and famines is a principal motivating force for remedial and preventive action by government, as Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen showed in their 1989 book Hunger and Public Action. So too, exposure of environmentally degrading activity within the United States has been a powerful catalyst to public and private remedies. Competition can of course provide incentives for improvement. International competition over maximizing the current HDI-together with the prospect for national and international embarrassment-may well yield improvements in many nations. 
There is a final point. The HDI could help counteract two mutually reinforcing problems in Eastern Europe. These are (a) inadequate information-gathering capacities and (b) a conspicuous pathology of many democracies, which is to direct public and governmental attention toward issues that are often only indirectly connected with real improvements in human lives. In the aftermath of Communism, it is clear that many East European countries need to assemble much more objective information on how people are actually doing. Ironically, a democratic system can be an obstacle to this goal insofar as it tends to direct attention to alleged scandals in the high levels ofgovernment, or gossip about their activities, rather than the question whether policy initiatives are having beneficial effects for the citizenry. A large advantage ofthe HDI-especially if it receives media attentionis that it tends to place public attention in the right place. There is evidence that this beneficial result has already occurred from the publication of the annual UN reports. 
To say all this is hardly to claim that a constitutonally mandated HDI would be a panacea, or to deny that it brings potential problems. By themselves, compilation and publication of information are only that. The effect of information depends on what people do with it. Moreover, reasonable people disagree about what ought to be counted in an HDI, and here there is room for errors. It is surely possible that many HDI's will be based on unreasonable judgments about what matters, or on large mistakes about the facts. 
An HDI would, no doubt, raise significant administrative issues. For one thing, the proposal presupposes a significant degree of administrative competence and capacities. It is possible that a full-scale program of information-gathering will take some time to develop. Despite Western images of the omniscient Big Brother, it seems clear that Communist regimes have had, on many important matters, highly undeveloped capacities for gathering information. An HDI requirement might well stimulate improvements on this score, but we should not underestimate the difficulties of successfully performing the relevant information-gathering tasks. 
There is also a risk that governmental or private corruption or self-interest might well infect the HDI in any given year. The result would he inaccurate and inflated numbers. This is an especially important concern in Eastern Europe, where citizens arc accustomed to reports by the government showing that everything is getting better. Past practice has made citizens extremely skeptical of such proclamations; extreme cynicism about governmental reports is an unfortunate legacy of Communist regimes. For this reason it is important to ensure that the compilation of the relevant information is as objective and professional as possible. 
Two remedies suggest themselves. First, legal steps should be taken domestically to ensure that those who are compiling the data are independent of politics. Building on an analogy to the central bank, the ombudsman, and the public broadcasting system, legal and even constitutional guarantees could create the necessary independence-by, for example, calling for term appointments and forbidding politically-motivated discharge of the relevant officials. Second, there should be international monitoring of the HDI. Something of this sort goes on in the UN in any event, and might well provide some protection against the risks of bias and error. 
If the HDI is to appear in the constitution, other issues arise. Will the HDI be subject tojudicial review? If the government prepares no HDI, or a deeply flawed one, can the Constitutional Court respond? These are complex issues, and I have only tentative suggestions to offer. I propose that the Court ought to have the authority to compel issuance of the HDI, and that every citizen should have an enforceable right to the document itself. (As noted above, this idea might fit well with the right, now popular in Eastern Europe, to receive information from government.) I also suggest that there should be judicial review to ensure minimal adequacy of the HDI, including professional objectivity. The Court should defer to reasonable judgments on what is to be included. But it should be available as a backstop. 
Not incidentally, there could be large democratic benefits from the very complexity of the question of what belongs in the HDI. This is a subject on which public discussion may be highly beneficial. It is important for citizens to think about what sorts of things count injudgments about quality of life-decent health care, long lives, recreation, education, environmental quality, and so forth. 
Many constitutional provisions amount to windowdressing, offering broad promises but doing little good. No constitution-no set of words on paper-can guaranEAsT EUROPEAN CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW tee good results for citizens. The danger of creating unhelpful "paper rights" is especially severe when constitutions require positive governmental action, by such means as the ever-popular rights to free medical care, environmental quality, and recreation and leisure time. By contrast, constitutionally mandating the HDIan objective statistical report that raises implications for, but places no overt obligations on, policymakers-might well count as a substantial step toward improved democracy and better lives for the people of Eastern Europe. Not incidentally, it could also count as an important development in the theory and practice of constitutionalism. 
Cass RK Sunstein is the author,most recently, of The Partial Constitution (HarvardUniversity Press, 1993.) 
Cass R. Sunstein 
intervalbetween the teacher'sasking anotherstudentaquestion andmy handgoingin the air-justin case thestudent called on was not ready with an answer.At the end of thatfirstyear, in an act of retaliatoryaffection, the classplaced a captionunder my picture in the yearbook that read: "DerrickBell. He knows everything and he wants everybody to know that he knows everything." 
I wonder what my classmates would say about Cass Sunsteins steady stream of impressivepublicationsoverthe lastseveralyears,publicationscoveringevery aspect of the law and, to his great credit,perusing with seriousness and respect the new and controversialformsoflegalscholarshipas they appeared.We have asked him here today to sharewhat he obviously has learned: that recognition of the new does not demand belief that beliefin the traditionalneed not deter examinationof the new. - DerrickA. Bell 
Let me begin with my conclusions. We should reject the traditionalist defense of traditional canons, in law and elsewhere. We should also reject what I will be calling the postmodern attack on canonicity, of which parts of Stanley Fish's essay seem to me a possible example. The two positions appear sharply opposed, but actually they have a lot in common. They share the view that if we do not have transcendental or external grounding for our judgments, many things go out the window, including (for example) freedom, and reason, and respect for authoritative texts. I'm going to make instead an oldstyle liberal case for a form of multiculturalism and for revisiting the legal canon-and just to the extent that these steps help educate our students better, and help make them better lawyers and citizens. 
Now for some details. 
When I first read Stanley Fish's essay, I had a sudden association with a very striking part ofRobert H. Bork's The TemptingofAmerica-Bork'streatment of Brown v. Board ofEducation.Bork is of course an originalist, and of course he knows that the framers"of the Fourteenth Amendment did not specifically intend the federal courts to eliminate segregation. On Bork's own method, Brown seems pretty easy-and wrong. But Bork did not reach this conclusion. Instead he struggled mightily to explain why Brown was right after all. 
What is interesting for present purposes is not the details of Bork's argument, but the fact that Bork found it necessary to make it. From this and other Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Liewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
examples, it seems clear that to have a claim on lawyers' attention, any serious theory of constitutional interpretation must be able to explain why Brownwas right. In this sense, Brownis part of the canon of constitutional law. It operates just like The Merchantof Venice in Fish's account of the Skokie case. 
Now what are we to make of this state of affairs? We could understand this situation in two very different ways. 
First: Lawyers have lost sight of the fact that Brownwas very much a human creation, very controversial (to say the least) in its time. Bizarrely, they take this very human outcome as an absolutely fixed point for an analysis, when they should understand it as a contingent product of distinctive social forces. Lawyers have really committed an act of idolatry. As part of the legal canon, Brown stops thought. Our principal interests should instead be in genealogyin how things got to be this way. What gave Brown its special status? 
Now here is a second, very different response to what has happened with Judge Bork and Brown: 
Lawyers take Brown as correct for good reasons. Lawyers think that a constitutional order that allowed apartheid would not be worthy of respect. Lawyers think that any system of constitutional interpretation must ensure that our constitutional order is worthy of respect. They have reasons for their conclusion; these reasons have to do with the purposes and effects of racial caste systems for the people subject to those systems. 
I am an outsider to the literary and historical debate over the canon, and what I am about to say may be inadequately informed; but in that debate, it seems to me, many people accept some version of response one. They emphasize that the canon is socially constructed, is a product of social forces, and could have been otherwise. They believe that these claims make it hard or impossible to offer response two, which suggests that there are good reasons for giving special status to some texts, for claiming them as authorities. In any case I think that this is what has happened in Stanley Fish's paper. 
I also think that all this is a mistake.2 The mistake takes the following form. If we do not have wholly external or transcendent foundations for something-if all we have is produced through human filters-we really have nothing at all. If the self is a social artifact, or a social product, freedom itself is in big trouble. Our beloved belief in liberty is an illusion simply because mental powers are shaped and constrained by external influence; free speech is an illusion too. Thus if antifoundationalism is right-if it was just us who created the canon-maybe The Merchant of Venice is regulable under the First Amendment. If Shakespeare is a social construct, maybe his works will have to be demoted, maybe by a lot, and-now notjust maybe; now I'm speaking of a real event-in literature departments some teachers will refuse to teach Shakespeare's plays because of the author's reactionary politics. If the canon is produced by us-if it is an outcome of social forces-then we might switch things around very radically. 
What-it might be asked-shall we consult when we do this? Perhaps something called "politics"; perhaps "interest"; perhaps nothing at all. 
I have said that there is a mistake here. Now let me explain why. From the absence of external or transcendental foundations, it does not follow that everything is up for grabs, or that all we have is conventions, or power, or play. (I refer here, respectively, to Fish, Foucault, and Derrida.) It is right to say that there is no wholly external perspective on human endeavors, that canonization cannot be grounded without language or culture. But this does not mean that good reasons cannot be offered on behalf of one view rather than another. The alleged choice-between transcendental foundations on the one hand and power, conventions, or play on the other-is entirely unnecessary. Instead we need to think about what sorts of approaches will serve what sorts of things we, in our diversity and our commonality, really value. We do not.need transcendental foundations to say that a regime offree speech is a lot different from a regime of tyranny. The fact that people are influenced in what they have to say does not in the least impugn freedom, or free speech, or liberalism. 
All this has been pretty abstract. Now let me turn to the canon. Some people-I am calling them traditionalists-seem to think that the existing canon in law and elsewhere has a very special claim on us. On their view, any proposal for change or revision reflects a kind of cheap faddishness, disrespect for real quality, or hubris. On the traditionalist view, we really should take our canon as given rather than chosen. If we do not, we will be giving in to a kind of strident, standardless relativism in which political interest, rather than reason, governs intellectual life. 
Another group, represented by some postmodernists, thinks that canons in general reflect the interests of certain groups-whites, or males, or heterosexuals, or Europeans-and that a recognition of this fact will point the way to a form of plurality that better serves socially diverse interests. So far, very plausibly, so good. But for some people who hold this sort ofview, any form of ranking or valuation orjudgment-the view, for example, that Shakespeare is especially good, worthier than most other writers-is perniciously hierarchical, or disabled in some way by virtue of the fact that it comes from human beings. There are no common standards-only diverse interests, power, and conventions. 
Both of these positions seem to me to contain important truths. The traditionalists are right to emphasize that much of what is in the existing canon really does belong there. It doesn't matter much whether Kant and Milton got into the canon partly for some bad reasons; they belong. At the same time, there are undoubted biases in existing canons, and we should be alert to this fact. But these important truths notwithstanding, I think that both traditionalism and postmodernism are unhelpful to our question today. They are each other's flip sides; they reflect the same kind of belief in the necessity for wholly external foundations. Traditionalists disregard the fact that there is no sufficient reason to think that any existing canon adequately serves educational goals. If what we want is good learning, and a good appreciation of what 
intellectual life has to offer, we should say that the virtues of wisdom, clarity, and good argumentation are not limited to particular periods, genders, races, and countries. And this fact means that some current canons are in for revisiting. 
But the postmodern position is little better.3 At least in some forms, that position makes itvery hard to explain why we should engage in intellectual life at all; if political power and political interest are all that is at stake, discussion of texts is hardly a good path to follow. Moreover, what underlies some of the most plausible claims of those who attack the current canon is the belief that the canon should include works of certain kinds. This belief-this use of "should"--makes sense only to the extent that it is based on generally acceptable reasoxis, not on political interest. 
Against both traditionalism and postmodernism, I suggest that we oppose a third alternative, which might well be called a version of the old commitment to liberal education. I won't be able to say a lot about that commitment now, but at a minimum the commitment requires us to try to impart deep and wide understanding-to counteract ignorance, bias, and parochialism. Some of the current efforts to revisit the canon, in literature and history, are admirably well-suited to that goal. Those efforts have helped bring to the attention of students and teachers materials that are excellent, or that tell us a great deal about culture, politics, and history, and that were excluded only because of ignorance or bias in the past. Of course the class of reasons for inclusion of any particular text is not closed and unitary, but open and plural; and of course we will disagree about what reasons count as good. This is a matter that deserves a good deal of attention. In literature, for example, there are such traditional (and admittedly ambiguous) virtues as depth of human understanding and creativity with language; and works that show otherwise neglected aspects of human experience might well be included even if they are not quite so distinctive on other counts. 
Now some brief words on canonicity within law. For lawyers, there are at least three different aspects to canonicity, which should be kept distinct: first, there is the category of authoritative texts; second, there is the curriculumthe courses that we teach; third, there is the choice of materials within each course. And, in the legal context, there is a distinctive element. Law students are being trained to be lawyers, and in order to be lawyers, there are certain things that law students need to learn. This fact imposes a degree of constraint on law school experimentation with the canon. What literature departments do createsthe canon; the same is less true, or at least it's differently true, of law schools, who have courts and employers to answer to. 
But within that fairly broad constraint it is important to expose students to a diverse array of thought and information, so as to equip them to be better lawyers and citizens. American legal education is extremely parochial. Often it seems as if the decisions of high-level American courts between 1970 and the Introduction, in Charles Taylor et al., Multiculturalism and 'The Politics of Recognition" 3 (Princeton, 1992). present exhaust the contours of appropriate legal argument. It would be very good for legal education to be both more comparative and more historical. Let me offer just two examples. In the sodomy case, Bowers v. Hardwick,4 both the lawyers and the justices struggled hard to think about the history and nature of homosexuality. In the abortion case, PlannedParenthoodofSoutheastern Pennsylvania v. Casey,- the Supreme Court grappled with the causes and consequences of laws restricting abortion. Part of the problem in both these cases was simple ignorance. Compare, for example, the extraordinary historical and comparative material in Judge Posner's book Sex and Reason6 and in Mary Ann Glendon's Abortion andDivorcein Western Law.' We can quarrel with a lot in both books; but surely it is a huge advance to place, squarely within the legal canon, some works that attend to the extraordinary diversity of attitudes toward gender, reproduction; and sexual orientation. Surely it is important for lawyers to know what Posner and Glendon have told us; this information would have added an enormous amount to an understanding of the issues in both Bowers and Casey. 
Let me add some final notes. Any system offree speech would be unacceptable if it allowed government to censor The Merchant of Venice. The Skokie case was a hard one, but in the end it was rightly decided; government should not be allowed to stop a political protest without making a graver showing of harm than was provided there. Judge Bork's instincts were entirely right: an approach to constitutional interpretation is unacceptable if it entails the incorrectness of Brown v. Board ofEducation. 
Perhaps some of these conclusions are wrong. Certainly we should be willing to discuss the reasons that might be offered on their behalf.A commitment to liberal education entails a commitment to this process of reasongiving. It understands this process to be one that requires both width and depth: an exposure to an array of attitudes and perspectives; a respect for clarity of argument; an understanding that education entails not reinforcement of widely held convictions, but appreciation of actual and potential criticism from internal and external sources. I think that something of this general sort would be a good start toward reevaluation of canonicity in law. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
American Association of University Professors is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Academe. http://www.jstor.org Liberalis mCo,des, 
Speech and 
RelatePdroblems One of mypurposes is to defend the constitutionalityof narrowlydrawn restrictionson hate speech. 
LAWHASRARELYBEEN at odds with academic freedom.1 In recent years, however, the development of campus "speech codes" has createda rangeof new controversies.In these remarks,one of my purposes is to defend the constitutionality of narrowly drawn restrictionson hate speech, arguing in the process againstthe broaderversions that have become popular in some institutions. My most generalgoal is to set the dispute over speech codes in the broadercontext of the liberalcommitment to freedom of speech and academic pluralism.Through this approachit may be possible to overcome the "allor nothing" tone that has dominated much of public and even academic discussion. In the monlyheldvisionof academicfreedomwhatmightbe calleda neutralor skepticavlision in whichall comersareaccepted.We mightbe led to endorseinsteada nonneutral, substantiveviewthatembodiesthreedefining commitments:politicalequality;a mildversion of liberalperfectionisma;ndan insistence on exposureto a wide rangeof conceptionsof the goodandthe right,so long asallof these aresupportedby reasons.I will offersome preliminaryremarkson the relationshipbetweenthe "speechcode"controversyand thesecommitments. 
It is almostcertainlynecessaryto distinguish ACADEMIC FREEDOM AND THE FUTURE OF 
THE UNIVERSITY Second in a series process of defending some narrow restrictionson hate speech, it will be necessaryto say a good deal about the principle of neutralityin constitutional law, academic life, and perhaps elsewhere. 
The discussionwill obviously bearon the subjectof academic freedom.The subjectis complexin partbecauseno academicinstitution canavoidmakingcertaincontroversiaslubstantivejudgments; becausethosejudgmentswill intrudeon someformsof freedom; andbecausethoseintrusionswill interferewith speech.If we understandthe hatespeechcontroversyin this light,we will be pushedawayfroman attractiveandcomCassR Sunsteinis KarlN. LlewellynProfessorof Jurisprudence,Universityof ChicagoLaw Schooland Departmentof Political Science. Theauthor writes:"I draw hereon someworkpublishedelsewhere:CassR Sunstein,The PartialConstitution (Harvard UniversityPress,1993); CassR. Sunstein,Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech (forthcoming,The FreePress,September1993). between different forms of speech in terms of their relationship to Constitutional ideals. Current constitutional law does indeed make such distinctions, asking whether speech qualifies as "low-value"or "high-value." Some speech lies at the free speech "core."Such speech may be regulated, if at all, only on the strongest showing of harm. 
or outside of the Constitution altogether. This "low-value"speech may be regulated if the government can show a legitimate, plausible justification. 
Ordinary political speech, dealing with governmental matters, unquestionably belongs at the core. Such speech may not be regulated unless there is a clear and present danger, or, in the Supreme Court's words, unless it is "directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action."2 Under this standard,a speech containing racialhatred, offered by a member of the Ku Klux Klan, is usually protected; so too with a speech by a member of the Black 
"governmenbty discussion",private preferenceasnd beliefs are not takenasfixed and static. 
It doesseemthat any well-functioningsystem offree expressionmust ultimatelydistinguish betweendifferentkinds of speech. Panthers, or by neo Nazis during a march in Skokie, Illinois, the home of many survivors of concentration camps. 
But much speech falls into the peripheryof constitutional concern. Commercial speech, for example, receivessome constitutional protection, in the sense that it qualifies as "speech"within the meaning of the first amendment. Truthful, nondeceptive advertising is generallyprotected from regulation. But government may regulatecommercial advertising it if it is false or misleading. There are many other kinds of "low-value"speech. Consider threats, attempted bribes, perjury, criminal conspiracy, price-fixing, criminal solicitation, private libel, unlicensed medical and legal advice, sexual and racialharassment.All these can be regulatedwithout meeting the ordinary, highly speech-protective standards. 
The Supreme Court has not set out anything like a clear theory to explain why and when speech qualifies for the top tier. At times the Court has indicated that speech belongs in the top tier if it is part of the exchange of ideas, or if it bears on the political process.3 But apart from these ambiguous hints, it has failed to tell us much about its basis for deciding that some forms of expression are different from others. 
Is a two-tier FirstAmendment inevitable or desirable?Some people claim to be free speech absolutists- they think they believe that all speech is protected, or that speech can be regulated only if the government can show overwhelming harm. But it does seem that any well-functioning system of free expression must ultimately distinguish between different kinds of speech by reference to their centrality to the FirstAmendment guarantee. 
Begin with a truly absolutist position: Anyone may say anything at all at any time. A moment's reflection should show that this position could not be seriously maintained. It would not make sense to forbid government from regulating perjury, bribes, threats, fraudulent real estate deals, unlicensed medical and legal advice, willfully false advertising, and many other forms of expression. Realistically speaking, our choices are a range of nonabsolutionist approaches. 
It is tempting to resist this conclusion by proposing that the speech that is unprotected is "really"not speech at all, but merely action. When someone attempts to bribe a government official, perhaps he is "acting,"or perhaps the regulation of criminal solicitation is "ancillary"or "incidental"to the regulation of conduct. But as stated, I think that this suggestion is unhelpful. Criminal solicitation and attempted bribes are speech, not action. They may lead to action; but by themselves they are simply words. If I tell you that I want you to help me to commit an assault, I have spoken words; if I say that I will give you $10,000 if you vote for me, I have merely talked; if I say "Kill!"to a trained attack dog, I have done something regulable, but I have still just spoken. If these things are to be treated as action- that is, if they are not to be protected as speech- it is because of their distinctive features. This is what must be discussed. The word "action"is simply a placeholder for that unprovided discussion. 
So much for the speech-conduct distinction. The only nonabsolutist alternativeto an approach that looks at free speech "value"would be this: All speech stands on basicallythe same footing. We will not look at value at all. The only relevant issue is one of harm. Speech may be regulatedif government can make a demonstration that the speech at issue will produce sufficiendy bad consequences. Would it not be possible, and desirable,to have a "singletier" first amendment, in the sense that all speech is presumed protected, but we allow government to regulatespeech in those rarecaseswhere the harm is very great? 
The answer is that it would not be plausible to say that all speech stands on the same footing. For example, courts should not test regulation of campaign speeches under the same standardsapplied to misleading commercial speech, child pornography, conspiracies, libel of private persons, and threats. If the same standardswere applied, one of two results would follow, and both are unacceptable. 
The first possible resultwould be to lower the burden of justification for governmental regulation as a whole, so as to allow for restrictions on misleading commercial speech, private libel, and so forth. If this were the consequence, there would be an unacceptablyhigh threat to political expression. Upon a reasonably persuasiveshowing of harm, government could regulate misleading campaign statements, just like it can now regulatemisleading proxy statements. A generallylowered burden of justification would thereforebe intolerable. 
The second possible result is that courts would apply the properly stringent standards for regulation of political speech to (for example) conspiracies, criminal solicitation, commercial speech, private libel, and child pornography. The central problem with this approach is that it would ensure that government could not control speech that should be regulated. A system in which the most stringent standardswere applied across the board would ensure that government could not regulate criminal solicitation, child pornography, private libel, and false or misleading commercial speech, among others. The harms that justify such regulation are real, but they are insufficient to permit government controls under the extremely high standards applied to regulation of political speech. 
If courts are to be honest about the matter, an insistence that "allspeech is speech" would mean that they must eliminate many currently unobjectionable and even necessary controls- or more likely that judgments about value, because unavoidable, would continue to be made, but covertly. We will soon see that this claim bears directly on the questions raised by speech codes and by academic freedom generally. 
Thus far I have suggested that a workable system of free expression ought to make distinctions between different sorts of speech; but it remains to decide by what standard courts might accomplish this task. To support an emphasis on politics, we need to define the category of political speech. For present purposes I will treat speech as political when it is both intendedand receivedas a contributionto public deliberationabout some issue.By requiring intent, I do not mean to require a trial on the question of subjective motivation. Generally this issue can be resolved simply on the basis of the nature of the speech at issue. By requiring that the speech be received as a contribution to public deliberation, I do not mean that all listeners or readersmust see the substantive content. It is sufficient if some do. 
An approach that affords special protection to political speech, thus defined, is justified on numerous grounds. Such an approach receives firm support from history- not only from the constitutional framers'theory of free expression, but also from the development of that principle through the history of American law. There can be little doubt that suppression by the government of political ideas that it disapproved, or found threatening, was the central motivation for the clause. The worst examples of unacceptable censorship involve efforts by government to insulate itself from criticism. Judicial interpretations over the course of time also support a political conception of the First Amendment. 
This approach also seems likely to accord fairlywell with our initial or considered judgments about particularfree speech problems. Any approach to the First Amendment will have to take substantial account of those judgments, and adjust itself accordingly. Of course we are not unanimous in our considered judgments. But it seems dear that such forms of speech as perjury, bribery, threats, misleading or false commercial advertising, criminal solicitation, and libel of private persons- or at least most of these- are not entitled to the highest degree of constitutional protection. No other general approach unifies initial or preliminary judgments about these matters as well as a political conception of the First Amendment. 
In addition, an insistence that government's burden is greatest when political speech is at issue responds well to the fact that here government is most likely to be biased. The premise of distrust of government is strongest when politics are at issue. It is far weaker when government is regulating (say) commercial speech, bribery, private libel, or obscenity. In such cases there is less reason to suppose that it is insulating itself from criticism. 
Finally, this approach protects speech when regulation is most likely to be harmful. Restrictions on political speech have the distinctive feature of impairing the ordinary channels for political change; such restrictions are especially dangerous. If there are controls on commercial advertising, it always remains possible to argue that such controls should be lifted. If the government bans violent pornography, citizens can continue to argue against the ban. But if the government forecloses poAn insistencethat "allspeechis speech" would mean that the courtsmusteliminate manycurrently unobjectionablaend even necessary controls. If campusspeech restrictionast public universitiescover speechthat ispart of socialdeliberation they mightwell beseenas unconstitutional liticalargument,the democraticcorrectiveis unavailableC.ontrolson nonpoliticalspeech do not havethis uniquelydamagingfeature. 
Takenin concert,theseconsiderationssuggestthat,in a liberaldemocracyg,overnment shouldbe undera specialburdenof justification when it seeksto controlspeechintended and receivedasa contributionto publicdeliberation.This doesnot meanthatgovernment is unconstrainedwhen it attemptsto regulate otherspeech.Recallthatgovernmentcannot regulatespeechbecauseit is persuasiver;ecall too thatoffenseat ideasis an illegitimate groundforlegalcontrols.Alwaysthe government mustbe ableto makea strongshowing of harm.Forthis reasonart,literaturea,nd scientificspeechwill generallybe protected fromgovernmentcontrolsevenif someof thesefallwithinthe secondtier.Of course thesestatementswill leaveambiguitiesin hard intermediatecases. 
IL Liberalism and Speech on Campus I havetriedthusfarto setout someof thefeaturesof a well-functioningsystemof freeexpressionI.n thatsystem,politicalspeechbelongsin the top tier;morespeech,not censorshipi,s the remedyforspeechthat threatensharm;onlyanemergencycansupport suppressionN.onpoliticalspeechis alsoprotected,but it canbe regulatedon thebasisof a lessershowingof harm.Heretoo thegovernmentmustpointto somethingotherthanpersuasivenesosroffenseat thecontentof ideas. 
We canuse this discussionasa basisforexploringthe complexproblemsresultingfrom recenteffortsto regulatehatespeechon campus. Someregulationsareoftenassociated with allegedeffortsto imposean ideological orthodoxyon studentsandfaculty,underthe rubricof "politicalcorrectness."Perhapsradicalleft-wingcampuses,underpressurefrom well-organizedgroups,aresilencingpeople who disagreeA.rethe campusspeechcodes constitutional? 
To the extentthatwe aredealingwith privateuniversitiest,he Constitutionis not implicatedat all,andhenceallsuchrestrictionasre permissibleT.his is an exceptionall yimportant point.Privateuniversitiecsando whatever theylike.Theycanbanallspeechby Republicansb, y Democrats,or by anyonethey wantto silence.But manyprivateuniversities liketo followthe Constitutionevenif theyare not requiredto do so. In anycase,publicuniversitiesaresubjectto the Constitution,andso it is importantto tryto establishwhatthe first amendmentmeansforthem. 
On theapproachprovidedthusfar,we can offeran importantprovisionaclonclusion:If campusspeechrestrictionast publicuniversitiescovernot merelyepithets,butspeechthat is partof socialdeliberationt,heymightwellbe seenasunconstitutionaflorthatveryreason.4 At leastasa presumptions,peechthatis intendedandreceivedasa contributionto social deliberatio nis constitutionallpyrotectedeven if it amountsto whatis sometimesclassifiedas hatespeech- evenif it is racistandsexist. 
Consider,forexample,the Universityof Michigan'sjudiciallyinvalidatedbanon "[a]nybehavior,verbalor physical,thatstigmatizesor victimizesan individualon the basisof race,ethnicity,religion,sex,sexual orientation,creed,nationalorigin,ancestry, age,maritalstatus,handicap,orVietnam-era veteranstatus,andthat...createsan intimidating, hostile,or demeaningenvironmentfor educationalpursuits...."This broadbanforbidsa wide rangeof statementsthatarepart of the exchangeof ideas.It alsofailsto give peoplesufficientnoticeof whatstatementsare allowed.Forboth reasons,it seemsinvalid. 
speakingfora 5-4 majorityof the Supreme Court,rejectedthisview. Beauharnaivs. Illinois^upheldan Illinoislawmakingit unlawfulto publishor exhibitanypublication which"portraydsepravityc,riminalityu,nchastity,or lackof virtueof a classof citizens, which [publication]exposesthe citizensof anyrace,color,creedor religionto contempt, derision,or obloquyor whichis productiveof breachof the peaceor riots."The lawwasappliedto bancirculationof a petitionurging "theneedto preventthewhite racefrombecomingmongrelizedby the negro,"andcomplainingof the "aggressionsr,apes,robberies, knives,guns,andmarijuanaof the negro." 
In upholdingthe law,JusticeFrankfurter referredto a rangeof factors.He pointedto the historicalexclusionof libelfromfree speechprotection;to the risksto socialcohesion createdby racialhatespeech;andto the needforjudicialdeferenceto legislativejudgmentson thesecomplexmatters.Manycountriesin Europeacceptthe sameanalysisand do not affordprotectionto racialandethnic hatespeech.But mostpeoplethinkthatafter New YorkTimesv. Sullivan?Beauharnais no longerthe law.In New YorkTimest,he Courtindicatedthatthe lawof libelmustbe evaluatedin accordancewith the constitutionalcommitmentto robustdebateon public issues.The conventionalview- which the SupremeCourthasnot directlyaddresse-d is thatracialhatespeechcontainshighlypoliticalideas,thatit belongsin the freespeech "core,"andthatit maynot be suppressed merelybecauseit is offensiveor otherwise harmful. 
Therearerealcomplexitieshere.In its strongestform,the defenseof Beauharnais wouldpoint towardthe contributionof hate speechto the maintenanceof a castesystem basedon raceandgender.A principalpoint herewouldbe the effectof suchspeechon the self-respecotf its victimsandalsothe relationshipbetweensuchspeechandfearsof raciallymotivatedviolence.7I cannotfullydiscuss thisissuehere;but I thinkthatBeauharnais wasincorrect.No one shoulddenythatdistinctiveharmsareproducedby racialhate speech,especiallywhen it is directedagainst membersof minoritygroups.It is only obtusenes-s a failureof perceptionor empatheticidentificatio-n thatwould enable someoneto saythatthe word"fascist"or "pig"or "communist,"or even"honky,"producesthe samefeelingsas theword"nigger." In viewof ourhistory,invectivedirected againstminoritygroups,and racistspeechin general,createfearsof violenceandsubordination- of second-classcitizenship- thatare not plausiblydescribedas mereoffense.As I havenoted,mostEuropeancountries,including flourishingdemocraciecsommittedto free speech,makeexceptionsforsuchexpression. In manycountries,includingourown, it is possibleto thinkthatracialandethnichate speechis reallysuigenerisa,ndthatit is properlytreateddifferently. 
But therearestrongcounter-argumentIs.f we wereto exciseall of what is describedas hatespeechfrompoliticaldebate,we would severelytruncateourdiscussionof suchimportantmattersas civilrights,foreignpolicy, crime,conscription,abortion,and socialwelfarepolicy.Evenif speechproducesangeror resentmenton the basisof race,it mightwell be thoughta legitimatepartof the deliberativeprocess,andit bearsdirectlyon politics. Foreclosureof suchspeechwouldprobably accomplishlittlegood, andby stoppingpeople fromhearingcertainideas,it couldbring abouta greatdealof harm.Thesearethe mostconventionalMillianargumentsfor the protectionof speech. 
Fromallthisit seemsthatthe Universityof Michiganbanwasfartoo broad.On theother hand,it shouldbe permissibleforcollegesand universitietso buildon thebasiccaseof the epithetin orderto regulatecertainnarrowlydefinedcategoriesof hatespeech.Standingby themselveso,r accompaniedby litdeelse,epithetsarenot intendedandreceivedascontributionsto socialdeliberationaboutanything. We arethereforedealingwithlowertier speech.The injuryto dignityandself-respecits a sufficientharmto allowregulation(.Seemy discussionbelowof the Stanfordregulation.) 
It is now possibleto offera provisionaclonclusion.A publicuniversityshouldbe allowed to regulatehatespeechin the formof epithets.But it shouldbe prohibitedfromreaching veryfarbeyondepithetsto forbidthe expressionof viewson publicissues,whatever thoseviewsmaybe. I will qualifythisconclusion shortly,but it seemslikea good placeto start. 
But arerestrictionson hatespeechimpermissiblyselective?In R.A.V.v. St. Paul,the Court invalidateda lawdirectedagainsta certain kindof hatespeech,principallyon the ground thatit discriminatedon the basisof subject matter.The caseinvolvedan actof crossburningon a privateyard.All thejustices agreedthatthe content-neutratlrespasslaw could be appliedagainstthatact;the question waswhethera special"hatespeech"lawwas 
themselvese, pithets are not intendedas contributionsto socialdeliberation aboutanything. 
in onesense,a defining characteristiocf the university. constitutionalasappliedto thatact. 
As interpretedby the MinnesotaSupreme Court,the relevantlawbannedanyso-called "fightingwords"thatproducedangeror resentmenton the basisof race,religion,or gender.In invalidatingthe act, the RA.V.Court emphasizedthatthe lawat issuewasnot a broador generalproscriptionof fighting words.It reflectsa decisionto singleout a certaincategoryof "fightingwords,"definedin termsof audiencereactionstospeechaboutcertain topicsI.s this illegitimate?The point bears on almostalleffortsto regulatehatespeech, on campusandelsewhere. 
The SupremeCourt'sbasicideais this: Whetheror not we aredealingwith high valuespeech,governmentcannotdrawlines on a partisanbasis.It cannotsay,forexample, thatlibelof Democratswill be punishedmore severelythanlibelof Republicanso,r thatobscenitywill be regulatedonly if it makesfun of the presidentA. lawof thissortwouldbe "viewpoint-based,t"hatis, it makestheviewpoint of the speakerthe basisfor regulation.To thatextentit is invalid.Moreover,the government is sharplyconstrainedin its abilityto limit speechon certainsubjects.It couldnot, forexample,banspeechaboutAIDS. "Subject-matter"restrictionsaremoreneutralthan viewpoint-basedrestrictionsT.hey arenotper seinvalid,but theyaretreatedwith considerableskepticism.Forthe SupremeCourt,the majorproblemwith the Minnesotalawwas thatit wasan impermissiblesubject-matter restriction. 
To the distinctionbetweenlow-valueand high-valuespeech,then,we mustaddthatthe FirstAmendmentlimitsthe government's line-drawingpower.The governmentmust not be impermissiblyselective,evenif it is regulatinglow-valuespeech.Hence in the RA.Kcase,the CourtconcludedthatSt. Paul hadviolatedthe FirstAmendment,not becauseit hadregulatedconstitutionallyprotectedspeech,but becauseit hadchosento regulateonly "fightingwords"of a certain, governmentallydisapprovedsort,andallowed the restto flourish. 
In his dissentingopinion,JusticeStevens arguedthatSt. Paulhadnot madean impermissibledistinction,sincethe harmsunderlying the regulatedspeechweresufficientlydistinctive.He wrotethat"race-basetdhreats maycausemoreharmto societyandto individualsthanotherthreats.Justas the statute prohibitingthreatsagainstthe presidentis justifiablebecauseof the placeof the presidentin oursocialandpoliticalorder,so a statuteprohibitingrace-basedthreatsis justifiablebecauseof the placeof racein oursocialandpoliticalorder."In his view, "[threatening someonebecauseof herraceor religiousbeliefsmaycauseparticularlsyeveretraumaor touchoff a riot.. .; suchthreatsmaybe punishedmoreseverelythanthreatsagainstsomeone basedon, forexample,his supportof a particularathleticteam."Thus therewere"legitimate,reasonablea,ndneutraljustifications"forthe specialrule.ButJusticeStevens spokeonly forhimself,andhis viewwas firmlyrejectedby the majority. 
The questionthen becomeswhetheruniversityrestrictionson hatespeechareimpermissiblyselective.A universitymightwell, post-RA.V.ybe forbiddenfromsinglingout forpunishmentspeechthatmanyuniversities wantto control,suchas (a)a narrowlydefinedcategoryof insultstowardsuchspecificallyenumeratedgroupsasblacks,women, andhomosexualso,r (b) a narrowlydefined categoryof insultsdirectedat individualsinvolvingrace,sex,andsexualorientation.How would restrictionsof thiskindbe treated? 
Undercurrentlaw,a restrictionthatinvolves(a) is viewpoint-baseda, ndto thatextent evenworsethanthe restrictionin R.A.V. itself.On the analysisof the R.A.V.Court,restriction(a)triesto silenceone sidein a debate.A restrictionthatinvolves(b) is a subject matterrestrictionn,ot basedon viewpoint. But it too is impermissiblyselectivein exactly the samesenseas the restrictioninvalidatedin the RA.V. case. 
It is possibleto saythatthe conclusionsin R.A.V.areincorrectin principle,because therearesufficientlyneutralgroundsforrestrictions(a)and (b).8Perhapsa university could neutrallydecidethatepithetsdirected againstblacks,women,andhomosexuals causedistinctiveharms.But thisconclusionis hardto reconcilewith the RA.V.decision. 
Collegesanduniversitiesdo, however,have someargumentsthatwereunavailableto St. Paul,Minnesota.In orderto makethe conclusionsthusfarmorethanprovisionalw,e haveto addressthoseargumentsI.f RA.V. doesnot applyto the campus,it mightbe becausepublicuniversitiescanclaima largedegreeof insulationfromjudicialsupervision. That claimto insulationis closelyconnected to the ideaof academicfreedom. 
collegesanduniversitiesareoftenin the businessof controllingspeech,andtheircontrols arehardlyeverthoughtto raisefreespeech 20 
problems. Indeed, controlling speech is, in one sense, a defining characteristicof the university. There are at least four different ways in which such controls occur. 
First, universities impose major limits on the topics that can be discussed in the classroom. Subject matter restrictions are part of education. Irrelevantdiscussion is banned. Students cannot discuss the presidential election, or Marx and Mill, if the subject is math. Schools are allowed to impose subject matter restrictions that would be plainly unacceptable if enacted by states or localities. 
Second, a teacher can require students to treat each other with at least a minimum of basic respect. It would certainly be legitimate to suspend a student for using consistently abusive or profane language in the classroom. This is so even if that language would receive firm constitutional protection on the street corner. The educational process requires at least a measure of civility. Perhaps it would be unacceptable for universities to ban expressions of anger or intense feeling; the notion of civility should not be a disguise for forbidding irreverenceor disagreement. But so long as requirements of civility are both reasonable and neutral with respect to viewpoint, a university may limit abusive or profane comments within the classroom. 
The problem goes deeper, for- and this is the third kind of academic control on speech- judgments about quality are pervasive. Such judgments affect admissions, evaluation of students in class and on paper, and evaluation of prospective and actual faculty as well. Academic decisions about quality will of course be based on a conception of appropriate standards of argument and justification. These standards involve judgments about merit or excellence that would of course be unacceptable in the setting of criminal punishment or civil fine, but that are a perfectly and nearly inescapable legitimate part of the educational function. At least this is so if there is no discrimination on the basis of viewpoint, that is, if the person involved in making the assessment offers judgments on the basis of standards of quality that are applied neutrally to everyone (an ambitious aspiration, and one that is conceptually complex). 
But there is a fourth and more troublesome way in which universities control speech, and this involves the fact that many academic judgments are viewpoint-based, certainly in practice.In many places, a student who defends fascism or communism is unlikely to receive a good grade. In many economics departments, sharp deviation from the views of Adam Smith may well be punished. History and literature departments have their own conceptions of what sorts of arguments are retrogradeor beyond the pale. Viewpoint discrimination is undoubtedly present in practice, and even if we object to it in principle, it is impossible and perhaps undesirable for outsiders to attempt to police it. 
Thus far I have mostly been discussing students; but much the same is true for faculty members. Universities can impose on their faculty restrictive rules of decorum and civic participation. A teacher who refuses to teach the subject, fails to allow counter-arguments, treats students contemptuously, or vilifies them in class, can be penalized without offense to the Constitution. The job performance of teachers consists mostly of speech. When that performance is found wanting, it is almost always because of content, including judgments about subject matter and quality, and sometimes because of viewpoint. 
It is worthwhile pausing over this point. Initial hirings, tenure, and promotion all involve subject matter restrictions, and sometimes viewpoint discrimination in practice. All this suggests that universities are engaged in regulating speech through content discrimination and at least implicit viewpoint discrimination. The evaluation of students and colleagues cannot occur without resort to con 
of teachersconsists mostlyof speech. 
Whenthat performanceisfound wanting, it is almost alwaysbecauseof content. 
21 Justas a university mightban the useof profanityin class,so it mightstopracial epithetsand similar expressionosf hatredor contempt. saying that it is hard for courts to police, but nonetheless a real offense to both academic aspirations and free speech principles. 
How does this proposition bear on the hate speech issue? Perhaps a university could use its frequently exercised power over speech in order to argue for certain kinds of hate speech codes. Perhaps it could say that when it legitimately controls speech, it does so in order to promote its educational mission, which inevitably entails limits on who may say what. Perhaps a university could be allowed to conclude that its educational mission requires unusually firm controls on hate speech, so as not to compromise the values of education itself. 
The university might emphasize in this regard that it has a special obligation to protect all of its students as equal members of the community. This obligation calls for restrictions on what faculty members may say. The university might believe that certain narrowly defined forms of hate speech are highly destructive to the students' chance to learn. It might think that black students and women can be effectively excluded by certain forms of hate speech. Probably a university should be given more leeway to restricthate speech than a state or locality, precisely because it ought to receive the beriefit of the doubt when it invokes concerns of this kind. Surely the educational mission ought to grant the university somewhat greater room to maneuver, especially in light of the complexity and delicacy of the relevant policy questions. Courts might also hesitate before finding viewpoint discrimination or impermissible selectivity. Perhaps there should be a presumption in favor of a university'sjudgment that narrowlydefined hate speech directed at blacks or women produces harm that is especially threatening to the educational enterprise. 
CONCLUSIONISBUTTRESSEDBY two additional factors. First, there are numerous colleges and universities. 
Many students can choose among a range of alternatives, and a restriction in one, two, or more imposes an extremely small incursion into the system of free expression. Colleges that restrict a large amount of speech may find themselves with few students, and in any case other institutions will be available. Second, the Constitution is itself committed to the elimination of second-class citizenship, and this commitment makes it hard to say that an educational judgment opposed to certain forms of hate speech is impermissibly partisan. 
kind would justify two different sorts of approaches to the issue of hate speech on campus. First, a university might regulate hate speech, narrowly defined, as simply a part of its general class of restrictions on speech that is incompatible with the educational mission. On this approach, there would be no restriction specifically directed against hate speech 
no campus "speech code"- but a general, suitably defined requirement of decency and civility, and this requirement would regulate hate speech as well as other forms of abuse. Just as a university might ban the use of profanity in class, or personally abusive behavior on campus, so it might stop racialepithets and similar expressions of hatred or contempt. This is not to say that students and teachers who violate this ban must be expelled or suspended. Generally informal sanctions, involving conversations rather than punishment, are much to be preferred. But the Constitution should not stand as a barrier to approaches of this sort, so long as the university is neutral in this way. 
Second, courts should allow narrowly defined hate speech restrictions even if those restrictions are not part of general proscriptions on indecent or uncivil behavior. For example, Stanford University now forbids speech that amounts to "harassmentby personal vilification." (Stanford is a private university, free from constitutional restraint,but it has chosen to comply with its understanding of what the First Amendment means as applied to public universities.) Under the Stanford rule, speech qualifies as regulable "harassment"if it (1) is intended to insult or stigmatize an individual or a small number of individuals on the basis of their sex, race, color, handicap, religion, sexual orientation, or national and ethnic origin, (2) is addressed directly to the individual or individuals whom it insults or stigmatizes, and (3) makes use of insulting or "fighting"words or nonverbal symbols. To qualify under (3), the speech must by its "very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace," and must be "commonly understood to convey direct and visceral hatred and contempt for human beings on the basis oP one of the grounds enumerated in (2). 
The Stanford regulation should not be faulted for excessive breadth. It is quite narrowly defined. If a public university adopted it, the major constitutional problem, fueled by the outcome in R.A.K, would not be breadth but unacceptable selectivity. Why has the university not controlled other forms of "fighting words," like the word "fascist,"or "commie," or "bastard"?Does its selectivity show an impermissible motivation? Shouldn't we find its selectivity to be impermissibly partisan?I do not think that we should. A university could reasonablyand neutrally decide that the harms caused by the regulated fighting words are, at least in the university setting, more severe than the harms caused by other kinds of fighting words. I conclude that public universities may regulate speech of the sort controlled by the Stanford regulation and probably go somewhat further, and that such restrictionsshould not be invalidated as impermissibly selective. 
We can also use this discussion as a basis for exploring the question of the university's power over employees, arising out of the highly publicized decision of the City University of New York to remove Dr. Leonard Jeffries as chair of the black studies department at City College. Jeffries had reportedly made a range of apparently anti-Semitic remarks, blaming rich Jews for the black slave trade, complaining that Russian Jews and "their financial partners, the Mafia, put together a financial system of destruction of black people," and claiming that Jews and Italians had "planned, plotted, and programmed out of Hollywood" to denigrate blacks in films. Could the City University take these remarks as a reason to remove Jeffries from his position as department chair?(We should agree that removal could be justified if, as some say, it was a response to an inadequate record of publication, to poor research,or to low-quality work.) 
ANSWERDEPENDSON WHETHER the removal was based on an effort neutrally to promote educational goals, or whether it was instead an effort to punish the expression of a controversial point of view. In the abstract this question is hard to answer, but it can be clarified through ex 
rangeof statements that mightmakejob performancequite difficult. 
Therewill be no substantialinterference with thesystemoffree expressio nif universitiesaregiven the narrowauthority for whichI have argued. tried to do) a philosophy professor for publishing the view that blacks are, on average, intellectually inferior to whites. It also follows that the City College could not remove ProfessorJeffries from his tenured position merely because of actually or apparentlyantiSemitic statements. 
But we can imagine a range of statements that might make job performance quite difficult, at least for someone in a high-level administrative position- statements, for example, expressing general contempt for students and colleagues, a refusal to participate in the academic enterprise, or hatred directed against people who are part of the university community. Perhaps such statements would not be sufficient to allow discharge from a faculty position; but they could make it hard for the relevant speakersto perform as deans, as admissions officers, or as chairs of departments. In the Jeffries case, the best argument in favor of the City University of New York would be that it is difficult for someone to succeed as chair of a prominent black studies department if he has made sharply derogatory statements about members of other groups defined in racial, religious, or ethnic terms. This argument would not allow Jeffriesto be discharged from his position as professor, but it should allow him to be removed from the position as department chair, which involves a range of distinctive tasks. It follows that on the facts I have assumed, the City College did not violate Jeffries'sFirstAmendment rights. Of course the case would be different if Jeffries could prove that the City College was reacting not to impaired job performance, but to its own disapproval of Jeffries'spoint of view. 
An opposing principle would take the following form. A universityshouldnot bepermitted to burdenor to deny benefitsto an employee on the basisof the employeespoint of view, even if thepoint of view doesdamagejob performance. On this view, people who disapproveof the point of view- students, other faculty, potential contributors- should not be permitted to enshrine their own views by affecting the university'sdecisions about employees. We might argue for this principle on the ground that there should no "heckler'sveto" against unpopular opinions. We should not have a system in which people who dislike a certain point of view can stop dissentersfrom assuming prominent positions in the university. 
This argument is not without force, but I do not think that it should be adopted. Everyone seems to agree that the president and the governor may make hiring decisions on the basis of viewpoint; it would not make sense to disable the president from ensuring that high-level employees do not try, through speech, to undermine the president's program. Any resulting interference with the system of free expression seems minimal, and the president has a strong need for a loyal staff. Similarly, universities have powerful and legitimate reasons to expect their employees to perform their jobs, especially if those employees are engaged in highly public administrative tasks, and especially if professorswho are not performing administrative tasks are realistically not threatened. At least under ordinary circumstances, there will be no substantial interferencewith the system of free expression if universities are given the narrow authority for which I have argued. I conclude that outside of legitimate judgments about quality and subject matter, universities may punish employees for their speech only in a narrow set of circumstances- almost always involving highly public, administrative positions- in which the relevant speech makes it difficult or impossible for employees to perform their jobs. 
It follows from all this that the national government should abandon its efforts to subject private universities to the constraints of the First Amendment. This is an area in which national authorities should proceed with caution. Of course we could imagine experiments that we might deplore. But there is no reason for the federal government to require uniformity on this complex matter. 
A system of free expression should be designed to safeguard the exchange of ideas. This understanding calls for protection of much of what might be considered "hate speech";but it also allows restrictions on speech that amounts to epithets. There are some additional complexities in the academic setting. Universities are pervasively and necessarilyengaged in regulation of speech, and this fact complicates many existing claims about hate speech codes. In the end I suggest that the test is whether the restriction on speech is a legitimate part of the institution's educational mission, understanding that ideal by reference to the commitment to liberal education. This mission is not neutral among different conceptions of the good. It embodies a substantive project (though the project is one that allows exposure to a wide range of competing conceptions). This understanding would not permit speech codes to endanger the exchange of ideas, but it would allow for mildly broader restrictions than would be acceptable for states and localities. & NOTES claim that academic freedom forbids certain governmental intrusions into the affairsof the university, though some of what I say does bear on those issues. Him Go," 1990 Duke LJ. 431; Mari Matsuda, "Public Response to Racist Speech," 87 Mich. L. Rev. 2320 (1989); Richard Delgado, "Words That Wound," 17 Harv. C.R.-CL. L. Rev. 133 (1982). R. Sunstein, Democracyand the Problem of Free Speech(forthcoming from The Free Press, September 1993). 
lack offreedomare sociallyconstructed; theyare an outcome of humanpractices. ACADEME 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. Liberal Constitutionalism and Liberal Justice 
The Framers of the American Constitution hoped to create a deliberative democracy. They also believed in a modest role for the judiciary. 
Both the hope and the belief were deepened during the Civil War and New Deal periods. If modem constitutional interpreters were guided by the same basic idea of deliberative democracy-with its apparently limited role for the judiciary-what would happen to our constitutional rights as we now know them? 
It seems clear that a well-functioning deliberative democracy would include a large set of rights, including, above all, rights of political participation and political (not economic) equality.' Nonetheless, a system of deliberative democracy might well fall short of what would be required in a fully just society. Broad rights of privacy would not necessarily flourish in such a system. So, too, a system of deliberative democracy might slight at least some rights of conscience, including the right to speak freely when politics is not involved. It therefore seems reasonable to ask whether we might not be quite wrong to root our theory of constitutionalism or constitutional interpretation in a theory of democracy, whether deliberative or otherwise. Would not such an effort provide an unnecessarily truncated system of rights? Many of the great liberals, including Mill and Rawls, offer considerable support for deliberative democracy.2 But most of the 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jon Elster and James Fleming for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 

V. Shields ed., 1958) (1861) (describing the ideal form of government as one in which every citizen participates); JOHN STUART MILL, ON LIBERTY, in ON LIBERTY AND OTHER WRITINGS 5, 102 (Stefan Collini ed., 1989) (1859) [hereinafter MILL, ON LIBERTY] (discussing the right of citizens to make decisions by mutual agreement); JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 5-6 (1993) [hereinafter RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM] (reasoning that each citizen in a constitutional democracy is entitled to an adequate scheme of rights in which political liberties are guaranteed their fair value); id. at 227 (discussing constitutional essentials); id. at 356-63 (arguing for fair value of political liberty); JOHN great liberals, emphatically including Mill and Rawls, point to a far broader set of rights than those that follow from democracy alone.3 
Invoking ideas of this sort, Professor Fleming's illuminating paper argues that deliberative democracy is too partial and thin a source of constitutional safeguards.4 This guiding ideal fails to furnish the full set of guarantees that emerge from a proper exercise in constitutional constructivism.5 In his view, the ideal stresses republican rights6 without sufficiently respecting liberal protections against government intrusions into what is properly taken as the private sphere.7 Thus Professor Fleming argues for constitutional protection of liberty of conscience, autonomy, and freedom of association, even if these rights cannot be associated with democracy itself.8 More particularly, Professor Fleming argues that the rights to choose abortion and to engage in consensual sexual activity find a secure home in autonomy principles even if democratic equality is not at stake. 9 
There is an obvious affinity between Rawlsian principles and those that emerge from deliberative democracy.1" But Professor Fleming argues for what he considers to be a more thoroughly Rawlsian approach to constitutional interpretation," an approach that would stress the interest in RAWLS, A, THEORY OF JUSTICE 356-62 (1971) (contrasting deliberative democracy with market conceptions of democracy). 
unwarranted limitations on the liberties of conscience, preference, and association); RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM, supra note 2, at 5-6 (including nonpolitical rights among those protected by the two principles ofjustice). 
(1993). 
to adopt an alternative to constitutional constructivism. At the broadest level, all theories of interpretation-including, for example, those of Judge Bork and Justice Scalia-are exercises in construetivism, at least in the very general sense that they attempt to make sense rather than nonsense out of the constitutional system. The real question is: Constructivism of what sort? 
H. BEER, To MAKE A NATION: THE REDISCOVERY OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM 264-75 (1993) (describing a liberal commitment to governmentby discussion); MILL, ON LIBERTY, supranote 2, at 15 (noting that the rights and interests of every person are secure from being disregarded only where every person is able to assert them); RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM, supranote 2, at 5-6 (stating that political rights are essential to political liberty). 
for a well-functioning democracy. See JEREMY WALDRON, THE RIGHT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY 9-10 (1988) (noting, for example, the utilitarian argument that private ownership of property promotes efficiency and social prosperity). 

1, at 141; CASS R. SUNSTEIN, DEMOCRACY AND THE PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH 247-49 (1993) (both noting diverse sources of deliberative democracy). 
interautonomy even if that interest is not clearly connected with democratic considerations. 
In this space, I cannot discuss the many valuable points that Professor Fleming raises. Instead I will identify one possible line of response to his challenge to an approach that I have defended, a response that begins by stressing the difference between a theory of a just society on the one hand and a theory of constitutionalism or constitutional interpretation on the other.12 I do not contend that the interests in freedom of conscience, privacy, and autonomy13 do not belong in a good constitution, or that these interests should not be recognized by reviewing courts.14 But it is at least possible that the interest in deliberative democracy provides a good account of constitutional interpretation even if it offers an inadequate theory of justice, and that it is therefore worthwhile to stress that interest even if we acknowledge that it does not exhaust the appropriate concerns of justice or constitutionalism. 
Begin by distinguishing among three sets of rights. The first consists of those that are protected by a good society. The second consists of those that are enumerated in a good constitution. The third consists of those that are safeguarded by courts operating in the name of an existing constitution. 
It should be clear that these three sets of rights need not be coextensive.15 Under imaginable social circumstances, a good constitution might pretation, as Professor Fleming is of course aware, and so I am not sure whether a Rawlsian form of constitutional constructivism would diverge from one based on deliberative democracy. 
background for the discussion of the key issue ofjudicial interpretation of the Constitution. 
the reasons offered on their behalf, or of their origins and consequences. For example, we might safeguard autonomy of the perfectionist sort defended by Joseph Raz. See JOSEPH RAZ, THE MORALITY OF FREEDOM 381 (1986) (describing a form of autonomy that attends to the background conditions under which conceptions of the good are formed). While avoiding perfectionism, Rawls has emphasized background conditions in many places. See, e.g., John Rawls, The Basic Structure as Subject, 14 AM. PHIL. Q. 159 (1977). The debate between political and perfectionist forms of liberalism raises many complexities that I cannot address here. 
that concern Professor Fleming. First, that commitment calls for protection of some such interests, prominently including liberty of conscience, which is a precondition for democracy. See SUNSTEIN, supra note 1, at 142 (describing the repression of opposing views as antithetical to democracy). 
Second, privacy and autonomy are often at risk because of an absence of political equality, and therefore a kind of democratic failure is at work. Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986), Roe v. 
Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), and Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965) are all examples. See Guido Calabresi, The Supreme Court, 1990 Term-Foreword:Antidiscriminationand Constitutional Accountability (What the Bork-BrennanDebateIgnores), 105 HARV. L. REV. 80, 132-37 (1991) (advocating equality principles as a narrower alternative to substantive due process). But Professor Fleming is right to say that democratic concerns do not capture all of what is at stake. 
justice, principally on grounds of urgency, ease of determining compliance, and ease of obtaining general social agreement. See RAWLS, PoLITIcAL LIBERALISM, supra note 2, at 227-30. omit certain rights that a just society ultimately would furnish.1" The distinction might be justified on various grounds, including the difficulty of obtaining agreement on the relevant rights at the constitutional stage17 and the likelihood that those rights will be adequately guaranteed through ordinary political processes. In the United States, for example, it is reasonable to think that freedom of contract or environmental protection are important goods that should not be recognized in the Constitution. 8 In Eastern Europe, we might believe that there is no special reason to constitutionalize the welfare state, even if its guarantees are properly part of a decent society; perhaps there is no risk that the welfare state will be jeopardized by the new regimes. One of a constitution's distinctive rolesespecially in the realm of rights-is to counteract predictable problems in the ordinary politics of particular nations. For this reason a constitution might not guarantee rights that, while a part of a good society, are not at particular risk in the politics of the country for which the constitution is designed. More generally, a constitution might be thought to be a mechanism for carrying out certain practical tasks, and if we focus on those practical goals, we might end up with a document that does not by any means track the best theory of justice. 
So much for the possibility that the requirements of justice are not coextensive with the requirements of a good constitution. There is also a difference between what a good constitution requires and what courts ought to be willing to mandate during the process of interpreting an existing constitution. Two points are relevant here. First, courts charged with the duty of interpretation should attend to constitutional text, structure, and history, and these constraints on interpretation should produce substantial differences between the meaning of the existing document and (what the judges believe to be) a good constitutional provision on the subject at hand.19 Second, it is important for judges to build into the interpretive process a considerable degree of modesty stemming from their lack of either fact-finding competence or a good electoral pedigree. It should not 
life furnished in a good society. 

by positing rights to collective goods. 
background principles are always at least implicitly at work. For different views, see 1 BRUCE ACKERMAN, WE THE PEOPLE 264 (1991) (arguing that the Supreme Court should integrate the people's 'expression of constitutional will" into the existing constitutional framework); RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 360 (1986) ("Every conscientious judge. . . is an interprevist in the broadest sense: each tries to impose the best interpretation on our constitutional structure and practice, to see these, all things considered, in the best light they can bear."); SUNSTEIN, supranote 1, at 93-161 (describing the principles underlying constitutional interpretation). be necessary to stress that judges are often unable to bring about significant social reform on their own.' Because of the need for a high level of judicial modesty, we might not be surprised to find significant traces of the seemingly narrow political question doctrine throughout constitutional law in general-as constitutional rights are judicially "underenforced," and properly so, because of the courts' distinctive limitations.21 
These points will lead to sharp differences between judicially enforceable rights on the one hand and, on the other, rights that are a part of a just society or that belong in a good constitution. Even if, for example, rights to subsistence and health care qualify as rights that a good society would recognize, they might well be deemed absent from our Constitution if judges use the ordinary sources of interpretation. And even if such rights can be found through those sources-even if text, structure, and history leave room to maneuver-judges might believe that these rights are not properly subject to judicial enforcement. The courts may lack the tools that are required for successful implementation; their efforts may be futile or counterproductive. In any case, reasonable people might think that judges should be especially cautious in these (and many other') areas. 
It seems, then, that the category of judicially enforceable rights is a subset of the category of genuine constitutional rights, and that the category of genuine constitutional rights is in turn a subset of the category of rights recognized in a just society. 
Professor Fleming is convincing in his claim that rights without a source in democratic deliberation nonetheless deserve to be protected in a just society. He is also persuasive in saying that a just society concentrates on rights of autonomy as well as rights of democratic equality.' Nor should it be denied that judges interpreting a good constitution, including ours, might protect autonomy under (for example) the free speech guarantee of the First Amendment, the free exercise guarantee of the same amendment, and (here much more controversially') the Due Process 
CHANGE? 336-43 (1992) (contending that courts can effect significant social reform only under special conditions). 
91 HARV. L. REV.1212, 1226 (1978) (arguing that a federal court's refusal to decide an issue because of institutional propriety is not decisive of constitutional substance). 
serve in the military. I do not mean to resolve that issue here, but it is at least plausible to say that courts should not invalidate a discriminatory plan in this complex context, but also to insist that any such plan should be presumed or found unconstitutional by Congress and the President. 
of equality. Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986), is a possible example. See supranote 14. 
which is nonetheless well established; perhaps the same basic notion could have had a much happier home in the adjacent clause protecting privileges and immunities. See Akhil R. Amar, The Bill of Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. There is thus real room for judicial protection of autonomy rights of this kind, even if those rights have little or nothing to do with democracy or deliberation. In these circumstances it seems best to say that deliberative democracy is an important source of both constitutional rights and interpretive principles, but far from exhaustive; the two words capture only a part of the picture.' On this score I agree with Professor Fleming. 
We might, however, want to make some distinctions here, distinctions that are geared to the differences among just societies, just constitutions, and a good role for reviewing courts. First, there is the distinction between what justice requires and what belongs in a just constitution. 
Undoubtedly a just constitution recognizes autonomy of various sorts; but whether and how it does so depends on a range of highly contingent matters. Property rights, for example, seem important to personal autonomy, but it is at least not clear that the Canadians have made a major mistake in omitting such rights from their Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which has constitutional status.' The case for firm constitutional protection of property rights-a case often made out in terms of autonomy-has far more force in contemporary Russia than in Canada or the United States I do not mean to argue against giving constitutional recognition to rights of autonomy, privacy, and conscience; but not all such rights belong in every constitution. This is a matter that cannot be resolved on the basis of first principles. We need to know a lot of details. 
Now turn to the issue of judicial enforcement of the Constitution, the central topic here. Building on Ely, I propose that judicial enforcement is most readily defensible when democratic concerns come to the fore-not because such concerns are merely procedural (they are not), and not because democratic rights are more important than anything else (they are not), but because the principles that underlie appropriate judicial modesty are weakest in that setting (which is not to say that they are decisive Rights and the FourteenthAmendment, 101 YALE L.J 1193, 1220, 1264 (1992) (proposing a refined model of incorporation of substantive guarantees into the Fourteenth Amendment's Privileges or Immunities Clause). Part of the controversy stems also from nontextual concerns about judicial definition of fundamental rights, concerns that seem to me legitimate for reasons suggested below. 
REEXAMINED 4-5, 39-55 (1992), with Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy, in LIBERALISM AND THE GOOD 203, 225 (R. Bruce Douglass et al. eds., 1990). The items appearing in these discussions are not limited to democratic considerations, and they could not plausibly all be included in a constitution. 
(excluding a general takings clause, but declaring that everyone has a right to, and the right to be free from the deprivation of, life, liberty, and security of person). 
(1993) (explaining the need for constitutionally protected property rights in countries like those in Eastern Europe where culture and tradition threaten those rights). elsewhere).' If courts do not protect the preconditions for democratic government, the risks to liberty may be very grave. The predicate for judicial caution evaporates when, for example, a group has been disenfranchised or when the right of political protest has been violated. It follows that vigorous judicial protection of political speech is fully justified, indeed more fully justified than judicial protection of many other rights. 
To be sure, there is a good argument for judicial protection of free speech on grounds not of democracy but of autonomy; that argument helps explain the grant of constitutional protection to nonpolitical art and literature.2 9 But for purposes of thinking about judicial review, there is a real difference between censorship of art and censorship of criticism of government, and the difference stems from the fact that ample protection of political speech is a precondition for a well-functioning constitutional democracy. When the state invades rights that follow from the commitment to deliberative democracy, there is reason to fear that political processes will not be able to correct themselves.' And when there is no problem from the democratic point of view, the relevant intrusions may well be unjust but properly subject to remedy not via the judiciary, but either through (a) public deliberation about constitutional goals or (b) public deliberation unaffected by the Constitution at all. We might reach this conclusion because the Constitution simply does not speak to the intrusions or because the founding document speaks, or should be taken to speak, to the elected branches rather than to courts. 
It is important in this connection to note that the category of fundamental rights is highly contested in our society; consider debates over such diverse things as property rights, contractual rights, welfare rights, and rights of sexual choice. Judges are themselves in sharp disagreement on these matters. Even if we think that Professor Fleming's version of constitutional constructivism has it about right, we might believe that the judicial definition of fundamental rights under the Due Process Clause-a definition operating without much textual or historical help-ought to be very cautious, in part because of the difficulty of obtaining broad social agreement on these questions. When we are dealing with judicial protection of nondemocratic rights, the risks of error-its likelihood and cost-are very high, and the potential benefits are highly speculative. When courts are protecting democratic deliberation-an ideal built deeply into American constitutionalism and unusually susceptible to both definition and development-the benefits are likely to be great, and the risks are far lower. 

constitutionally central issue of religion. This is a significant gap in The Partial Constitution. See SUNSTEIN, supra note 1. 

This judgment cannot be defended by an algorithm, but I think that it is an important lesson of our history, as well as of an inquiry into the institutional characteristics of judges and legislatures. Some platitudes are worth repeating: So long as democratic goals" are met, judges should allow majorities to make (what judges consider to be) some mistakes, even if those mistakes involve (what judges consider to be) injustice. The realm of what is judicially enforced as unconstitutional is not coextensive with the realm of the unjust as judicially conceived, even though some judges may be able to offer especially persuasive accounts. 
In light of widespread social disagreements over what justice requires, then, the Constitution should allow considerable scope for experimentation and debate (subject to the significant constraints of deliberative democracy). 
The same is even more emphatically true of a theory of constitutional interpretation, because the appropriate theory ought to insist on constraining the judges, and because in the absence of judicial agreement on the requirements of justice, courts ought to focus principally on violations of democratic commitments" and also on what is realistically redressable by judges. For this reason, it is unclear that the interest in privacy or autonomy, standing by itself, provides an adequate defense of Roe v. 
Wade33 or an adequate attack on Bowers v. Hardwick.4 I cannot discuss these complex cases here; no general theory can substitute for concrete engagement with particular problems and particular provisions. But at least it seems less adventurous to rely on equal protection principles, because those principles provide a narrower and, I think, more secure basis for decision. 
Let me conclude with a brief summary. A theory of constitutional interpretation35 that amounted to a full-blown theory of just outcomes would offer inadequate room for democratic rule, at least if that theory did not allow judges to permit participants in democracy to make some errors, including errors from the standpoint of justice.36 To state it more precisely: 
Constitution as sharply delimiting the ingredients of democratic deliberation, while also allowing the political process a measure of discretion in defining fundamental interests. 
SenateJudiciary Comm., 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (July 21, 1993), available in LEXIS, Legis Library, Fednew File (statement of Judge Ginsburg) ("[Wihen political avenues become dead-end streets, judicial intervention in the politics of the people may be essential in order to have effective politics."). 

invocation of both liberty and equality, rather than reliance on either standing alone. See Fleming, supra note 4, at 253-55. 
interpretation is occurring elsewhere. See SUNSTEIN, supra note 1, at 140 (discussing the meaning of constitutional obligations "outside the courtroom"). 
interpretation is not sufficiently democratic, and it does not sufficiently engage the many risks raised Democracy is itself a requirement of justice, and in any case there are large difficulties in adapting any theory of justice for use in constitutional interpretation, where we are dealing with at best a second-best world, one that requires constraints on judicial discretion. The appropriate theory of justice, adapted for such a world, may well call for a theory of constitutional interpretation based principally-if not exclusively-on deliberative democracy,37 because that theory allows the requisite space for democratic rule, that is, the space implied by the appropriate theory of justice. 
To say this is not to deny that a good constitution, including ours, ought to the extent fairly possible35 to be interpreted so as to help counteract the most conspicuous and serious failures of justice, even if those failures cannot be connected with democratic goals. But I hope that I have said enough to show why there is a significant space between a theory of justice and a theory of constitutional interpretation. I think that because of this space, courts should defer to legislative judgments involving some intrusions on privacy and autonomy. by judicial discretion. See, for example, Dworkin's well-known essay, Liberalism, with its three-level theory: Markets are seen as reflecting an appropriate neutrality among competing conceptions of the good, and as having considerable normative force, except that they need correction for market failures of various sorts; democracy offers that correction; but democracy allows for external preferences, and so constitutionalism is a check on it. See RONALD DWORKIN, Liberalism, in A MATTER OF PRINCIPLE 181 (1985). I cannot discuss here the many questions raised by this view, but it may be apparent that it allows very little space for democracy between the larger defining ideals of markets and constitutionalism. See also the discussion of Dworkin in SUNSTEIN, supranote 1, at 344-45. 
aspects of the preferred theory ofjustice to be excluded from the constitutional essentials. See RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM, supra note 2, at 227-30 (proposing that some requirements of justice are not constitutional essentials). 

The Myth of the Unitary Executive* 
CASS R. SUNSTEIN** 
MR. ROSS: Our first speaker is Cass Sunstein, who is the Karl Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. A prolific author and lecturer on administrative law issues, Professor Sunstein is Vice Chair of the Judicial Review Committee of the American Bar Association Section on Administrative Law and Regulatory Practice. He formerly served in the Office of Legal Counsel at the United States Department of Justice. 
PROFESSOR SUNSTEIN: The Council on Competitiveness (Council) certainly has become a very important and controversial entity in a relatively short time. Even though the Council is fairly new, it is a continuation of the 1980's trend toward presidential oversight of the regulatory process, with a view toward reducing costs, introducing a degree of uniformity and centralization, and promoting political accountability in the administrative process. I think that the role of the Council has developed naturally out of mostly excellent innovations by President Reagan with respect to the administrative process. I believe that the Council, or a similar body, is necessary because there should be presidential oversight of the regulatory process, with a particular view toward reducing regulatory costs. 
I think it is probably good to say that we start from that significant common ground. It is my hope that the prospective Clinton Administra* The following is an edited transcript of Professor Sunstein's presentation at an October 30, 1992 Colloquy, held at The American University's Washington College of Law, on the role of presidential oversight in the administrative process. The background research for this presentation was conducted in preparation for an upcoming publication in the Columbia Law Review. See generally Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 COLUM. L. REv. 1 (1994) (developing in-depth notion of considerable legislative authority over administration of Federal Government). 
** Karl Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law and Department of Political Science. A.B., Harvard College, 1975; J.D., Harvard Law School, 1978. I am grateful to Lawrence Lessig, Assistant Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School, for his assistance in developing these joint ideas. tion would continue the concern toward decreasing regulatory costs and ensuring a degree of uniformity and centralization.' Whoever is the President for the next four, eight, twelve, or thirty years should build on these precedents. 
Notwithstanding what I have just said, I do have a major legal claim to offer you, and I offer it with regret. It has become a pervasive view within the executive branch, and to a large degree within the courts, that the original vision of the Constitution put the President on top of a pyramid, with the administration below him. This vision, set out in numerous documents by the Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel,' my former home, is not an accurate interpretation of the Constitution. It is basically a fabrication by people of good intentions who have spoken ahistorically. 
Competitiveness, but he vowed to create a more open and accountable system of agency regulatory review. Clinton Administration Orders Pullback of More Than 50 LastMinute Regulations, DAILY EXEC. REP. No. 14 (BNA), Jan. 25, 1993, at d15. To this end, President Clinton issued Executive Order 12,866 on September 30, 1993, in an attempt to streamline the administrative process and to eliminate the improper influence of parties interested in agency rulemakings. Exec. Order No. 12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735 (1993). 
Legal Counsel (OLC) set out the constitutional basis for Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R.  127 (1981), reprinted in 5 U.S.C.  601 app. at 473 (1988) [hereinafter Executive Order 12,291]. See Role of OMB In Regulation: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Oversight and Investigations of the House Comm. on Energy and Commerce, 97th Cong., 1st Sess. 152-69 (1981) (reprinting as part of Hearing Record, OLC's Memorandum for Honorable David Stockman, Director, Office of Management and Budget, Regarding Proposed Executive Order on Federal Regulation) [hereinafter Department of Justice Memorandum]. Executive Order 12,291 requires federal agencies to incorporate, to the extent allowed by statute, cost-benefit analyses when promulgating regulations. Executive Order 12,291,  2. To this end, an agency must prepare a Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) and submit it to the Office of Management and Budget when it promulgates a major rule, as defined by Executive Order 12,291,  l(b). Executive Order 12,291,  3(a). Among other requirements, an RIA must include: 1) a description of the potential benefits of a rule, and identification of the likely beneficiaries; 2) a description of the potential costs of the rule, and those likely to bear those costs; 3) a determination of the potential net benefits of the rule; and 4) a description of any potentially less costly alternatives, and the legal reasons that these alternatives were not chosen. Executive Order 12,291,  3(d)(1-4). The Department of Justice Memorandum justified these requirements under the Take Care Clause of the Constitution, U.S. CONST. art. II,  3, and under the dicta in Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 135 (1926). See infra note 22 (quoting Myers dicta setting, subject to interpretation, limits of presidential review of agency action). 
Given that the strong version of the Unitary Executive idea is an ahistorical myth, the questions that we will be discussing should be mostly ones of policy, not constitutional law. The issue is what policy does it make sense for the Council to implement, not what policy does the Constitution require the Council to follow. 
With respect to this policy, I generally agree with the Council on Competitiveness, with one possible exception. I am not sure whether there is a disagreement on this point. I believe that there ought to be full disclosure of private communications with the Council. When members of the Council communicate with private people about the content of rules in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the public should know. There ought to be full disclosure of communications with the private sector to assure the American people that nothing scandalous is happening, and to give them a sense of the actual process. That is my principal policy recommendation. 
My beliefs with regard to the constitutional structure come with considerable regret. I wish it were not the case. The executive branch's vision of the Constitution, with the President on top and the administration below, has elegance, simplicity, and tremendous appeal. In the modem climate, I submit that this structure would make much sense. That, however, was not the Framers' original conception. The Constitution does not speak in those terms. It is commonly believed that the Vesting Clause of the Constitution5 resolves these issues, but this is not the case. The eighteenth-century conception of executive power was very different from our present views. What has happened is that twentiethcentury categories and ideas are being used to give content to an eighteenth-century document. 
What I am about to say might seem a little bit historical and technical. It is both, I acknowledge; but it has considerable contemporary importance. I believe that if Congress wants to regulate the Federal Communications Commission in certain ways, by insulating it from the President, and if Congress wants to allow the head of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to make decisions about the environment instead of the President, or the Council on Competitiveness, then Congress is fully entitled to do that. Would it be wonderful if Congress acted in this way? It is hardly clear, but this is something the Constitution does not forbid Congress from doing. 
In a nutshell, here is the constitutional argument. It first came to my attention that the President might not be hierarchically superior to everything we consider "administration," by reading nineteenth-century texts on administrative law. What persists in the nineteenth-century texts is a distinction between execution and administration.6 These distinguished mainstream people insisted that this distinction exists, and they said that the Founders perfectly well understood this notion.7 The nineteenth-century commentators, basically uncontradicted, said that there is execution, involving foreign affairs issues and certain core executive functions, and there is administration, which is essentially the ordinary policy business of what we now consider the executive branch. The nineteenth-century writers also believed that the Framers thought Congress could control the relationship between the President and the administration.8 The nineteenth-century commentators thought that the President had a broad sphere of control over what they called "execution," but that the President did not necessarily have hierarchical control over administration.9 
It is alarming to people like me, who want to believe in the Unitary Executive, that the nineteenth-century writers thought this was self-evident, and attributed their belief to the Framers. I have not found any nineteenth-century source that has this hierarchical vision on which Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Carter all have relied. At the very least, the absence of nineteenth-century support for the twentieth-century view is alarming, partly because the nineteenth century, by my calendar, is closer to the eighteenth than is the twentieth. 
Let us talk now a little bit about what happened in the eighteenth century. I am just going to sketch out some historical facts. As Justice Scalia eloquently argues, if anything ought to be under the President's Administrative Law, 18 GEO. WASH. L. REv. 285 (1950) (surveying historical views of presidential authority over administrative process). See also Louis FISHER, THE POLITICS OF SHARED POWER: CONGRESS AND THE ExEcuTivE 73-74 (2d ed. 1987) [hereinafter FISHER. THE POLITICS OF SHARED POWER] (discussing Congress's responsibilities in supervising federal agencies). 
generally FISHER. THE POLITICS OF SHARED POWER, supra note 6 (discussing constitutional basis of President's ability to legislate and Congress's ability to structure administrative state). 
eliminator of administrative state, Congress is superior to agencies, except as Congress chooses to delegate authority to President). 
delegated authority, he can re-delegate this authority and direct decisionmaking actions at his discretion; but if authority is delegated to agency, President has no discretionary power over decisionmaking process). control, it is prosecution via the Attorney General. 0 Yet the Framers actually did not put prosecution under the hierarchical control of the President. They created an Attorney General, but they also created District Attorneys who were not subject to the control of the Attorney General or the President." Right there, the defenders of the Unitary Executive theory have to hesitate. Prosecution of the laws by Federal Government employees was not under the arm of the President, and as far as I have been able to find, no one thought that violated the Constitution. 
There are also the Framers' famous decisions of 1789 on whether and how to put the heads of the Foreign Affairs Department, the War Department, and the Treasury Department under the President." They ended in a closely divided vote that many of the leading participants said was a policy decision not made under constitutional compulsion, although some of the decisions' supporters disagreed with this view. The Framers ultimately did put Foreign Affairs and War under the President's hierarchical control. But if we follow up on history a little bit, things become much more complicated very quickly. 
The first Congress had refused to put the Treasury Department formally within the executive branch. 3 There was a very important public official in the Treasury Department called the Comptroller of the Currency. James Madison, the greatest of the Framers, believed that the Comptroller of the Currency would not be under the President's hierarchical control; because the Comptroller settled legal claims, his office (arguing that because 1) prosecution is executive function, and 2) statute in question vests this function in branch other than executive, statute in question violates Article II of Constitution). Justice Scalia emphasized his belief that government prosecution of crimes is quintessentially an executive function. Id. 
& Cass R. Sunstein, The President and The Administration, 94 COLUM. L. REv. 1, 16-22 (1994) (examining federal prosecution practices of late eighteenth century, and how they shed light on fallacy of Unitary Executive model). 
removal authority of agency heads, in particular of the Departments of War, State, and Treasury. See Louis FISHER, CONSTITUTIONAL CONFLICTS BETWEEN CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENT 60-66 (1985) (reciting highlights of removal debate of 1789). See also EDWARD S. CORWIN, THE PRESIDENT: OFFICE AND POWERS, 1787-1957, 1019, 101-02 (Randall W. Bland et al. eds., 5th ed. 1984) (summarizing various executive removal authority options debated by First Congress, and questioning whether result supports Chief Justice Taft's argument in Myers). 
FISHER, THE POLITICS OF SHARED POWER, supra note 6, at 40-41. contained "too much of the Judicial capacity to be blended with the Executive" and subject to the President's plenary power. 4 Theodore Sedgwick, another of the Framers, believed that in light of the Comptroller's close connection to the raising of national revenues, he "seemed to bear a strong affinity" to Congress.' 5 Madison believed that this office was distinct from both the executive and judicial branches. 6 
If Madison was speaking for many of the Framers, and it appears that he was, this has explosive consequences. The judicial function of the Comptroller was similar to what many administrative agencies now do in one way or another. This suggests that when administrative officials do things that seem to bear a strong affinity to what Congress does-and the EPA is an example in its rulemaking capacity-the agency need not be, as a matter of constitutional compulsion, placed under the hierarchical control of the President. If the settlement of legal claims becomes judicial, and immunized from presidential control, then the defenders of the Unitary Executive idea have a strong historical burden to overcome. This is a real disappointment to any sitting President. 
In 1792, the Postmaster General, the person in charge of the mails, was treated similarly. 7 The office was reorganized, and he was given the authority to enter into contracts and to make appointments. It was said around the time of the Framing that this would "combine purse and sword" by giving the President direct power over revenues. As a result, Congress deleted the language putting the Postmaster General under the direction of the President. 
Because of all this, there is a big historical burden for the Unitary Executive supporters to surmount. Prosecution was not under the President's control, the functions of the Comptroller were not under the President's control, and the functions of the Postmaster were not under the President's control. The notion that any of this was unconstitutional was barely discernable in this period. 
What about the text of the Constitution? There is strong textual support for the view I have just suggested. The Opinions Clause of the ANNALS OF CONGRESS 613, 614 (1789)). 
from presidential control is evidence of administrative state's independence from presidential control). 
EXECUTIVE OVERSIGHT OFAGENCY RULEMAKING Constitution" gives the President the power to demand the opinions, in writing, of the heads of departments. I used to think that this clause was an indication of strong support for the Unitary Executive view. But if we think about it a moment, this interpretation would be redundant. Why is it that the Framers gave the President the power to demand, in writing, the opinions of department heads if these were people whom he could hire and fire at his will, and whose actions he could direct? This provision would make no sense under the strong Unitary Executive model. The notion that the President must specifically be given the power to demand opinions in writing seems to me very strong textual evidence against the Unitary Executive concept. Furthermore, the Necessary and Proper Clause 9 gives Congress constitutional authority to "enact all powers necessary and proper" to carry into effect not only the powers of Congress, but all other powers vested in the Federal Government. That suggests, at a minimum, considerable congressional control over the organization of the judicial and executive branches. 
This is simply the sketch of an argument. It produces, for me, the sad conclusion that the strong Unitary Executive conception is an ahistorical, policy-driven, extremely sensible anachronism that uses twentieth-century ideas on an eighteenth-century document. Because the conclusion that I have reached seems to me so unfortunate, I am trying hard to figure out what can be done about it. Perhaps we should not really be originalists about the meaning of the Constitution. Maybe the views of Judge Bork" are wrong, in that the Constitution is a changing and living document, with a high degree of flexibility. 
Under such an approach to constitutional interpretation, perhaps we have the ingredients of a new Unitary Executive idea. Maybe we can say that "executive" has to be read in twentieth-century ways so as to promote eighteenth-century goals. This seems plausible to me, given the vastly changed character of the executive branch. This idea rests heavily on notions of an evolving Constitution and the need to pay attention to changed circumstances. This argument may be able to bring us towards the Unitary Executive concept, but I do not think it can bring us all the way there. 
Let me now talk about some concrete issues that are very important in Washington now and will be regardless of the outcome of the elec18. U.S. CONST. art. II,  2. 
OF THE LAW 81-83 (1990) (advocating originalism). tion. I am just going to address them cursorily. One issue is whether the President, or any reviewing entity headed by Vice President Quayle, Gore, or Stockwell, has the power to tell an agency what to do. As I said earlier, the constitutional answer is no. He cannot dictate to an agency head. The proper solution for the White House, at most, is to discharge the agency head. The early opinions of the Attorney General support this view." The history that I have traced supports this view. The dicta in Myers v. United States2,2 the most emphatic affirmation of presidential power in the history of the Supreme Court, supports this view. I assume that the Council on Competitiveness is in full agreement with this conclusion. The EPA promulgates the regulations under the Clean Air Act, not the President or the Council. 
Incidentally, I should add that it is not clear to me, unlike many critics of the Council, that anything the Council has done is illegal.'I do not know enough about the details to challenge or endorse what the Council has done, and my conclusions are no reflection on the Council on Competitiveness. 
Let us address the issue of private contacts involving the Council on Competitiveness. If the Council is influencing an agency's decision on the basis of communications with private individuals, it not only has a duty to disclose, but Congress can require disclosure. In fact, I actually think it would be a good idea to disclose. Even if it would not make things fantastically better in terms of, for example, environmental protection, it would increase the legitimacy of our government by notifying the American people of exactly when high-level people are meeting with members of the private sector on the substance of proposed rules. It is part of a very simple idea of open government. 
Another issue is time limits for reviewing entities. As long as they are reasonable and give the entity an opportunity to have its say, they are a good idea. It should not be feared that a reviewing entity is killing he was powerless to review Treasury Department's settlement of Major Joseph Wheaton's account). 
[o]f course there may be duties so peculiarly and specifically committed to the discretion of a particular officer as to raise a question whether the President may overrule or revise the officer's interpretation of his statutory duty in a particular instance. Then there may be duties of a quasi judicial character imposed on executive officers and members of executive tribunals whose decisions after hearing affect interests of individuals, the discharge of which the President cannot in a particular case properly influence or control.). regulations through delay. Time limits would respond to that fear. I suggest that there is no constitutional problem with imposing time limits onto the reviewing process. 
For me, the most difficult question is the policy issue with respect to internal executive branch communications. Suppose the Council is going back and forth with the EPA. Should Congress require disclosure of these communications? Is there a legal problem if Congress requires disclosure in these instances? If the President or the Vice President is involved, there might be a constitutional problem with requiring disclosure of all relevant contacts. And, certainly, there would be a problem with requiring disclosure if we are talking about core executive agencies, such as the State Department, the Defense Department, and possibly the Justice Department. But I think it is almost certainly the case that, other than in these instances, Congress can constitutionally require disclosure of internal executive branch communications that influence rulemaking proceedings. Thus, the issue becomes one of policy. 
I do not like this conclusion with respect to what I would like the Constitution to represent, or as a matter of sound constitutional policy. I think the Council's argument, that the internal deliberative process should be protected from public oversight, is persuasive. I do not agree with the American Bar Association's recommendation that the deliberative process be opened in all respects. Congress would not like an effort to require its internal discussions with its own staff to be opened up. General Motors would not like a requirement that its internal policy discussions be opened up to the public. There is a terrible chilling effect on internal discussion when it is exposed to public scrutiny. 
Perhaps drafts that are submitted to the Council on Competitiveness should be disclosed. I understand that is ACUS's position.2" But requiring disclosure of this kind does not seem to be Congress's highest priority. I think their time is better spent elsewhere. 
To summarize on the issue of internal executive contacts, I think that if the President or Vice President is not involved, there is not a constitional problem with requiring disclosure. In some rare cases, perhaps, there is something of a constitutional problem. Usually it is an issue of policy. 
Let me give you my basic conclusion. As an originalist matter, the notion of a strong Unitary Executive has been greatly oversold. We should not be looking at the Constitution, we should be discussing poli23. See ACUS Recommendation, supra note 2 (outlining ACUS's 1988 recommendation with respect to presidential oversight of agency action). cy. The notion of presidential oversight of the administrative and executive process, particularly with an eye toward controlling costs, is an excellent policy innovation. In this role, however, the Council on Competitiveness may not dictate rulemaking outcomes. It could be, and should be, required to disclose private contacts. Time limits are fine, as both a constitutional and policy matter. Finally, Congress should not require that internal executive deliberations be disclosed to the public, though there is rarely a constitutional obstacle to this requirement. 
Thank you. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
The Harvard Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Harvard Law Review. http://www.jstor.org 
Reasoningby analogyis the most familiarform of legal reasoning. 
It dominatesthe first year of law school;it is a characteristicpart of brief-writingand opinion-writingas well. But exactly what is analogical reasoning,as it operatesin law? 
The subject receives little attentionin the most influentialworks in Anglo-Americanjurisprudenceand legal theory.' Often lawyers themselvesare unenthusiasticabout analogicalreasoning,urgingthat this wl.v of thinking about law is unconstrainedor not a form of reasoning at all.2 As a result, the legal culture lacks a sympathetic depictionof its own most characteristicway of proceeding.3 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For helpful comments, I am very grateful to members of the audience at a lecture on this topic at Harvard University's Program in Ethics and the Professions; to participants in legal theory workshops at Stanford Law School and the University of Southern California Law Center; and to Bruce Ackerman, Scott Brewer, Daniel Brudney, Joshua Cohen, Jon Elster, Richard Fallon, Abner Greene, Dennis Hutchinson, Laurence Friedman, Elena Kagan, Larry Lessig, Frank Michelman, Michael McConnell, Jennifer Nedelsky, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, Richard Posner, Margaret Jane Radin, Frederick Schauer, Lawrence Solum, David A. Strauss, Mark Tushnet, Edna Ullmann-Margalit, and Lloyd Weinreb. 
1 See RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE (I986); RONALD DWORKIN, TAKING RIGHTS SERIOUSLY (Ig77); and H.L.A. HART, THE CONCEPT OF LAW (Ig6I). The various essays in JUDITH J. THOMSON, RIGHTS, RESTITUTION, AND RISK 78-i i6, 257-260 (I986), are prominent nonlegal examples of the method of analogy, as I understand it here. Thomson's comments on her method are also relevant. Id. at 25I. 
2 See PETER GOODRICH, READING THE LAW 77-78, i6o-6i, I84-86, I97-98 (I986); RICHARD A POSNER, THE PROBLEMS OF JURISPRUDENCE 86-ioo (IggO); ROBERTO M. UNGER, THE CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES MOVEMENT 8 (I983); James A. Boyle, The Anatomy of a Torts Class, 34 AM. U. L. REv. I003, I05I, I054-55 (I985); Mark V. Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Interpretivism and Neutral Principles, 96 HARV. L. REV. 78i, 8I8-Ig (I983). 
3 The leading discussion of analogical reasoning in law is EDWARD H. LEVI, AN INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL REASONING (I947), discussed below in note 63. Helpful descriptions appear in STEPHEN F. BARKER, THE ELEMENTS OF LOGIC I86-95, 225-29 (5th ed. I989); STEVEN J. 
BURTON, AN INTRODUCTION TO LAW AND LEGAL REASONING 25-40 (I987); MARTIN P. GOLDING, LEGAL REASONING 97-I43 (I984); MARK T. KEANE, ANALOGICAL PROBLEM SOLVING I I37 (I988); JOSEPH RAz, THE AUTHORITY OF LAW 20I-o6 (I979); J.F. ROSS, PORTRAYING ANALOGY 202-II (Ig8I); and STEPHEN TOULMIN, RICHARD RIEKE & ALLAN JANIK, AN INTRODUCTION TO REASONING I48-I50 (I979). For useful collections, see ANALOGICAL REASONING: PERSPECTIVES OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, COGNITIVE SCIENCE, AND PHILOSOPHY (David H. Helman ed., I988) [hereinafter ANALOGICAL REASONING]; SIMILARITY AND ANALOGICAL REASONING (Stella Vosniadou & Andrew Ortony eds., I989). For short, suggestive treatments, see HILARY PUTNAM, THE MANY FACES OF REALISM 73-75 (I987); DAVID TRACY, PLURALITY AND AMBIGUITY 20-22 (I987); W.V. QUINE & J.S. ULLIAN, THE WEB OF BELIEF [Vol. i06:74I 
In the face of this odd combination of general indifference and critical attack, analogical reasoning maintains its status as an exceedingly prominent means by which both lawyers and nonlawyers think about legal and moral questions. The principal goals of this Commentary are to offer an account of analogical reasoning and to suggest that, at least for law, it has distinctive advantages over forms of thought that seem to be far superior. The discussion will bear on the role of analogical thinking in ethics and politics as well. 
I also hope to say something about the nature and possibility of normative argument in law and to suggest how and when certain views about legal disputes can be shown to be persuasive or even correct.4 What does it mean to say that a difficult case is "rightly decided"? How, if at all, does such a judgment differ from a political or moral claim about what the law should be? What is the difference between a legally correct decision and a morally correct decision? An understanding of analogical reasoning should provide some clues. 
The Commentary is divided into three parts. Part I describes analogical reasoning, primarily by comparing it to other methods of thinking that also have a place in law. Part II tries to make the description more concrete by showing how analogies might be helpful in thinking about the problems raised by legal restrictions on crossburning. The Supreme Court's decision in R.A. V. v. City of St. Paul5 provides a focal point for the discussion. 
Part III, evaluating analogical reasoning, is divided into two sections. The first explores the most prominent criticisms of this way of thinking. Here I challenge the view that analogical reasoning is indeterminate and that it depends on an apparatus - a set of principles - that it is unable to supply. The second section explores the vices and especially the virtues of analogical reasoning by contrasting it with some especially prominent approaches to legal reasoning, including those offered by Ronald Dworkin and economic analysts of law. 83-95 (2d ed. 1978); Brian Barry, On Analogy, 23 POL.STUD.86, 93-99 (1975); cf. ALBERTR. 
JONSEN& STEPHENTOULMIN,THE ABUSEOF CASUISTRY279-303 (I988) (defending particularistic case analysis - "casuistry"- against the view that morality consists of the application of a code of general rules). 
4 Skepticism about normative argument has become prominent in law. See, e.g., Richard Delgado, Norms and Normal Science: Toward a Critique of Normativity in Legal Thought, 139 U. PA. L. REV. 933, 960 (i99i) ("Normative discourse is indeterminate; for every social reformer's plea, an equally plausible argument can be found against it."); Robert W. Gordon, "Of Law and the River," and Of Nihilism and Academic Freedom, 35 J. LEGALEDUC. I, 2 (I985) ("[B]ecause ... [law] is founded upon contradictory norms, its principles cannot constrain a single set of outcomes even if intelligently, honestly and conscientiously applied. Lncontract law, for example, there is always a legitimate argument for maintaining one party's freedom of action and a contrary argument for protecting the other party's security; for every argument for enforcing the deal . . . there is a counterargument for voiding the deal . 
5 112 S. Ct. 2538 (1992). In this section, I reject, as only part of a complex story, the view that analogical reasoning is a crude and incomplete version of the lawyer's search for "reflective equilibrium."6 I also claim that analogical reasoning has important advantages over general theories, because those who use analogies are especially attuned to the diverse and plural goods that are at stake in legal and ethical decisions. 
Outside of law, analogical reasoning often helps to inform our judgments. I have a German shepherd dog who is gentle with children. When I see another German shepherd dog, I assume that he, too, will be gentle with children. I have a Toyota Camry that starts even on cold days in winter. I assume that my friend's Toyota Camry will start on cold winter days as well. This kind of thinking has a simple structure: (i) A has characteristic X; (2) B shares that characteristic; (3) A also has characteristic Y; (4) Because A and B share characteristic X, we conclude what is not yet known, that B shares characteristic Y as well.7 
This is a usual form of reasoning in daily life,8 but it will readily appear that it does not guarantee truth. The existence of one or many 
7 What I am describing in the text is a form of inductive analogy, in the sense that it depends on predictive conjectures about an unknown case that are based on but go beyond stated premises. See BARKER, supra note 3, at I9I-93; Theo A.F. Kuipers, Inductive Analogy by Similarity and Proximity, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at 299, 30I-09. Inductive analogy is different from the usual case of induction, which occurs by enumeration. An example of nonanalogical inductive reasoning is: I have seen ioo German shepherds, and they are all gentle with children. From the large number of gentle German shepherds, I infer that the latest German shepherd is also gentle with children. 
I deal throughout with analogical reasoning that is roughly propositional in a sense that should emerge from the discussion at pp. 744-49 below. I spend little time on the growing work dealing with analogy and metaphor at nonpropositional levels. See, e.g., GEORGELAKOFF, WOMEN, FIRE AND DANGEROUS THINGS 68-76 (I987); Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at 25, 39 ("[A]nalogiescannot be understood as propositional or conceptual mechanisms for reflecting on already-determinate experiences; rather, we can actually speak of them as constitutiveof our experience, because they are partially constitutive of our understanding, our mode of experiencing our world. Analogy is a basic means by which form, pattern, and connection emerge in our understanding and are then articulated in our reflective cognition and in our language."). See also the brief discussion of metaphor and analogy below in note 26. 
8 See Mary Hesse, Theories, Family Resemblances and Analogy, in ANALOGICALREASONING, supra note 3, at 3I7, 3I7-I8. Hesse writes: 
It has long been obvious that the human problem solver does not generally think deductively or by exhaustive search of logical space. Propositional logic relies upon enumeration of premises, univocal symbolization, and exclusively deductive connections, and these cannot be either a good simulation of human thought or an efficient use of computers. shared characteristics does not mean that all characteristics are shared.9 Some German shepherd dogs are not gentle with children. Some Toyota Camrys do not start on cold days in winter. For analogical reasoning to work well, we have to say that the relevant, known similarities give us good reason to believe that there are further similarities and thus help to answer an open question. Of course this is not always so. At most, analogical thinking can give rise to a judgment about probabilities, and often these are of uncertain magnitude. 
Analogical reasoning has a similar structure in law. Consider some examples. We know that an employer may not fire an employee for refusing to commit perjury;10it is said to follow that an employer is banned from firing an employee for filing a workers' compensation claim."1 We know that a speech by a member of the Ku Klux Klan, advocating racial hatred, cannot be regulated unless it is likely to incite, and is directed to inciting, imminent lawless action;12it is said to follow that the government cannot forbid the Nazis to march in Skokie, Illinois.13 We know that there is no constitutional right to welfare,14 medical care,15 or housing;16 it is said to follow that there is no constitutional right to government protection against domestic violence.17 
In real humanthinking,the meaningsof conceptsare constantlymodifiedand extended by parallels,modelsand metaphors,and the rationalsteps frompremisesto conclusion are generallynon-demonstrativeb, eing carriedout by inductive,hypotheticaland analogicalreasoning. 
From a brief glance at these examples, we can get a sense of the characteristic form of analogical thought in law. The process appears to work in four simple steps: (i) Some fact pattern A has a certain characteristic X, or characteristics X, Y, and Z; (2) Fact pattern B differs from A in some respects but shares characteristics X, or characteristics X, Y, and Z; (3) The law treats A in a certain way; (4) Because B shares certain characteristics with A, the law should treat B the same way. For example, someone asking for protection against domestic violence is requesting affirmative government assistance, just like someone asking the government for medical care; it is said to "follow"from the medical care case that there is no constitutional right to protection against domestic violence. 
As in the nonlegal examples,18 it should readily appear that analogical reasoning does not guarantee good outcomes or truth. For analogical reasoning to operate properly, we have to know that A and B are "relevantly"similar, and that there are not "relevant"differences between them. Two cases are always different from each other along some dimensions. When lawyers say there are no relevant differences, they mean that any differences between the two cases either (a) do not make a difference in light of the relevant precedents, which foreclose certain possible grounds for distinction, or (b) cannot be fashioned into the basis for a distinction that is genuinely principled. A claim that one case is genuinely analogous to another - that it is "apposite" or cannot be "distinguished"- is parasitic on conclusion (a) or (b), and either of these must of course be justified. 19 
The major challenge facing analogical reasoners is to decide when differences are relevant. To make this decision, they must investigate cases with care in order to develop governing principles. The judgment that a distinction is not genuinely principled requires a substantive argument of some kind. For example, one difference between the Nazi march and the Klan speech is that the Nazi Party is associated with the Holocaust. This is indeed a difference, but American law currently deems it irrelevant. It appears unprincipled - or excessively ad hoc - for the states to ban prohibitions on political speech except when the speaker is associated with the Holocaust.20 we are dealing with non-inductive analogical reasoning. We are not making a prediction about likely facts in an unknown case, but are instead making claims about how an as-yet undecided case should be resolved in light of its similarity to a decided or clear case. See BARKER, supra note 3, at 225-29. 
18An important difference is that the dog and automobile cases involve analogies as a crude guide to statistical probabilities, whereas the legal examples involve normative judgments. 
19It should be clear from the text that in analogical argument, precedents cannot be said to be uncontroversially binding or "on all fours." An argument from analogy depends on the fact that there are both plausibly relevant differences and plausibly relevant similarities between the precedent and the case at hand. 
20 The distinction between the principled and the excessively ad hoc is sometimes a matter As we will see, analogical reasoning goes wrong when there is an inadequate inquiry into the matter of relevant differences and governing principles. But what are the defining characteristics of a competent lawyer's inquiry into analogies? 
In law, analogical reasoning has four different but overlapping features: principled consistency; a focus on particulars; incompletely theorized judgments; and principles operating at a low or intermediate level of abstraction. Taken in concert, these features produce both the virtues and the vices of analogical reasoning in law. 
First, and most obviously, judgments about specific cases must be made consistent with one another. A requirement of coherence, or principled consistency, is a hallmark of analogical reasoning (as it is of reasoning of almost all sorts). It follows that in producing the necessary consistency, some principle, harmonizing seemingly disparate outcomes, will be invoked to explain the cases. 
Second, analogical reasoning focuses on particulars, and it develops from concrete controversies. Holmes put it this way: a common law court "decides the case first and determines the principle afterwards."'21 Ideas are developed from the details, rather than imposed on them from above. In this sense, analogical reasoning, unlike many forms of reasoning,22 is a version of "bottom-up"thinking.23 
Despite the focus on particulars, the analogizer's description of a particular holding inevitably has some general theoretical components. One cannot even characterize one's convictions about a case without using abstractions, and without taking a position on competing abstractions.24 We cannot fully describe the outcome in case X if we do of social convention. See e.g., Fredrick Schauer, Exceptions, 58 U. CHI. L. REV. 871, 886-9I (I99I) (discussing the effect of social conventions on free speech principles and claims for exceptions). 
21 Oliver W. Holmes, Jr., Codes and the Arrangementsof Law, 44 HARV. L. REV. 725, 725 (I93I) (reprinted from 5 AM. L. REv. i (I870)). In a way this suggestion is misleading. To decide the case at all, one has to have the principle in some sense in mind; there can be no sequential operation of quite the kind Holmes describes. See T.M. Scanlon, The Aims and Authority of Moral Theory, 12 OXFORD J. LEGAL STUD. I, 9 (I992). 
22 See, for example, the discussion of racial discrimination in DWORKINc,ited above in note I, at 38I-89, in which the principles are first generated at a high level of generality, and then applied to particular disputes - an example of "top down" reasoning. A similar method is at work in Ronald Dworkin, The Coming Battles over Free Speech, N.Y. REV. BOOKS, June ii, I992, at 55 [hereinafter Dworkin, The Coming Battles over Free Speech]. An interesting contrast is provided by Ronald Dworkin, The Original Position, in READING RAWLS i6, 28-37 (Norman Daniels ed., I989) [hereinafter Dworkin, The Original Position], in which the search for reflective equilibrium is described in a way that does not have this "top down" aspect. 
23 See Richard A. Posner, Legal Reasoning from the Top Down and From the Bottom Up, 59 U. CHI. L. REV. 433, 434-35 (I992); cf. JON ELSTER, LOCAL JUSTICE I89-94 (I992) (distinguishing between "hard"and "soft" theories in the same way that Posner distinguishes between "top down" and "bottom up" approaches). 
24 See BRIAN BARRY, THEORIES OF JUSTICE 264 (I989); Scanlon, supra note 2I, at 9; see not know something about the reasons that count in its favor. We cannot say whether decided case X has anything to do with undecided case Y unless we are able to abstract, a bit, from the facts and holding of case X. The key point is that analogical reasoning involves a process in which principles are developed with constant reference to particular cases. 
Third, analogical reasoning operates without a comprehensive theory that accounts for the particular outcomes it yields. The judgments that underlie convictions about, or holdings in, the relevant case are incompletely theorized, in the sense that they are unaccompanied by a full apparatus to explain the basis for those judgments. Lawyers might firmly believe, for example, that the Constitution does not create a right to welfare or that the state cannot regulate political speech without a showing of immediate and certain harm. But it is characteristic of reasoning by analogy, as I understand it here, that lawyers are not able to explain the basis for these beliefs in much depth or detail, or with full specification of the theory that accounts for those beliefs. Lawyers (and almost all other people) typically lack any largescale theory.25 They reason anyway, and their reasoning is often analogical. 
Finally, analogical reasoning produces principles that operate at a low or intermediate level of abstraction. If we say that the state cannot ban a Nazi march, we might mean that the state cannot stop political speech without showing that the speech poses a clear and immediate harm. This is a principle, and it does involve a degree of abstraction from the particular case; but it does not entail any highlevel theory about the purposes of the free speech guarantee or about the relation between the citizen and the state. Analogical reasoning usually operates without express reliance on any general principles about the right or the good. Some such principles may of course be also RAZ, supra note 3, at 203 ("By its very nature the justification of a rule is more abstract and more general than the rule it justifies"). 
25 Consider in this connection a famous story of the early days of law and economics at the University of Chicago Law School. Edward Levi - the great champion of analogical reasoning, see infra note 63 - decided to introduce economics into his antitrust course, by allowing every fifth class to be taught by the economist Aaron Director, one of the fathers of modern law and economics. As the story goes, Levi would spend four classes in the lawyer's fashion, brilliantly rationalizing the seemingly inconsistent judicial holdings. In the fifth class, Director would explain, with the economist's tools, why everything Levi said was wrong. Eventually even Levi was converted. (The story is summarized in Ronald H. Coase, Law and Economics at Chicago, J.L. & ECON.(forthcoming I993)). The supposed moral of the story is that lawyers' reasoning, even by its most able practitioners, is inferior to economics, primarily because it lacks clear criteria or specified governing values. In antitrust, this may well be true; but it is not true everywhere. And if this is so, there are places in which those now occupying the place of Levi should not be converted by those now occupying the place of Director. See infra pp. 787-90 (discussing diverse and plural goods). an implicit or even necessary basis for decision, but the lawyer who engages in analogical reasoning is not self-conscious about them. 
Reasoning by analogy, understood in light of these four characteristics, is the mode through which the ordinary lawyer typically operates. He has no abstract theory to account for his convictions, or for what he knows to be the law. But he knows that these are his convictions, or that this is the law, and he is able to bring that knowledge to bear on undecided cases. For guidance, he looks to areas in which his judgment is firm. Analogical reasoning thus works when an incompletely theorized judgment about case X is invoked to come to terms with case Y, which bears much (but not all) in common with case X, and in which there is as yet no judgment at all.26 
We need to distinguish here between analogies that depend on a contestable substantive argument and analogies that are simply constitutive of the thinking of people in the relevant community. Some analogies, or perceptions of likeness, do not depend on arguments, but rest instead on the widely shared way that human beings order their world. We do not need an argument in order to say that one car is relevantly "like"other cars; we take the point for granted; it is part of our language. This form of categorization is different from the view, plausible but in need of an argument, that a ban on the work of Robert Mapplethorpe is "like"a ban on Ulysses. Of course the distinction between analogies that depend on contestable arguments and analogies that constitute how people arrange their world is only contingent and conventional - a function of existing social judgments.27 Sometimes the two operate more like poles on a continuum than a sharp dichotomy, and there are important shifts over time from one category to another. Consider, for example, the current 26 A good deal of recent attention has been devoted to the relationship between analogy and metaphor. See generally ON METAPHOR (Sheldon Sacks ed., I979). In much of this work, metaphor is said to have epistemic value, in science and elsewhere. Here there is much room for further thought about both analogy and metaphor in law. I make one brief point here. Consider the statement: "Abortionis murder,"a statement that in the abstract, could be intended and received as a literal truth, a metaphor, or an analogy. If it is a metaphor, we know that the speaker believes that abortion is not literally murder, but is seeking to cast some light on the subject precisely by departing from literal description. ("Holmes was a lion of the law." "Michael Jordan is God.") But if the statement is an analogy, the speaker is claiming, and should be understood to be claiming, that abortion really is murder in the relevant respects; there is no acknowledgement that the statement is literally untrue. I believe that this is a large difference between metaphor and analogy, though I must be tentative on this point. See Donald Davidson, What Metaphors Mean, in ON METAPHOR, supra, at 29, 29-36 (challenging this conception of metaphor); Dedre Gentner, Brian Falkenhainer & Janice Skorstad, Viewing Metaphor as Analogy, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at I7I, I72 (claiming that metaphor is a kind of analogical process); Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at 25, 25 (same). 
27 See also infra note 53 (discussing the analytic-synthetic distinction). consensus that Brown v. Board of Education28 is "like" Loving v. Virginia,29 to the point that the similarity between the two cases can almost be taken as constitutive of how lawyers arrange their world, rather than as a controversial proposition that requires a substantive argument. Much creativity in law consists of the effort to show that a judgment about likeness that seems constitutive of thought actually depends on contestable substantive arguments - or vice-versa. 
These statements leave many ambiguities, and I will return to them shortly. For the moment it will be useful to try to get a better sense of analogical reasoning by comparing it with five other forms of reasoning that have a prominent place in law.30 These alternative conceptions are general theories, the search for reflective equilibrium, reasoning from incompletely theorized practices, classification, and means-ends rationality. 
B. Other Forms of Legal Reasoning i. Top-Down General Theories. - Legal problems are often discussed in terms of some general theory - indeed, this method seems to be increasingly popular in law schools, if not in courts. By a general theory, I mean an approach to law that is simple and unitary, operates at a high level of abstraction, has a distinctive "top down" character, brings the general theory to bear on particular cases, and disregards the fact that people are disturbed by particular outcomes that seem counterintuitive but that have been compelled by the general theory. Utilitarianism and economic analysis of law are especially familiar examples of this form of reasoning. 
Top-down general theories operate deductively. Analogy plays no role. Legal outcomes in particular cases are the logical consequence of the general theory. For example: The law should maximize efficiency; a negligence regime is more efficient than one of strict liability; the law should therefore require a showing of negligence. 
Many general theories give little weight to convictions about appropriate outcomes in particular cases, which are sometimes dismissed as "intuitions." Some Kantian approaches, for example, are famously indifferent if the approach will compel truth-telling even if many people will be killed as a result. The utilitarian analogue is the apparent obligation to kill an innocent person if social welfare will thereby be promoted. Economic approaches to law find a similar case in the acknowledgement that, on economic grounds, rape should per28 347 U.S. 483 (1954). 29 388 U.S. i (i967). 
30 Of course I do not mean to canvass all or most forms of human reasoning; I select those that are pervasive in the legal culture. haps be legalized if rapists would pay more to rape than victims would pay to avoid rape.31 
These examples can make believers in general theories seem fanatical; indeed, we might understand fanaticism in law and politics to consist precisely in the insistence on applying general principles to particular cases in which they produce palpable absurdity or palpable injustice.32 The point is not that exponents of any of these views cannot avoid the seemingly bizarre counterexample.33 It is instead that general theories usually do not make existing convictions about particular cases a constituent part of the method through which principles are constructed. 
There are conspicuous differences between top-down theories and analogical reasoning. In top-down thinking, particular cases are not the source of principles; all judgments are completely theorized, in the sense that they are accompanied by a full explanation of their basis; and the relevant judgments operate at a high level of abstraction and generality. General systems are for these reasons a natural ally of codification, and a natural enemy of the common law. It is therefore no surprise that Jeremy Bentham was both the founder of utilitarianism and the most vigorous advocate of codification, a word that in fact he coined.34 Thus Bentham wrote with palpable disgust about the disadvantages and irrationality of the common law approach, in which general inferences are deduced from particular decisions 35 also evaluated by comparing apparently plausible general theories with 31 See Richard A. Posner, An Economic Theory of the Criminal Law, 85 COLUM. L. REv. II93, II98-99 (I985). 
32 Sometimes the judgment that a particular outcome is palpably absurd or unjust should not be given much weight, because that judgment should itself be subject to critical scrutiny. See infra note 67 and accompanying text (suggesting that considered judgments about particular cases should count as such only if they have survived encounter with a good deal else that is both general and particular). 
33 It is interesting that advocates of general theories often work very hard to show that deductions from the theory are indeed consistent with our judgments about particular cases. See, e.g., ROBERT H. BORK, THE TEMPTING OF AMERICA 74-83 (I990) (attempting to explain why a reliance on the original understanding of the Constitution is consistent with the outcome in Brown v. Board of Education). Note also that a large part of the argument for the economic analysis of law is that economic analysis appears to "account for" or "explain"a large number of well-established and apparently satisfactory common law principles. See, e.g., RICHARD POSNER, ECONOMICANALYSIS OF LAW ? 2.2, at 23-25 (4th ed. I992). 
34 See JOHN DINWIDDY, BENTHAM 58 (I989). 
35 See 3 JEREMY BENTHAM, THE WORKS OF JEREMY BENTHAM 206 (J. Bowring ed., I843). Barker, cited above in note 3, at 286-9o, contains a useful discussion, implicitly responsive to Bentham and highly relevant to lawyers, of how noninductive reasoning by analogy is necessary when deductive and inductive reasoning are not able to give us answers that we need. Barker offers the case of a bad check written by a student who is claimed to have violated an honor code that bars lying and cheating. How, Barker asks, could this case be resolved without resort to analogical thought? See also infra note I47 (discussing affirmative action). apparently plausible outcomes in particular cases. Drawing on Rawls' notion of reflective equilibrium,36 we might understand much reasoning, in law and elsewhere, to entail an effort to produce both general theories and judgments in individual cases by close engagement with a range of general theories and a range of considered judgments about particular disputes. Those considered judgments may serve as provisional "fixed points" for inquiry, in the sense that we have a high degree of confidence in them and cannot readily imagine that they could be shaken. In searching for reflective equilibrium, what we think tentatively to be the general theory is adjusted to conform to what we think to be our considered views about particular cases. In other words, the particular views are adjusted to conform to the general theory and vice-versa. Through this process, we hope finally to reach a form of equilibrium. 
Many different conceptions of reflective equilibrium are possible. We might accord greater or lesser weight to particular situational judgments or to intermediate-level principles; make different decisions about what counts as a distortion of judgment; stress or downplay the role of philosophical arguments; evaluate in different ways the appropriate or possible amount of congruence between the general and the particular; bring to bear a few general theories or a large number; reject or value apparently emotional reactions;37and counsel deference or indifference to very high-level theories.38 
Some versions of the search for reflective equilibrium play a large role in law. Thus, for example, the notion that only political speech receives special constitutional protection might be abandoned if and 36 See RAWLS, supra note 6, at 19-2I, 46-5 I (I97I); John Rawls, The Independence of Moral Theory, 48 PROC.& ADDRESSES OF THE AM. PHIL. Ass'N 5, 7-10 (I974-75). 
37 Rawls suggests that considered judgments count as such only if reached when we are calm and disinterested, see RAWLS, supra note 6, at 47-48. In general this seems right, but it may be that anger, indignation, and other emotions sometimes reflect better thinking rather than distorting influence. See Norman Daniels, Wide Reflective Equilibrium and Theory Acceptance in Ethics, 76 J. PHIL. 256, 258 n.3 (I979); MARTHA C. NUSSBAUM, Perceptive Equilibrium: Literary Theory and Ethical Theory, in LOVE'S KNOWLEDGE I68, i68-93 (I990); cf. RAWLS, supra note 6, at 440-46 (suggesting that shame and guilt are highly cognitive rather than referring to them as products of distortion). 
38There is thus a dispute about the real role, in the search for reflective equilibrium, of judgments about particular situations. See generally Daniels, supra note 37, at 258 n.3. Ronald Dworkin describes the search for reflective equilibrium in a way that relies heavily on particular judgments about particular situations, and this is closer to how I understand things in this essay. See Dworkin, The Original Position, supra note 22, at 28-30. It is interesting that the search for reflective equilibrium, if understood to require a great deal of attention to low-level judgments, plays little or no role in Rawls's book itself. The examples offered are "that religious intolerance and racial discrimination are unjust." RAWLS, sup-ranote 6, at I9. There is little reference to particular judgments, and little testing of the general principles against those judgments. See i BRIAN BARRY, A TREATISE ON SOCIALJUSTICE: THEORIES OF JUSTICE 28082 (i989). We should understand the search for reflective equilibrium to be a general concept of which Rawls's own version is a particular conception. when it appears that that notion allows censorship of great art and literature. The goal of the resulting method would be to produce a full set of confident judgments about specific cases, accompanied by an abstract theory, or a set of principles, that is able to account for all of them. 
There is an important commonality between analogical reasoning and the search for reflective equilibrium. In sharp contrast to topdown theories, both of these approaches depend heavily on judgments about particular cases. Here is a source of controversy. Sometimes lawyers rebel against the idea that theories should be adjusted if they lead to unacceptable particular outcomes.39 For them, the adjustment is a form of brinkmanship, or strategic thinking, and a violation of the necessary commitment to general principle and neutrality itself. 
This is an objection to both analogical reasoning and the search for reflective equilibrium; perhaps judgments about particular cases should not play a large role in developing theories or principles. The objection raises large issues that I cannot fully discuss here. But if judgments by human beings are inevitably a product of what human beings think, nothing need be wrong with changing one's general theory when that theory brings about results that seem to be an unacceptable part of one's approach to the subject.40 To understand 39 Herbert Wechsler, Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional Law, 73 HARV.L. REv. I, I5-I7, 3I-34 (I959), is the mostnotableexampleof suchcriticisms.The searchfor reflective equilibrium is criticized as unacceptably dependent on existing intuitions in, among other places: RICHARD B. BRANDT, A THEORY OF THE GOOD AND THE RIGHT I6-23 (1979); R.M. Hare, Rawls' A Theory of Justice - II, 23 PHIL. Q. 241, 249-50 (1973); Joseph Raz, The Claims of Reflective Equilibrium, 25 INQUIRY 307, 3I8-I9 (I982); Peter Singer, Sidgwick and Reflective Equilibrium, 58 MONIST 490, 5I5-I7 (I974). But see Daniels, supra note 37, at 264-67 (defending the search for reflective equilibrium if it is sufficiently "wide"). A helpful treatment can be found in ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS ? 5.3 (forthcoming 1993) (qualifying coherence theories by acknowledging and incorporating criticisms while maintaining many of the best features of coherentist accounts). 
Jon Elster makes the interesting suggestion that the "empirical foundations" of theories of justice should be not only "the intuitions of the philosopher,"but also the results of (a) empirical studies of perceptions of justice and (b) investigations into the actual practices of institutions allocating scarce resources. JON ELSTER, LOCAL JUSTICE 192-94 (I992); see also NORMAN FROHLICH & JOE A. OPPENHEIMER, CHOOSING JUSTICE (I992) (providing such an empirical study). An approach of this kind would result in a quite different conception of reflective equilibrium than that presented by Rawls. In Rawls's conception, particular judgments are revisable; this would not be so under Elster's suggestion. See Scanlon, supra note 2I, at io (describing the connection between revisability of judgments and Rawls's method). 
40 I am drawing in this paragraph on various discussions of coherence in moral and ethical thought. See, e.g., ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND IN ECONOMICS ch. 5 (forthcoming I993); GILBERT HARMAN, CHANGE IN VIEW 29-63 (I986); RAWLS, supra note 6, at I9-22, 46-5I; Rawls, supra note 36, at 5; John Rawls, Outline of A Decision Procedure For Ethics, 6o PHIL. REV. I77 (195I). To accept what I say here, it is not necessary to endorse all the details of these different and controversial accounts. Coherence accounts are criticized in Joseph Raz, The Relevance of Coherence, 72 B.U. L. REV. 273, 275-82 (1992). what morality requires, or what the law is in hard cases, we need to explore what we - each of us - actually believe; there is no other place to look. For example, many people could not accept a system of free expression that would allow suppression of a relatively harmless political protest. The judgment in that case is indeed a fixed point for inquiry. For some people, any general theory about the Constitution must fail if it entails the incorrectness of Brown v. Board of Education,41 or the validation or overruling of Roe v. Wade,42 or a particular consequence for affirmative action. 
It may well be wrong for any of these particular outcomes to have such foundational status. Disagreement in law is often based on disagreement about what are the appropriate fixed points for analysis. Some particular outcomes do, however, occupy so central a role that they constrain the category of permissible general theories. This is a conventional feature of practical reason, as it operates in law and elsewhere. 
So much for an important commonality between analogical reasoning and the search for reflective equilibrium; there are important differences as well. The search for reflective equilibrium places a high premium on, first, the capacity to develop a complete understanding of the basis for particular judgments and, second, the development of abstract and general principles to account for those judgments. When reflective equilibrium is obtained, both horizontal and vertical consistency among cases are achieved. Every particular judgment becomes fully theorized, and at a highly general level. 
Analogical reasoning is far less ambitious,43 for it does not require anything like horizontal and vertical consistency. But because analogical reasoning requires at least a degree of generality, it is probably best to think of the difference between the two as one of degree rather than of kind. There is a continuum from the one to the other rather than any sharp discontinuities. This is so especially in view of the existence of many possible conceptions of reflective equilibrium, allowing for very different extensions in the direction of both particular judgments and high generality. Analogical reasoning might therefore be understood as a sharply truncated form of the search for reflective 4" 347 U,S. 483 (I954). 42 410 U.S. 113 (I973). 
43 On whether analogical reasoning can even occur without much more in the way of theory, see infra pp. 78I-83; see also Rush Rhees, The Language of Sense Data and Private Experience - II, 7 PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS IOI, I39 (I984) ("Suppose people are playing chess. I see queer problems when I look into the rules and scrutinise them. But Smith and Brown play chess with no difficulty. Do they understand the game? Well, they play it." (quoting a Wittgenstein lecture)). For examples of analogical reasoning that do not purport to search for reflective equilibrium, see the essays in Thomson, cited above in note i. equilibrium, with the truncation starting at just the point when the relevant principles go beyond a low level of generality.44 Practices.Sometimes reasoning by analogy works by reference to incompletely theorized practices rather than incompletely theorizedjudgments. One might, for example, know that merchants behave a certain way in the world, or that men and women tend to have a certain relationship in most families. One form of analogical reasoning would involve the effort to bring to bear, on disputed cases, social practices that seem similar to those under review.45 
Ideas of this kind are built on a time-honored view of law.46 The common law -the product and the most celebrated locus of analogical reasoning -has often been understood as a result of social custom rather than an imposition of judicial will. According to this view, the common law implements the customs of the people; it does not impose the judgment of any sovereign body.47 Judges need not theorize about or evaluate these customs to work from them.48 
In some ways, reasoning by analogy to incompletely theorized social practices resembles reasoning from incompletely theorized judgments. The difference is that it builds on existing practices, not judgments. To that extent, it has a conspicuous Burkean caste.49 Reasoning from incompletely theorized practices is founded on the assumption that those practices have a kind of legitimacy and sense that ought to be brought to bear on current dilemmas.50 Here lies the source of its appeal but also of great controversy. Those who believe that existing practices are often a result of arbitrariness or force, rather than deep wisdom or rationality, will be quite skeptical. As I describe reasoning by analogy, it operates by reference to particular convictions or judicial holdings, rather than social practices. It 44 I deal below with the comparative virtues of the two forms of reasoning. See infra pP. 78I-83. 
45 I think that something of this general sort underlies Charles Fried, The Artificial Reason of the Law or: What Lawyers Know, 6o TEX. L. REV. 35, 54-58 (I98I). 
46 See, e.g., MORTONJ. HORWITZT,HE TRANSFORMATIOONFAMERICANLAW, I870-I960, at I20 (I992). 
47 A usual response is that customs are not prelegal or prepolitical; they are themselves a function of law, and not independent of it. But see ROBERT C. ELLICKSON, ORDERWITHOUT LAWI23-55 (I99I) (providing a basis for thinking that something like customary law is indeed possible). 
48 This view of the common law has played a large role in fending off codification movements in the United States. Moreover, these systems account for a prominent and influential academic response to the Benthamite attack on judge-made law. Intriguingly, they appear to retain considerable appeal today. 
49 See EDMUNDBURKE,REFLECTIONOSN THEREVOLUTIOINN FRANCE348 (Gateway 1962) (1790). 
50 See Robert C. Clark, Contracts, Elites, and Traditions in the Making of CorporateLaw, 89 COLUM. L. REV. I703, 1726-30 (I989). may be true, however, that these convictions or holdings are also the product of arbitrariness or force, and this problem may push us in the direction of a preference for reflective equilibrium or general theories.51 
Classification plays a large role in both analogical reasoning and the application of general theories.52 In using the notion of classification here, I mean to refer to something far narrower and more mechanical - the effort to resolve a case solely by reference to purely semantic principles. By semantic principles, I mean the basic rules of grammar and diction. When someone says that a cat is an animal, he is using purely semantic principles. Substantive principles, by contrast, require an argument rather than a language lesson.53 When people say that the term "liberty"includes the right to seek an abortion, they are resorting to substantive principles, not mere semantics. 
Lawyers sometimes act as if semantic principles are all that is required to decide cases.54 Because some cases can be resolved simply by deduction, a mundane version of legal formalism is indeed unobjectionable. For example, if a driver drives a Toyota Camry go miles per hour (mph) in a 6o mph zone, syllogistic reasoning can resolve the case: the Toyota Camry is a motor vehicle, the state has a speed limit ordinance of 6o mph; the driver violated the ordinance. 
Classification of this sort is not always adequate. Suppose that the driver of the Camry claims that she was escaping a murderer who was shooting at her from his vehicle, or that she was a police officer 51I discussthis point in Partm. See infrapp. 770-7I. 
52 Hence SamuelBeckett'sresponseto criticsof his friendJamesJoyce:'The dangeris in the neatnessof identifications.... Mustwe wringthe neckof a certainsystemin orderto stuff it into a contemporarypigeon-hole,or modify the dimensionsof that pigeon-holefor the satisfactionof the analogymongersL?iterarycriticismis not book-keeping."SAMUEL BECKETT, DANTE. . . BRUNO.Vico ... JOYCE, in I CAN'TGo ON, I'LL Go ON I07, I07 (Richard W. Seaver ed., I976). (I am gratefulto Scott Brewerfor providingthis reference.)Law is not book-keeping,either;but this is an argumentfor analogicalreasoningratherthan againstit. See iifra pp. 787-90. 
53 I am oversimplifyinghere. W.V. Quinefamouslyarguesthat a familiarversionof this distinctiontums out to be untenable. See W.V. Quine, TwoDogmasof Empiricism,60 PHIL. REV. 20 (i95i). Adaptedto the legalcontext,Quine'sargumentmaybe describedin this rough way: There is no such thing as interpretationby referenceto purelysemanticprinciples(or purelyanalytictruths). Manysubstantiveprinciples(ornonanalyticideas)are at workin every case. In cases in which they are invisible, as they often are, and when we seem able to rely only on semantics,it is only becausethere is a consensusabout the substantiveprinciples(or nonanalyticideas). See id. at 34. I believethat Quine'sargumentis relatedto the following point, stated very briefly:"Theapplicationof the conceptof 'followinga rule'presupposesa custom." LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN, REMARKS ON THE FOUNDATIONS OF MATHEMATICS 322 (G.H. von Wright, R. Rhees & G.E.M. Anscombeeds., G.E.M. Anscombetrans., rev. ed. 1983). The distinctionI am drawingin the text should thus be understoodas a matterof custom or convention. 
54 With the qualificationnotedabove. See supranote 53. attempting to arrest a fleeing terrorist. To evaluate the guilt of a defendant found in either of these situations, classification in the purely semantic sense is inadequate. Both defendants may well have a legally sufficient excuse as a result of statute or judge-made law. If the speed limit statute is all the court invokes, we have what might be called spurious classification. It is spurious because to decide the cases, the court must actually be resorting to something other than the speed limit law. It must use an additional form of reasoning, or invoke some other cases or statutes. 
Often reasoning by classification is indeed a sham, in the sense that some judgment of value is being made but not disclosed. This is a familiar kind of bad formalism, at least if we understood formalism as an effort to decide all cases in law solely by reference to decisions made by someone else. Consider, for example, the view that the liberty to contract is necessarily, and purely as a matter of semantics, part of the "liberty"protected by the Due Process Clause.55 The problem here is that a supplemental value judgment is necessary. To conclude that liberty of contract is part of constitutional "liberty," the dictionary is insufficient. One has to make claims about morality, history, or probably both. The case is quite different from one in which someone decides that the category "dog" necessarily includes German shepherds.56 
Spurious classification, or bad formalism, often masquerades as analogical reasoning. Sometimes people believe that case A is analogous to case B, and attribute the belief to pure deduction, when a supplemental judgment of some kind is necessary.57 They find similarities between the two cases, ignore possible differences, and then announce the outcome of the case. In doing so, they fail to identify and defend the requisite supplemental judgment. 
Formalist analogical thinking is no better than any other kind of bad formalism. Different factual situations are inarticulate; they do not impose order on themselves. Patterns are made, not simply found. Whether one case is analogous to another depends on substantive 55 See Lochner v. New York, I98 U.S. 45, 53 (I905). 
56 I take the examples in this paragraph from Frederick Schauer, Formalism, 97 YALEL.J. 509, 512-13 (1988). 
57 William James described this phenomenon as "vicious abstractionism": We conceive a concrete situation by singling out some salient or important feature in it, and classing it under that; then, instead of adding to its previous characters all the positive consequences which the new way of conceiving it may bring, we proceed to use our concept privatively; reducing the originally rich phenomenon to the naked suggestions of that name abstractly taken, treating it as a case of 'nothing but' that concept, and acting as if all the other characters from out of which the concept is abstracted were expunged. Abstraction, functioning in this way, becomes a means of arrest far more than a means of advance in thought. It mutilates things .... 
WILLIAM JAMES, THE MEANING OF TRUTH I35-36 (I975) (footnote omitted). ideas that must be justified.58 The method of analogical reasoning that I am describing here is insistently antiformalist in the sense that it always stands ready to explain and justify the claim that one thing is analogous to another. 
In comparing analogical thinking with classification, we should see, too, that analogical reasoning can go wrong not simply because it is formalist, but also because it is illogical. Consider, for example, Justice Holmes's notorious argument on behalf of compulsory sterilization of the feeble-minded in Buck v. Bell.59 Holmes suggested that if people can be conscripted during wartime, or can be forced to obtain vaccinations, it follows that the state can require sterilization of the "feeble-minded."60 But this is a casual and unpersuasive claim. Many principles may cover the first two cases without also covering the third. Holmes does not explore the.many possibly relevant similarities and differences among these cases. He does not identify the range of possible principles, much less argue for one rather than another. Instead, he invokes a principle of a high level of generality "the public welfare may call upon the best citizens for their lives" -that is not evaluated by reference to low- or intermediate-level principles that may also account for the analogous cases. 
The example shows that analogical reasoning can go wrong when one case is said to be analogous to another on the basis of a unifying principle that is accepted without having been tested against other possibilities, or when some similarities between two cases are deemed decisive with insufficient investigation of relevant differences. These are pervasive problems, linked to bad formalist thinking. When these problems occur, the right response is to say that the court has not properly engaged in analogical reasoning. It is a part of the analogical method, as I understand it here, that judges must identify and test the possible available principles, and evaluate them against one another.61 
58 To the extent that analogical reasoning is not propositional but instead constitutive of our thinking, see supra note 7, however, we cannot make arguments, but must rest content with how it is that we think. For present purposes, I do not believe that this is an important qualification. 
59 274 U.S. 200, 207 (I927) ("Wehave seen more than once that the public welfare may call upon the best citizens for their lives. It would be strange if it could not call upon those who already sap the strength of the State for these lesser sacrifices, often not felt to be such by those concerned . . . The principle that sustains compulsory vaccination is broad enough to cover cutting the Fallopian tubes. Three generations of imbeciles are enough." (citation omitted)). 60 See id. 
61 See supra pp. 744-45; infra pp. 774-75. A related problem is that analogical reasoning can distract attention from the particular matter at hand by persuading judges to grapple with other cases and hypothetical examples that actually raise quite different issues. Resort to analogy can deflect the eye from the specific problem and thus induce a kind of blindness to what is really at stake. 
Note here Bishop Butler's phrase, "Everything is what it is, and not another thing," which a form of instrumental rationality. Suppose, for example, that a court must decide whether to impose an implied warranty of habitability on landlords. The court should consider the effects of the warranty on the housing market. Will such warranties increase rents, decrease available housing, or otherwise have disproportionately severe consequences for the poor? Or suppose a court is asked to rule that the First Amendment forbids the use of the libel law in any case involving a public official. A relevant question is the extent of the "chilling effect" of libel law on public discussion. In cases of this sort, courts must look at the facts. Reasoning operates simply by figuring them out, or at least by speculating as best we can. 
Means-ends rationality should play a large role in law, both in the courts and elsewhere; indeed, it should play a much larger role than it now does. In the law of tort, contract, and property, for example, legislatures and judges should anticipate the effects of their decisions on, among other things, the allocation and distribution of resources. Conventional legal tools are ill-suited to this task.62 Frequently, courts approach questions about consequences as if they could be answered by reference to other judicial holdings. 
Analogical reasoning is often silent or unhelpful on the question of social consequences. To be sure, it may be possible to say that if X has certain consequences, Y, which closely resembles X, will have the same consequences; in this way one can indeed learn something about consequences through thinking analogically. But this is usually not the most systematic or reliable way to evaluate the effects of laws. To the extent that courts do attempt to consider consequences, they will not be engaging in distinctly legal reasoning. Lawyers might as well be doing something else, such as economics; analogical reasoning usually plays little role. 
Here, then, is a basic account of analogical reasoning. Without relying on general theories, and without achieving reflective equilibrium, lawyers develop low-level principles to account for particular judgments, and apply those low-level principles to new cases in which there is as yet no judgment at all.63 As we will see in Part III, this Wittgensteinconsideredas a mottofor his book,PhilosophicalInvestigations.See RAYMoNK, LUDWIGWITTGENSTEINT:HE DuTY OF GENIUS451 (I99o). At its best, analogical reasoning is especially alert to this fact. See infra pp. 784-90 (comparing analogical reasoning to general theories). 
62 For a good discussion of the failure to examine means-end rationality in the legislative context, see Edward L. Rubin, LegislativeMethodology8,o GEO. L.J. 233, 268-81 (I99I). 
63 In his classicessay,An Introductionto LegalReasoning,Edward Levi also describes the process as analogical. See EDWARDH. LEVI, AN INTRODUCTIONTO LEGALREASONING 1-2 (1949). My account diverges from Levi's on the important question of what happens when analogies appear to point in different directions. In my view, a judge must make some judgment about the best controlling low-level principle. By contrast, Levi says that in such cases, "words method has important limits, but it is admirably well-suited to a system in which certain judgments must be taken as relatively fixed, and in which participants must deal with political dissensus and moral flux. 
Thus far the discussion has been quite abstract, but analogical reasoning is best understood by reference to examples. The law of free speech is an especially good area for investigation, because most of the reasoning in that area is analogical in nature. It will be useful to explore an issue of current controversy - the legal response to cross-burning and similar forms of expressive activity. I build the example from the recent case of R.A. V. v. City of St. Paul,64 in which analogies played an important role. 
I outline a set of responses to the cross-burning issue, attempting to show how much progress might be made by working from analogies and low-level principles. Large theoretical issues, and assessments of facts and incentives, are studiously avoided. We will see that analogies provide constraints on reasoning in a way that makes the correct legal outcome different from the correct moral outcome. But the key points involve method, not outcomes. 
It may be tempting to begin with the suggestion that cross-burning is action, not speech, and is therefore outside of the First Amendment altogether. We might suggest a low-level proposition: change to receive the content which the community gives to them." Id. at 104. "The process is one in which the ideas of the community and of the social sciences, whether correct or not, as they win acceptance in the community, control legal decisions." Id. at 6. For Levi, reasoning by analogy therefore has a crucial democratic component, found through the use of public desires (and social science). Levi did not, however, specify the mechanism by which community wishes help settle the play of analogies. There may be an historical explanation for this seemingly odd suggestion. Levi's book can be understood as a response to the legal realist attack on the autonomy of legal reasoning and to the associated claim, prominent after the New Deal, that legal reasoning is fatally undemocratic. When Levi was writing, it seemed crucial to establish the relative autonomy of law and especially of the common law method - to show that it had a logic and integrity of its own, but also to establish that it was not wholly independent of social desires. The enduring influence of Levi's account may stem from its apparent success in this endeavor. 
It would, however, be most surprising if one could identify any mechanism for translating community wishes into analogical reasoning. In hard cases, moreover, the community is badly divided. There may be no communal desire to which courts can look in making decisions. Reliance on community views is complicated further by the fact that the views of the community may be in part a function of what the courts say. The persuasiveness of any argument by analogy must turn on something other than community desires. Instead the process works by seeing to what principles people in positions of decision are most deeply committed. 64 II2 S. Ct. 2538 (I992). ready exists. Very little can be said on behalf of something so unambitious as that. 
To some degree this objection is valid. If someone denies that a problem would be created by a prohibition of flag-burning, or of any expressive conduct, the inquiry into cross-burning will have a hard time getting off the ground. (Note, however, that it may be possible to undermine this very denial with analogies.) If someone thinks that the government can punish political speech whenever that speech poses any risk to the government, it will be hard to reason with them through analogies to a sensible system of free expression.101 In this sense, it is correct to think that reasoning by analogy depends on a degree of commonality - even homogeneity - among participants in the discussion. 102 Analogical reasoning, it might be concluded, works most easily in these circumstances; it has a tendency toward bias or excessive complacency. 
Some of these claims are undoubtedly true. We might begin, however, by asking whether they really amount to objections at all. The need for a degree of consensus is hardly a problem distinctive to analogy. It applies to all forms of reasoning.103 In coming to terms with this objection, we need to distinguish between analogical reasoning in law and analogical reasoning elsewhere. Law imposes greater constraints on the analogical process. Existing legal holdings sometimes provide the necessary commonality and the necessary consensus. People who disagree with those holdings usually agree that they must be respected; the principle of stare decisis so requires. Within the legal culture, analogical reasoning imposes a certain discipline, and a widespread moral or political consensus is therefore unnecessary. We 101 On this score reasoning in science is no different from reasoning elsewhere. Both depend on a certain degree of consensus. The perceived differences between scientific and other thought may stem partly from the fact that we tend to compare ethical or legal issues in which judgments are contested (affirmative action, the death penalty) with scientific issues in which matters are settled (the earth goes around the sun, dropped objects will fall). This is probably misleading; we might do better to compare the settled scientific judgments with the settled ethical ones (slavery is wrong, purposeless human suffering cannot be justified). See Alan Gewirth, Positive "Ethics"and Normative"Science,"69 PHIL. REV. 311, 3I2-13 (1960). 
102 The point may be put in another way. Sometimes case A is found analogous to case B, rather than case C, simply because the relevant judges are homogenous, and the homogeneity may damage judicial thinking. Analogical reasoning can go wrong for this reason. Some people, for example, think that a prohibition on homosexual sodomy is like a prohibition on incest, see, e.g., Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. i86, 195-96 (I986); others think that the right analogy is a prohibition on the use of contraceptives within marriage. It is at least possible that the former group thinks as it does in part because of its homogeneity, that is, because it has not been systematically confronted with other views and perspectives. 
103 Cf. LUDWIG L. WITTGENSTEIN, PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATIONS ? 242, at 88 (G.E.M. Anscombe trans., 3d ed. 1958) ("If language is to be a means of communication there must be agreement not only in definitions but also (queer as this may sound) in judgments. This seems to abolish logic but does not do so."). have seen several examples of this in our examination of the crossburning issue. 104 
Things are different outside of law, simply because of the absence of precedents that can help generate an "overlapping consensus"105on outcomes. The differences lead to two important conclusions. First, the method of analogy may indeed be less determinate outside of law. In law, we have a wide range of "fixed points" for inquiry, and this makes the analysis easier. Second, there will be a real difference between the legally correct outcome and the morally correct outcome. The difference lies in the fact that analogies operate as fixed points in legal reasoning, whereas in morality they are either revisable or entirely open-ended. Consider, for example, the fact that lawyers must take Roe v. Wade as authoritative as long as it stands, even if they think the decision abhorrent.'06 
Even outside of law, the indeterminacy objection is not entirely persuasive. Very diverse people may have sufficient commonality on fundamental matters to permit considerable progress. Even if such commonality appears not to exist, a good deal of movement can occur through simultaneous engagement with what various participants in the discussion say and think - an engagement that would include narratives about diverse experiences or history, personal and otherwise, as well as more conventional "reasons."107(Note that the case method operates in part through narratives.)'08 
In order to provide relevant information, and to counteract parochialism and bias, it is important to ensure that, in law and elsewhere, people with different perspectives and experiences are permitted to participate.'09 It is equally important to ensure that judges are alert to the range of possible low-level principles, and that they attempt to compare those principles with one another. But through some such route, people who initially disagree so strongly as to make conversation seem difficult can sometimes be brought together, at least to the point where analogical reasoning can start. Nearly everyone has had this experience. 
In any case, we cannot know that the optimistic view is false until we try to talk.110 And here the very concreteness of analogical reasoning is a large advantage. In cases in which there are major differences in starting points, people can often think far better about particular problems than about large-scale approaches to the world. 
In this regard, we might consider a sharply disputed constitutional question, one related to the cross-burning problem: whether the government can regulate "hate speech." For some people, the proper analogy, in thinking about hate speech, is physical assault.1"' To them, hate speech is a form of visceral attack that has little or no connection to free speech values and produces severe and unique harm. For those who disagree, the proper analogy is speech by members of dissident political groups.112 Hate speech is merely a form of controversial expression, subject to a risk of censorship, as is much expression, by people who want to use the arm of the law to enforce a particular orthodoxy. 
A dispute of this sort may seem intractable. Perhaps people simply disagree. But it is necessary to ask people on both sides what features of hate speech make it analogous either to physical assault or to political dissent. Once that is specified, we are well on our way toward a discussion. For example, it might be said that hate speech is like an assault because the relevant words are not intended as a contribution to rational thought, because they deeply hurt, because they reflect and lead to second-class citizenship, or because they are inconsistent with prevailing, hard-won political convictions in relevant communities. 
All of these claims can be evaluated. In the ensuing discussion, we might ask when words are not intended as a contribution to rational thought, when such words are properly excluded from protection as speech, and when expression can be banned because it is harmful or because (or although) it is inconsistent with prevailing Supreme Court, 1985 Term- Foreword: Traces of Self-Government, ioo HARV. L. REV. 4, 7677 (I986) (defending plurality on courts). 
110It follows that the process of reasoning by analogy carries with it a pragmatic conception of truth. See WILLIAM JAMES, PRAGMATISM91-105 (Bruce Kuklick ed., I198I) (1907); John Dewey, Propositions, WarrantedAssertibility, and Truth, 38 J. PHIL. 169, 169-72 (I94I). 
II' See Charles R. Lawrence HII,If He Hollers Let Him Go: Regulating Racist Speech on Campus, I990 DUKE L.J. 431, 462. 
112 See Nadine Strossen, Regulating Racist Speech on Campus: A Modest Proposal?, I990 DUKE L.J. 484, 537-39. convictions. We might think about cases in which our convictions seem firm. We might agree, for example, that government can ban obscene telephone calls, or that it cannot ban even offensive and dangerous political speech. 
An approach of this kind might well lead us to make distinctions between different forms of "hate speech." The racial epithet might seem similar to an obscene phone call; but racist speech, made as part of a statement of political view, might seem like protected expression. This is at best a start. But even this seemingly least tractable of disputes may well be soluble in this way. Surely the field of legitimate disagreement can be narrowed and better understood. 
All this helps suggest the weakness in the view that analogical reasoning depends on a deep social consensus. Even without such a consensus, there is usually sufficient agreement, with respect to some matters of importance, to allow the process of reasoning to begin. None of this means that people will always be able to reach closure. Sometimes they really do disagree. But analogical reasoning can at least help to discover where they do, and why."13 
Criteria Never Supplied by Analogical Reasoning. - The final objection to analogical reasoning is that the process has yet to be adequately specified, and that when it is, it will emerge as a primitive and failed substitute either for a more general theory or for the effort to reach reflective equilibrium. This is, I believe, the most powerful objection to analogical reasoning; in an important sense, it is correct. But the nature of the objection, and the possible responses, are surprisingly complicated. 
The objection begins with a simple point. The method of analogy is based on the question: Is case A relevantly similar to case B, or not? Is a ban on homosexual sodomy like a ban on the use of contra113Note that it does not followfromthe merefact of disagreementhat thereareno correct answersto disputedquestionsin law or ethics, any morethan it does in science. Nor does it follow,fromthe fact thatlegalcategoriesareourcategories,andrevisableby us, thateverything is up for grabs,or that we are in some sort of abyss. It is truethat humanbeings,including lawyers,do not have unmediatedaccessto the world;we seethingsthroughhumanframeworks. But this need not entailany formof skepticismor relativism. It would do so only if the only possibleknowledgewereexternalortranscendentala,ndthereis no reasonto thinkthat. Indeed, peoplewho thinkthat the absenceof externalor transcendentafloundationsleadsto relativism or skepticismoften have a greatdeal in commonwith theirpurportedadversaries.They have the same odd conceptionaboutwhat correctanswersmustbe, to countas such. 
Stanley Fish makes this importanterrorin Doing What ComesNaturally,in which he suggeststhat becauseall categoriesare humancategories,all we are left with is conventions. See STANLEY FISH, DOING WHAT COMES NATURALLY 215-45, 342-55, 436-70 (I989). Richard Rorty comes very close to the same unfortunateposition,see RichardRorty,Feminismand Pragmatism30 MICH. QUART. REv. 231, 234-36 (i99i), and is criticizedpersuasivelyfor this reasonby DonaldDavidson,see DonaldDavidson,TheStructureand Contentof Truth,87 J. PHIL. 279, 279-82 (i99o), andby HilaryPutnam,see HILARYPUTNAM, RENEWING PHILOSOPHY 104 (1992). See also infranote 130 (discussingpostmodernismin law). 
HARVARD LAW REVIEV ceptives in marriage, or like a ban on incest? Is a restriction on abortion like a restriction on murder, or like a compulsory kidney transplant? To answer such questions, one needs a theory of relevant similarities and differences. By itself, analogical reasoning supplies no such theory. It is thus dependent on an apparatus that it is unable to produce.114 
In short: Everything is a little bit similar to, or different from, everything else. Perhaps better: Everything is similar in infinite ways to everything else, and also different from everything else in the same number of ways."15 At the very least one needs a set of criteria to engage in analogical reasoning. Otherwise one has no idea what is analogous to what. 
By themselves, factual situations tell us little until we impose some sort of pattern on them."16 We say that something is like something else only because we have a principle that tells us so (or because we simply perceive the world this way). If this is true, it might seem better simply to identify the principle and the criteria, if we have them, rather than to proceed through analogies. 
Thus, for example, if we are asking what sorts of speech are protected by the First Amendment, we might ask some questions about the purposes of that amendment, or the scope of its coverage, 114 Cf. POSNERs,upranote 2, at 88-92 (arguingthat "reasoningby analogy . . . is not actuallya methodof reasoning,that is, of connectingpremisesto conclusions.")R;obertoM. Unger,THE CRITicALLEGALSTUDIEMSOVEMENT8 (I986) ("Withoutsuch a guidingvision, legal reasoningseemscondemnedto a gameof easy analogies."). 
115 Westenmakesthe same argumentagainstthe notionof equality. See PeterWesten,The Empty Idea of Equality, 95 HARv. L. REV. 537, 540-42 (1982). Equality is parasitic on substantiveideas about relevantdifferences;so too with analogy. See Golding,supranote 3, at 102 ("Wfnfact two things may resembleeach otherin any numberof respectsand yet also be differentin any numberof respects")s;ee also NELSONGOODMANSe,ven Strictureson Similarity,in PROBLEMSAND PROJECTS 437 (1972) ("SimilarityI, submit, is insidious.... Similarity,ever readyto solve philosophicalproblemsand overcomeobstacles,is a pretender, an impostor,a quack."). 
116See suprap. 746(remarkingon Holmes). The pointsuggestssomereasonsfor skepticism aboutthe intriguingeffortsto programcomputersto engagein analogicalreasoning.See KEVIN D. ASHLEY,MODELINGLEGALARGUMENT(i99o); Kevin D. Ashley, Arguing By Analogy in Law: A Case-Based Model, in ANALOGICARLEASONINGs,upra note 3, at 205, 212-22. The programmersact as if computerscan be taught to decide what case a new fact situationis "moreanalogousto,"butthis dependson a crudepictureof analogousreasoning.It is inadequate to treat"analogousnessa"s a kindof quantity,with somethingsbeingmoreanalogousto others, and othersthingsless so. Any such formulationtendsto disguisethe needto developlow-level principleswith whichto thinkanalogiesthrough;andit is unclearthatthe computerexperiments have placedenoughweight on this point. We shouldnot, however,rejectthe possibilitythat in the long run (or the shortrun?),computerswill indeedbe able to makethe good normative argumentsthat underlieassessmentsof analogousnessa,nd that in the end it will be valuable for humanbeingsto listen carefullyto what they have to say. See ASHLEY, supra,at 238-47; cf. PuTNAm, suPranote 113, at i-i8 (criticizingthe analogybetweenthe human mind and artificialintelligence). and then apply our answers to various cases - rather than refusing to specify the general theory in advance and spending time examining the endless cases that are the staple of free speech law: perjury, misleading commercial speech, conspiracies, false cries of fire in a crowded theater, and so forth. On this view, reasoning by analogy is necessary only because of our failure to develop general principles, which ought to be evaluated in their own right. 
The first and most modest response to all this is that analogical reasoning is helpful even if the criticism is fundamentally right. Even if we do need principles to decide cases, this is not an objection to analogical reasoning, which is an important part of the development of those principles. Without analogies, relevant principles often cannot be described in advance except at an uninformatively high and crude level of generality. The cross-burning case provides an example: How could a general theory be helpful on a problem of this sort? Any relevant criteria for free speech problems will emerge largely from the process of comparing various cases. Moreover, the criteria will not have any source other than what we think. There is no other source of criteria. We cannot know what it is that we think until we explore a range of cases. Principles are thus both generated and tested through confrontation with particular cases. 
This humble response may establish only that analogies help us discover principles, which are in an ultimate sense freestanding. Analogies are like a ladder that can be discarded once we have climbed to the top. I think that this metaphor is misleading because it suggests that analogies are dispensable in a way that they are not; analogies are not a ladder to be tossed away, but rather an important basis for our judgments. But a fuller response to this criticism must go deeper. The fuller defense would start with the claim that our considered judgments about particular cases have a kind of priority in deciding what the law is or should be. My suggestion is that because of the distinctive requirements of a legal system, correct answers in law might consist precisely of those particular judgments, once they have been made to cohere.117 
117Cf. THOMSON, supra note I, at 257 ("[I]tis precisely our moral views about examples, stories, and cases which constitute the data for moral theorizing."). Thus Thomson writes as if we can "falsify"general propositions by "testing"them against particular judgments. See also DWORKIN, supra note 22, at 28-37 (treating judgments as data points); cf. T.M. Scanlon, The Aims and Authority of Moral Theory, I2 OX. J. LEGAL STUD. I, 9 (I992) ("[W]e are very unlikely to have a considered judgement that a certain action would be wrong without having in mind some more 'theoretical' reason why it would [be] wrong. 'Considered moral judgements' are in this respect quite unlike 'data points': in the case of simple empirical observations we can be quite certain that something is the case without having any idea why it is so."). Scanlon's position may ultimately be right; but there are some uncertainties. Is it clear that there is a sharp difference between an observation that dropped objects fall, or for that matter that the earth is flat, unaccompanied by "any idea why it is so" and an observation that slavery or 
At least it seems clear that general principles and general theories are sometimes inadequate for legal reasoning. Often too many factors are relevant, and too many variations are possible, to allow a general formulation adequately to capture the range of right results in the cases.118 More particularly, any general theory will sometimes be too rigid and crude to account for the diversity and plurality of relevant goods. 119 
On this view, correct answers plausibly consist not of deductions from general theory, but instead of coherent convictions about particular cases. In the law of free speech, for example, the Court has not fully explained what speech counts as "high value" and what speech falls in a lower tier.120 It is tempting to say that this is a major failure in constitutional law, and that the Court would do much better to tell us in plain terms what "test"it is using. But perhaps any test, described at a high level of generality, will be either vacuous or subject to decisive counterexamples. Perhaps this is not true for the First Amendment; it is possible that if we thought well enough, we would come up with a perfect general theory, or - a quite different point - that the advantages of an inadequately precise test might outweigh the disadvantages of having no general theory at all. All I mean to suggest is that sometimes analogical reasoning might, in principle, be crueltyis wrong, unaccompaniedby "anyidea why it is so"? It may be that simpleempirical observationsand consideredjudgmentsaboutparticularcases have the same(pragmaticp)lace in humanreasoning. 
118It is possible,however,that one will toleratemanyparticularmistakes,and thus seek a generalrule, becausecase-by-casedecisionsproduceeven moremistakesin light of the errors of humanjudgmentin case-by-casesystems. Wecan seethe pointby comparingthe firstRestate of Conflictof Laws with the second. The firstRestatementis filled with rules, most of them susceptibleto mechanicalapplication,but the mechanicscreate many errorsin the form of arbitraryrigidity. By contrast,the secondRestatementuses lists of factors,in the effort to produceindividualizedjudgments;but it createssomethingof a messforthosewho must'apply" it. See also Schauer,Formalism,supra note 56, at 538-44 (defendingrule-baseddecisions); AntoninScalia, TheRule of LawAs a Law of Rules, 56 U. CHI.L. REV.II75, II80-82 (I989) (describingproblemswith "reasonableness"tandardsand judicialbalancingtests). 119 See ANDERSONs,upranote 39, at ch. i; infrapp. 786-90. 
120 CompareCass R. Sunstein,Free SpeechNow, 59 U. CHI.L. REv. 255, 315-I6 (1992) (defendinga politicalconceptionof FirstAmendmentw)ith Dworkin,TheComingBattles over Free Speech, supranote 22, at 55 (arguingthat free speech cases should be resolvedon the basisof a "constitutivea"pproachthatwouldforbidgovernmento intrudeon listeneror speaker autonomyexcept underthe rarestof conditions). UndoubtedlyDworkinis correctthat ideas about autonomyshouldplay a majorrole in First Amendmentlaw. But the questionremains how much progresscan be madein hardfree speechcaseswithoutconsultinga wide rangeof particularsettings. A "topdown"approachthatappliedthe notionof autonomywouldprobably prove inadequatein cases involvingrestrictionson commercialadvertising,unlicensedmedical and legal advice, child pornographyp,rivatelibel, threats,and so forth. See T.M. Scanlon, Jr., Freedomof Expressionand Categoriesof Expression,40 U. PITT.L. REV.5I9, 532 (i979) (rejectinghis own earlierautonomyprinciplebecause.ofits inabilityto accountfully for judgmentsin particularcases). preferred to a general theory, simply because no such theory can adequately account for particular convictions, and because those convictions deserve priority in thinking about good outcomes in law. 
The objection and the response might be put in another way. It is tempting to think that with deductive reasoning, we can come up with truth. If, for example, utilitarianism is true, we can decide cases by figuring out how to maximize utility. But what is the relationship between analogical thinking and truth? Use of analogies produces principled consistency, at best, and not truth at all. 
The response is that sometimes there may be no criteria for truth in law except for our considered judgments about particular cases, once those judgments have been made to cohere with each other. I have noted that there is obscurity in this suggestion. The obscurity comes in at least two places: What are considered judgmenits? How do we know when they cohere? Let me address a few of the ambiguities. 
At a minimum, considered judgments include the judgments that serve as fixed points for moral or legal analysis (although we must note, as above, that we will not know what the fixed points are in advance). Some particular judgments do operate as fixed points in this sense. For some people, the notion that government may ban bribery or perjury has the status of a fixed point for free speech law. We might also understand the category of considered judgments to include those that have survived a degree of scrutiny through comparison with other cases and a good deal of other low-level principles.121 Through some such route, we may come up with a catalogue of reliable particular judgments. Coherence in law might then be defined as consistency among particular judgments and low-level principles. 
It would be good to achieve this kind of coherence;122but in the end, even this may be inadequate, because it is insufficiently ambitious. Judgments about particular cases probably deserve to be counted as considered only if they have survived encounter with principles of various levels of generality. To qualify as considered judgments, we should probably test our convictions about particular cases not simply by reference to other cases and low-level principles, but also by reference to principles described at higher levels of abstraction. On this view, reasoning by analogy should indeed be seen 121In his discussionof reflectiveequilibrium,Rawls does not understandthe categoryin quitethis way, and insteademphasizesjudgmentsin whichwe have a greatdealof confidence. See RAWLS, supranote 6, at 48-5i. But it is unclearhow we would have a greatdeal of confidencein a particularjudgmentif we have not submittedthatjudgmentto scrutinyof this generalkind. 
122But see infra pp. 778-79, 782-84 (questioningthe desirabilityof doing this in a legal system). as an incomplete and truncated version of the search for reflective equilibrium. And on this view, we have not achieved real coherence unless a great deal is done both vertically and horizontally, that is, unless we have tested our particular convictions against many judgments of general principle as well as against many other particular convictions. If this is so, we do not have either considered judgments or coherence until we have thought through our high-level principles in far more detail than analogical thought ordinarily requires. 
This argument suggests that some version of reflective equilibrium is indeed the appropriate end-state of analogical reasoning in morality and, under ideal conditions, in law.123 An important qualification, however, is necessary for law: Some of the fixed points in law are precedents reached by others, not judgments genuinely accepted by oneself. These points may be fixed either because the legal culture genuinely renders them unrevisable (for the particular judge on, say, a lower court), or because the principle of stare decisis imposes a strong barrier to revision. 
Unlike morality, in which revisability is a key aspect of the search for reflective equilibrium,124 the law tends to fix many particular judgments. This point has major implications for the possibility that lawyers or judges can reach reflective equilibrium. Because of the sheer number of judges in a position to create fixed points in many particular cases, no single participant in the legal culture is at all likely to be able to achieve equilibrium.125 
This fact should not be entirely lamented; it is a virtue as well as a vice. Because of the need for predictability and stability in law, many questionable outcomes must be taken as fixed. With this point in mind, analogical reasoning might be defended on the ground that the best approach to certain areas of law is principled consistency with respect to individual cases and low-level principles. At least under real-world constraints, this form of principled consistency may be what we mean by truth, or right answers, in law or even morality.126 This point bears on the claim that analogical reasoning requires criteria that analogies cannot themselves supply. Of course one needs criteria to engage in such reasoning. But those criteria will emerge from the process of comparing various cases; often they are not given or even describable in advance, except at an unhelpful level of generality. 
123 See also infra p. 785 (discussing "conceptual ascent"). 124 See supra p. 75 I. 
125 The point counts against Dworkin's use of Hercules as a metaphor for a legal system. See infra p. 786 (discussing the advantages of analogical reasoning over the search for reflective equilibrium). 
126 See supra note 63 (describing the discussion of Director and Levi); see also Davidson, supra note II3, at 279-82, 325-326 (offering a pragmatic conception of truth). 
The same point can be made in another way. The critics of analogical reasoning sometimes act as if analogies were "things," which either resolve or do not resolve contested cases.127 If they do resolve contested cases, they are not mere analogies but genuine rules; if they do not, they are nothing at all.128 But analogies should not be seen in this way. Their meaning lies in their use. They are not simply unanalyzed fact patterns; they are used to help people think through contested cases and to generate low-level principles. In this way they have a constitutive dimension, for the patterns we see are a product not simply of preexisting reality, but of our cognitive structures and our principles as well. 129 The principles and patterns we develop and describe are in turn brought to bear on, and tested through confrontation with, other cases. 
This process is not a game or a joke. It does not evade responsibility. It does not involve tricks. "Irony"is not its most distinctive feature.130 It does not treat moral seriousness as an anachronism to 127 See POSNER, supra note 2, at 89-90; Tushnet, supra note 2, at 825 (criticizing the view that the search for neutral principles is a constraint on "judicial choices"). Wittgenstein wrote: When we say that by our method we try to counteract the misleading effect of certain analogies, it is important that you should understand that the idea of an analogy being misleading is nothing sharply defined. No sharp boundary can be drawn round the cases in which we should say that a man was misled by an analogy. The use of expressions constructed on analogical patterns stresses analogies between cases often far apart. And by doing this these expressions may be extremely useful. It is, in most cases, impossible to show an exact point where an analogy begins to mislead us. Every particular notation stresses some particular point of view. 
LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN, THE BLUE AND BROWN BOOKS 28 (I958). 
128 Posner appears to make this particular argument. See POSNER, supra note 2, at 89-90. 129 See Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in ANALOGICAL REASONING, supra note 3, at 25, 26-28; supra notes 57, II0, II3; infra note I30 (discussing pragmatism); 
130See, e.g., RICHARD RORTY, CONTINGENCY, IRONY, AND SOLIDARITY73-I37 (I989). The method of analogy has a close connection with pragmatism, see generally JAMES,supra note Iio (discussing irony); but it is not allied with "postmodernism,"a constellation of ideas with increasing influence on the study of law. The relationship between postmodernism and law raises some complex issues, and I restrict myself to two brief observations here. 
First, any position about law and politics, in order to be worth holding, must be justified by reference to reasons. We should not understand the category of reasons to be a narrow one, or to be strictly Cartesian; but a view unsupported by reasons is unlikely to deserve serious consideration. Many postmodernists, however, appear to reject reason-giving altogether, putting in its place power, or play, or conventions. See, e.g., JACQUESDERRIDA, OF GRAMMATOLOGY 50 (Gayatri C. Spivak trans., 1976) (play); FISH, supra note II3, at 40, ii6 (conventions); MICHEL FOUCAULT, POWER/KNOWLEDGEI I9 (Colin Gordon ed. & Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mephan, Kate Soper trans., I98I) (power). The substitution ensures that many postmodernists "can give no account of the normative foundations of [their] own rhetoric." JURGEN HABERMAS, THE PHILOSOPHICALDISCOURSE OF MODERNITY 294 (Fredrick Lawrence trans., I987) (I985). 
Second, some of postmodernism appears to depend on the claim that if claims cannot be vindicated or grounded in some transcendental or extra-human way, we are left with chaos, or the free play of perspectives, and certainly without a discussion that can be mediated through be understood as one of the endless number of "social constructs" to be observed from the appropriate distance. It is not a substitute or a disguise for some other, preferable form of reasoning. Much less does it conceal something called "politics."'131 On the contrary, it treats both law and politics as forms of moral reasoning, and it attempts to engage in precisely that. 
We might conclude that in hard cases in law, any "choice,"if made well, is not a black box, but is instead founded on policies or principles that usually play a part in legal reasoning as it currently stands. And if the relevant grounds for choice are not in the current resources of legal reasoning, so much the worse for (current) legal reasoning. We should then change legal reasoning to ensure that it contains the appropriate resources for choice. 
The process of reasoning by analogy is not science,132and it cannot be anchored in anything other than what human beings actually believe. But surely this does not disqualify it as a mode of reasoning. It may even be said to be the central feature of the common law method, prevalent of course in American constitutional law. And when analogical reasoning is working well, it provides a deep challenge to ordinary understandings of the rule of law - and to the occasionally prominent movements toward codification and the replacement of analogical reasoning with clear rules, to be laid down by the legislature or courts133in advance. 
We are now in a position to compare analogical reasoning with some other prominent approaches to law. I deal here with the search for reflective equilibrium; Ronald Dworkin's conception of law as "integrity";and general theories, with special reference to the economic analysis of law. 
i. The Search for Reflective Equilibrium. - Throughout I have emphasized that analogical reasoning is not fully theorized and that those who engage in this form of reasoning have not developed a comprehensive theory to account for their particular convictions. This limitation has emerged as a serious one. It seems plausible that the search for a relatively wide or extended version of reflective equilibrium is superior to analogical reasoning, and that the latter is a kind of crude, incomplete version of the former. Perhaps lawyers should ultimately abandon analogical reasoning and attempt to bring their particular judgments in accord with theories of varying levels of generality. 
In some respects this is true, and something like it may well be the correct final assessment. Once one has reached reflective equilibrium, one has fully rationalized all particular judgments, and surely this is a major gain. Moreover, reflective equilibrium, once obtained, is likely to be better than analogical reasoning in the important sense that it subjects to scrutiny both particular convictions (that one holds) and particular holdings (of some court), and thus allows us to see if these results can fully survive encounter with a great deal else that is both particular and general. Once in reflective equilibrium, one is able to account in depth and detail for all of one's convictions. experiences, the realization that there are samenesses; and from this awareness of similarities in number and form both science and mathematics were born. 
CARLB. BOYER& UTA C. MERZBACHA, HISTORYOFMATHEMATIC3S(2d ed. I99I); see also G. POLYA,How To SOLVEIT 37 (I957) ("Analogy pervades all our thinking, our everyday speech and our trivial conclusions as well as artistic ways of expression and the highest scientific achievements. "). 
133See Scalia,supranote ii8, at 1179. 
Precisely because of its lack of ambition, analogical reasoning is inferior on these counts. On the other hand, reasoning by analogy has four distinct advantages. Each of these advantages is especially important for people engaged in legal reasoning. They suggest that analogical reasoning may be a second-best alternative to the search for reflective equilibrium in light of the multiple constraints imposed on any legal system in the real world. 
First, reasoning by analogy may be the best approach available for people of limited time and capacities. The search for reflective equilibrium may be simply too demanding for participants in law, or for others who attempt to reason through difficult problems. Often there are too many practical constraints to work out a fully general theory. As compared with the search for reflective equilibrium, analogical reasoning has the advantage, for ordinary lawyers and judges, of humility and circumspection. To engage in analogical reasoning, one need not take a stand on large, contested social issues, some of which can be resolved only on a sectarian basis. A lawyer or judge who claims to have reached reflective equilibrium may seem immodest, insufficiently cautious, or even hubristic. 
Second, reasoning by analogy may have the significant advantage of allowing people unable to reach anything like an accord on general principles to agree on particular outcomes. Sometimes it is exceedingly difficult to get people to agree on the general principles that account for their judgments. But it may be possible for them to agree on particular solutions or on low-level principles.134 An overlapping consensus135 is often possible on the view that case A is relevantly similar to case B - even if those who join the consensus could not decide as between utilitarianism or Kantianism, or come to agreement on the appropriate role of religion in society. 
Third, analogical reasoning may be especially desirable in contexts in which we seek moral evolution over time.'36 If the legal culture really did attain reflective equilibrium, it might become too rigid and calcified; we would know what we thought about everything, whether particular or general.137 By contrast, analogical reasoning has the important advantage of allowing a large degree of openness to new facts and perspectives. It enables disagreement and uncertainty to turn into consensus. 
Fourth, analogical reasoning in law operates with precedents that have the status of fixed points; this is so even for people who sharply 134See JONSON & TOULMIN, supra note 3, at I6-20. 
135See John Rawls, The Idea of an Overlapping Consensus, 7 OXFORDJ. LEGALSTUD. I, 2-8 (I987). 
136I am grateful to Daniel Brudney for help with this point. 
137In searching for reflective equilibrium, avenues are of course open; new experiences and new data make it necessary to reassess provisional fixed points. disagree with the results embodied in those precedents. In searching for reflective equilibrium, by contrast, everything is potentially revisable. The fact that precedents are fixed points helps to bring about an overlapping consensus as well, by constraining the areas of reasonable disagreement. In this way, analogical reasoning introduces a degree of stability and predictability. These are important virtues for law, and they sharply reduce the costs of reaching particular decisions. 
In short, lawyers could not try to reach reflective equilibrium without severely compromising the system of precedent. As noted, the judgments at work in the search for reflective equilibrium are subject to critical scrutiny, and any of them might be discarded.138 The point helps explain Rawls's suggestion that "for the purposes of this book, the views of the reader and the author are the only ones that count. The opinions of others are used only to clear our own heads."'39 
Here we have a striking and illuminating contrast between the search for reflective equilibrium and analogical reasoning. In a legal system, precedents are far more than an effort "to clear our own heads." If a judge or lawyer is to attempt to reach reflective equilibrium, precedents will have at most the status of considered judgments about particular cases, and these might be subject to revision if they conflict with something else that he believes. In the legal system, precedents have a much firmer status. To be sure, precedents are not immune to revision; but the principle of stare decisis ensures that they operate as relatively fixed points. The search for reflective equilibrium is therefore a misleading description of law and in some ways an unattractive prescription. Participants in a legal system that aspires to stability should not be so immodest as to reject judgments reached by others whenever those judgments cannot be made part of reflective equilibrium for those particular participants. Of course, it is only a mixed blessing to have fixed points that are wrong as a matter of principle. Analogical reasoning may perpetuate confusion or injustice where reflective equilibrium would not. 
the most influential critic of legal positivism - the view that law is a system of rules proceeding from authoritative sources.140 Dworkin thinks that there is an inevitable evaluative or normative dimension 138 On revisability and the search for equilibrium, see T.M. Scanlon, The Aims and Authority of Moral Theory, I2 OXFORDJ. LEGAL STUD. i, 8-12 (1992); and pp. 788-89 below. 
139 Rawls, supra note 6, at 50. I do not claim that the only function of this statement is to point to revisability. In the relevant section, Rawls discusses the analogy between the sense of grammar and the sense of justice, and suggests that a knowledge of one person's sense of either would be a "good beginning toward a theory of justice." Id. 
140 For Dworkin's description of positivism, see DWORKIN, TAKING RIGHTS SERIOUSLY, cited above in note i, at I7-22; and DWORKIN, LAw's EMPIRE, cited above in note I, at PROVINCEOF JURISPRUDENCEDETERMINED (I832). 
HARVARD LAWREVIEW to statements "about what the law is." Often, at least, one cannot say "what the law is" without also saying something about "what the law should be." In other words, Dworkin believes that when lawyers disagree about what the law is with respect to some hard question, they are disagreeing about "the best constructive interpretation of the community's legal practice."141 Thus, Dworkin argues that interpretation in law consists of different efforts to make a governing text "as good as it can be. "142 This is Dworkin's conception of law as integrity. 
Hercules, Dworkin's infinitely patient and resourceful judge, approaches the law in this way. 143 Dworkin places a large emphasis on "fit" as a criterion for correctness in legal outcomes. On Dworkin's view, we do not look at moral theory until we have exhausted the inquiry into "fitness"(although Dworkin is not entirely clear on this point). The supreme lawyerly virtue of integrity is connected with achievement of principled consistency among cases. 
These are illuminating suggestions. They do indeed help explain what people disagreeing in law are disagreeing about. They also show how the lawyer's task is different from that of the philosopher. Often a statement describing the law is not a statement about some "plain fact"; often there is a large evaluative dimension to positions about what the law is. 144 Moreover, Dworkin's reliance on "fit" closely connects with the analogical reasoner's own effort. Both Hercules and the analogical judge are especially concerned to develop principles that organize cases. Both of them are focused on coherence as a criterion of truth in law.145 
But it is notable that Dworkin says little about the role of analogical reasoning, which lies at the heart of how lawyers actually think. 146 His account does not give a proper place to this form of reasoning. In his hands, theories are produced largely on the basis of abstract 141 DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE, supra note I, at 225. 142 Id. at 239. 143 See id. at 240-50, 337-4I, 379-9I. I am compressing some complex issues here. 144 This issue is discussed in chapter five of CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIALCONSTITUTION (forthcoming I993). 
145 See SUSAN HURLEY, NATURAL REASONS II-I5, 36-39, I89-93, 3I8-22 (i989). 146 Joseph Raz takes Dworkin to have offered an argument for analogical reasoning and suggests that "ProfessorDworkin has thus opted for the most conservative interpretation of the judicial role: Judges are neither legally nor morally entitled to assume a reforming role. They must rely only on analogical arguments which perpetuate and extend the existing legal ideology." RAZ,supra note 3, at 205-06 n. I9. Raz suggests that Dworkin has provided in his early writings "the most extreme case of total faith in analogical arguments." Id. 
The conflation of Dworkin's approach with analogical thinking is understandable in light of the fact that, like analogizers, Dworkin places a large stress on "fit"and coherence, and little weight on external challenges to current holdings. For reasons discussed in the text, however, I do not wholly believe that Raz accurately describes Dworkin's view as expressed in either DWORKIN, TAKING RIGHTS SERIOUSLY, cited above in note i, at Io6-I5; or DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE, cited above in note i, at 240-50. moral theory. These theories are then brought to bear on particular problems.147But this is not how lawyers proceed. In deciding whether a restriction on cross-burning offends the First Amendment, lawyers do not really ask which interpretation will make the Amendment the best it can be. They do not begin with a high-level conception of the value promoted by the Amendment. To develop such a conception, they would have to ask questions that are too broad and abstract too hard, large, and open-ended for legal actors to handle. Such questions call for responses that are too deeply theorized. 
In thinking about free speech issues, lawyers instead ask what particular sorts of practices seem clearly to violate the First Amendment, or the principle of free expression, and then whether a restriction on (for example) cross-burning is relevantly similar or relevantly different. Of course the description of relevant similarities and differences will have evaluative dimensions, and these should be made explicit. But lawyers and judges will not engage in general moral theorizing.'48 The resulting approach is the distinctive legal method. As we have seen, that method has some important defects in comparison with the search for reflective equilibrium, which Dworkin's approach seems to resemble. But it has some advantages as well. 
From the standpoint of Dworkin's Hercules, we might respond in the following way. A judge who operates from the "bottom up," rather than from the "top down," might end up being Herculean too. At least he had better have that aspiration in mind. When our modest 147 For examples of this approach, see the discussions of affirmative action in DWORKIN, LAW'SEMPIRE, cited above in note i, at 393-97, and of free speech in Dworkin, The Coming Battles Over Free Speech, cited above in note 22, at 55. 
At first glance it might seem as if statutory construction, at least, cannot involve analogical reasoning. But this appearance is misleading. In hard statutory cases, the issue is sometimes resolved by something like this: We know that the statute applies to case X. We do not know if it applies to case Y. To resolve that issue, we have to decide whether case Y is relevantly like, or relevantly unlike, case X. We have to think analogically. 
Something of this kind, I believe, underlies the dispute in United Steelworkers of America v. Weber, 443 U.S. I93 (I979) in which the Court decided that private affirmative action is not barred under the Civil Rights Act of I964. See id. at I97. Realistically speaking, the disagreement among the Justices was not about anything Congress said or meant - the relevant materials were indeterminate - but about whether affirmative action was relevantly different from ordinary discrimination. Though I cannot prove the point here, I believe that the dissenters' self-confidence about their view that the majority had distorted the law depended on their own judgment that affirmative action was not relevantly different. See, e.g., id. at 22630 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). That judgment may be correct, but it requires an argument, not a mechanical reading of the statutory language. Analogical reasoning was therefore at least implicitly at work. 
148 It is true, however, that some such theorizing may be implicit, in the sense that particularistic case analysis may in some sense depend on it. But note that we can achieve an overlapping consensus on particular outcomes among people who would disagree about general theories, and also that general theories might be too hard to develop in advance, or to adapt to the complexities of particular areas. judge - Harlan, say, rather than Hercules - uses analogical reasoning to say that case A is like case B, he must rely on a principle. And if he is reasoning well, he will have before him a range of other cases, C through Z, in which the principle is tested against other principles and thereby refined. At least if he is a distinguished judge, he will experience a kind of "conceptual ascent," in which the more or less isolated and small low-level principle is finally made part of a general theory, or of reflective equilibrium. In this way, we might conclude that analogical reasoning is indeed part of Dworkin's account, but only as an early step toward something both wider and deeper. 
We have seen that there is a good deal of truth in this response.149 But the same points that were made earlier need to be reiterated. Sometimes we can achieve an overlapping consensus on an analogy. This is a real advantage over Hercules's approach, under which, if we do well, we will arrive at a single general theory that could strike others as sectarian. At least Harlan has this virtue - a partial and ambiguous one - over Hercules. Sometimes participants in law do not have the time or capacities to think everything fully through, and hence analogical reasoning is the best that we can expect in the real world of law. Sometimes it may be best to have analogical reasoning, precisely because of the greater flexibility that it permits over time, and because of its distinctive contribution to moral evolution in society. Once in reflective equilibrium, Hercules's legal universe is frozen. Finally, it may even be possible that considered judgments about particulars count as truth in law, though I have suggested reasons to be cautious about this claim. 150 
One additional note. Dworkin's conception of law as integrity contains a theory of what it means for law to be legitimate. Hercules 149 See supra pp. 773-79. 
150 See supra p. 779. Arrow's Impossibility Theorem, see KENNETH ARROW, SOCIALCHOICE AND INDIVIDUAL VALUES (2d ed. I963), raises important problems for coherence theories in law, notably including Dworkin's account. I cannot discuss those problems here, but on a multimember judicial body, there may be serious cycling problems, in which, paradoxically, result A is favored over result B, which is favored over result C, which is (and here is the paradox) favored over result A; or decisions may turn, arbitrarily, on the order in which issues happen to arise ("path dependence"). See Frank H. Easterbrook, Ways of Criticizing the Court, 95 HARV. L. REv. 802, 8II-3I (I982). A strong theory of stare decisis, combined with a commitment to analogical thinking, may alleviate some of the cycling problems and thus produce greater stability in law, but it will simultaneously aggravate the problems of path dependence. See id. at 8I7-23. The point suggests that it will be difficult to achieve real coherence through decentralized, multimember courts, and that the Hercules metaphor will run into real difficulty. A system built on analogical reasoning aspires to less and can diminish cycling; but the problem of path dependence will result in a high degree of arbitrariness. See generally HURLEY, supra note I45, at 225-53 (arguing that coherence theories can survive the Impossibility Theorem); Lewis A. Kornhauser & Lawrence G. Sager, Unpacking the Court, 96 YALEL.J. 82, I07-I7 (I986) (arguing that courts will not face severe problems under the Impossibility Theorem). can produce vertical and horizontal consistency among judgments of principle in law. Harlan can offer nothing so bold. A legal system pervaded by analogy will not yield anything like full coherence. Perhaps this is a decisive defect. 
A complete response would require more detail than I can offer here, but a few remarks are in order. Full integrity, I suggest, consists of much more than a legal system of numerous, hierarchically-arranged courts can be expected to offer. Because of the need for predictability and stability in law, judges must reason from cases with which they disagree, and the resulting judgments are unlikely fully to cohere. If this is so, a legal system may well be able to claim the requisite legitimacy if it is democratic (broadly speaking) and if individual judges seek to produce the limited but important sorts of principled consistency that analogical thinking can yield. If this is correct, a system in which judges reason by analogy, and do not seek reflective equilibrium, might itself be justified as part of the reflective equilibrium reached by informed observers who take institutional issues into account. 
look, finally, at efforts to replace legal reasoning with general theories, symbolized most dramatically by the effort to ask what sorts of legal rules will promote economic efficiency.151 The advantage of economic analysis of law is that it appears to distrust ordinary intuitions altogether, showing that they are too crude to be a basis for law. Intuitions about the effects of legal rules may be completely wrong. In a sharp restatement of Bentham's attack on the common law, economic analysts sometimes claim that traditional legal reasoning is not reasoning at all, but instead is an encrusted system of unorganized and perhaps barely processed intuitions. 152 
There can be no question that economic analysis of law has led to major advances. Above all, perhaps, it has done so by helping to untangle the social consequences of legal rules, many of which are counterintuitive, and all of which are relevant to the proper evaluation of law. There can be no question that instrumental rationality is highly pertinent to those designing legal rules. Economic analysis is, for this reason, exceptionally valuable for lawyers. Here it has a major advantage over analogical reasoning, which is far less helpful on the matter of consequences. One cannot discover consequences by examining other judicial holdings. 
In its normative form, however, economic analysis depends on too thin a repertoire for inquiry - that is, the notion that legal rules 151See, e.g., POSNER, supra note 33, ? I.2, at I2-I5. 
152 Compare3 BENTHAM, supra note 35, at 227-29 (discussing the irrationality of the common law approach) with RICHARDA. POSNER, THE ECONOMICSOFJUSTICE 323-3 I (I98I) (discussing privacy doctrine in this way). should be designed so as to maximize wealth. This intuition can be shown to be too crude and general to be right, and by making reference to particular cases that appear to disprove it.153 
A special advantage of analogical reasoning over economic analysis is that the former, unlike the latter, need not insist that plural and diverse social goods should be assessed according to the same metric. To make diverse goods commensurable in this way may do violence to our considered judgments about how each good should be characterized.154 Those considered judgments are far from embarrassing; they are part of what it means to think well. Consider, for example, the view that we should see all of the following as "costs":unemployment, the loss of a species, higher prices for pencils, the adaptation of workplaces to accommodate people on wheelchairs, sexual assault, and chilling effects on speech. If we understand all these things as "costs," to be assessed via the same metric, we will disable ourselves from making important qualitative distinctions. It might be objected that a more differentiated approach, one that insists on the plurality and diversity of goods, is fatally unscientific. To this objection we should respond that this conception of science is ill-suited to good thinking about a certain range of legal problems. What is required is not science, but practical reason.'55 
The hard question, not yet fully elaborated in the philosophical literature, remains: How does one make choices in cases in which incommensurable social goods are at stake, and in which some of these goods must be sacrificed? An exploration of how analogical reasoning actually works may well be helpful in this important en153 Many illustrations of its weaknesses are contained in RICHARD A. POSNER, THE PROBLEMS OF JURISPRUDENCE 353-92 (I990). 
154 See MICHAEL STOCKER, PLURAL AND CONFLICTING GOODS ch. 6 (I989); Elizabeth Anderson, Values, Risks, and Market Norms, I7 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 54, 57-59 (I988); MARTHA C. NUSSBAUM, Plato on Commensurability and Desire, in LOVE'SKNOWLEDGE, supra note 37, at io6, IO6-24 (I990); Richard H. Pildes & Elizabeth S. Anderson, Slinging Arrows at Democracy, 90 COLUM. L. REv. 2I2I, 2I43-86 (I990); Charles Taylor, The Diversity of Goods, in PHILOSOPHY AND THE HUMAN SCIENCES 230, 243(I985);Amaryta Sen, PluralUtility,8i PROC. OF THE ARISTOTELIAN SOC'Y I93 (I981); cf. Margaret J. Radin, Market-Inalienability, ioo HARV. L. REv. I849, I870-87 (I987) (critiquing universal commodification). A forthcoming discussion is ANDERSON, cited above in note 39, at chs. I-4. 
155 This is of course an Aristotelian point. See ARISTOTLE, NICOMACHEAN ETHICS I49-53 (David Ross trans., I980) (I925); see also JONSEN & TOULMIN, supra note 3, at 23-46; MARTHA C. NUSSBAUM, THE FRAGILITY OF GOODNESS 290-3 I7 (I986). Consider also Holmes's comment: 
After a sociological riot I read Aristotle's Ethics with some pleasure. The eternal, universal, wise, good man. He is much in advance of ordinary Christian morality with its slapdash universals (Never tell a lie. Sell all thou hast and give to the poor etc.) He has the ideals of altruism, and yet understands that life is painting a picture not doing a sum, that specific cases can't be decided by general rules, and that everything is a question of degree . ... 
THE ESSENTIAL HOLMES 58 (Richard A. Posner ed., I992). deavor. The analogical thinker is alert to the manifold dimensions of social situations and to multiple relevant similarities and differences. Unequipped with (or unburdened by) a unitary theory of the good or the right, she is in a position to see clearly and for themselves the diverse and plural goods that are at stake and to make choices among them. 156 The very search for relevant similarities and differences places a premium on this process of perceiving particulars. 
In any case, there is a large difference between using economics to ascertain the social consequences of legal rules'57 and using economics as a complete moral or political system. Racial discrimination seems wealth-maximizing in some places; does this mean that we must eliminate laws forbidding it? The comparative advantage of analogical reasoning is that it provides a deep and broad resource for legal thought. 
Economic analysis of law is an especially controversial top-down approach; but the limitations of the economic approach may be limitations of other such approaches as well. I cannot establish the point here. But consider the distinguished efforts to approach the free speech principle through the lens of a general theory of autonomy'58 or democracy.'59 The autonomy principle has considerable appeal, but it seems to run afoul of many considered judgments about particular cases, and its most prominent defender has repudiated it as a complete account. 160 A democratic approach to free speech runs into similar difficulties.161 By itself, all this may prove little. But it suggests the possibility that any top-down approach to certain areas of law will be inadequate because ill-suited to the complexity and plurality of the relevant values at stake. And if the theory is adjusted to take account of this complexity and this plurality, it will cease to be a top-down theory at all, at least as I have understood it here. 
156 See ANDERSON, supra note 39, at ch. 4. I think that something of this kind is at least part of the import of Wittgenstein's remarks on categorization: "What is common to them all? - Don't say: 'There must be something common, or they would not be called 'games"' - but look and see whether there is anything common to all. - For if you look at them you will not see something that is common to all, but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at that. To repeat: don't think, but look!" WITTGENSTEIN, supra note I03, ? 66, at 3I. 
157Of course "social consequences" are not simply brute facts. Any effort to set them out will be interpretive and to that extent evaluative. 
158 See Thomas Scanlon, A Theory of Freedom of Expression, I PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 204, 215-22 (I972); David A. Strauss, Persuasion, Autonomy, and Freedom of Expression, 9I COLUM. L. REV. 334, 336-37, 353-55 (I99I). 
159 See ALEXANDER MEIKLEJOHN, FREE SPEECH AND ITS RELATION TO SELF-GOVERNMENT 3-27 (I948); Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment Problems, 47 IND. L.J. I, 26-34 (I97I). I try to defend this view in Cass Sunstein, Free Speech Now (unpublished manuscript) (developing some of the ideas in Cass R. Sunstein, Free Speech Now, 59 U. CHI. L. REV. 255 (I992)). 
160 See Scanlon, supra note I20, at 528-37. 
161 See Martin H. Redish, The Value of Free Speech, I30 U. PA. L. REV. 59I, 596-6II (I982). 
If the argument I have made is plausible, there may be much more to be said in favor of the common law method than is now popular. That method will have within it resources unlikely to be available to anyone laying down rules in advance. It follows that a large task for a legal system based on a general enthusiasm for rules is to introduce the virtues of analogical reasoning. Debates in contemporary administrative law are often about precisely this point.162 Many people have tried to obtain, in a rule-pervaded, statutory era, some of the advantages of analogical thinking and of particular examination of particular contexts.'63 
Analogical reasoning is the conventional method of the lawyer; it plays a large role in everyday thinking as well. Its distinctive properties are a requirement of principled consistency, a focus on concrete particulars, incompletely theorized judgments, and the creation and testing of principles having a low or intermediate level of generality. Because of its comparative lack of ambition, this form of reasoning has some important disadvantages. Compared with the search for reflective equilibrium, it is insufficiently theoretical; it does not account for its own low-level principles in sufficient depth or detail. Compared with economics and empirical social science, it is at best primitive on the important issue of likely social consequences. Law should be more attuned to facts, and on this score analogical thinking may be an obstacle to progress. 
But in a world with limited time and capacities, and with sharp disagreements on first principles, analogical reasoning has some beneficial features as well. Most important, this form of reasoning does 162 Consicer the view that administrative agencies should be permitted large room for discretion in statutory interpretation. See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-45 (I984). This view seems to contradict no less an authority than Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (i Cranch) I37, I77-80 (I803), and it has for that reason been highly controversial. But the principle might be defended as a means of allowing caseby-case adjustment of literal language in particular circumstances, some of them new and unforeseen. The interpretive power of regulatory agencies will permit them to accommodate apparent rules to the complexities of individual cases - and to do so, in significant part, through analogical, case-by-case reasoning. 
163 See GuIDO CALABRESI, A COMMON LAW FOR THE AGE OF STATUTES 2-3 (I982) (calling for courts to have the power to declare "obsolete"certain statutes). The rules-standards issue is explored from different angles in Colin S. Diver, The Optimal Precision of Administrative Rules, 93 YALEL.J. 65, 66-8o (I983); Duncan Kennedy, Form and Substance in Private Law Adjudication, 89 HARV. L. REv. I685, I687-I7I3 (I976); Louis Kaplow, RULES AND STANDARDS: AN EcONOMIc APPROACH, 42 DUKE L.J. (forthcoming I993); and Kathleen Sullivan, The Supreme Court, i991 Term - Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards, io6 HARV. L. REV. 22, 95-I22 (I992). not require people to develop full theories to account for their convictions; it promotes moral evolution over time; it fits uniquely well with a system based on principles of stare decisis; and it allows people who diverge on abstract principles to converge on particular outcomes. In any case it is unsurprising that analogical reasoning continues to have enormous importance in legal and political discussion. 
A notable aspect of analogical thinking is that people engaged in this type of reasoning are peculiarly alert to the inconsistent or abhorrent result, and they take strong convictions about particular cases to provide reasons for reevaluating their views about other cases or even about apparently guiding general principles.'64 The emphasis on particular cases and particular convictions need not be regarded as an embarrassment, or as a violation of the lawyer's commitment to principle.'65 On the contrary, it should be seen as a central part of the exercise of practical reason in law (and elsewhere). 
In this light, it seems most unfortunate that analogical reasoning has fallen into ill repute. To abandon this method of reasoning may be to give up, far too quickly, on some of the most useful methods we have for evaluating our practices, and for deciding whether to change them through law. 
164 It may be tempting to conclude here that analogies can at most be persuasive, and never demonstrative. If what I have said here is right, this response depends on a too-narrow conception of what constitutes proof in law, and a too-sharp distinction between correctness and persuasiveness. 
165 Consider in this regard William Blake's comment on the work of Sir Joshua Reynolds: "To Generalize is to be an Idiot. I thank God I am not like Reynolds." WILLIAM BLAKE, Blake's Marginalia, in BLAKE'S POETRY AND DESIGNS 429, 440 (Mary L. Johnson & John E. Grant eds., I979). Note, however, that the second sentence undermines the first, by relying (implicitly) on a conception of relevant differences and similarities - and thus by generalizing. The first sentence, itself a generalization, is undermined even more severely by Blake's generalization in the same passage: "To Particularize is Alone the Distinction of True Merit." Id. 
Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/occasional_papers Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
Remembering 'TM' 
Cass R. Sunstein "For Justice Marshall," published originally in 71 Texas Law Review 1125 (1993). @ 1993 by the Texas Law Review Association. Reprinted by permission. 
Copies of OccasionalPapersfrom the Law School are available from William S. Hein & Company, Inc., 1285 Main Street, Buffalo, New York 14209, to whom inquiries should be addressed. Current numbers are also available on subscription from William S. Hein & Company, Inc. 
This Occasional Paper is devoted to reflections on Justice Thurgood Marshall, who died on January 24, of ChicagoLaw School faculty who served as law clerks to Justice Marshall-AssistantProfessor Elena Kagan, during the 1987 Term, and Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of JurisprudenceCass R. Sunstein, who clerked for him duringthe 1979 Term. 
A few days after Thurgood Marshall's death, I stood for a time at his flag-draped casket, then lying in state at the Supreme Court, and watched the people of Washington celebrate his life and mourn his passing. There would be, the next day, a memorial service for the Justice in the National Cathedral, a grand affair complete with a Bible reading by the Vice President and eulogies by the Chief Justice and other notables. That service would have its moments, but it would not honor Justice Marshall as the ordinary people of Washington did. On the day the Justice's casket lay in state, some 20,000 of them came to the Court and stood in bitter cold for upwards of an hour in a line that snaked down the Supreme Court steps, down the block, around the corner, and down the block again. The Justice's former clerks took turns standing at the casket, acting as a kind of honor guard, as these thousands of people filed by. Passing before me were people of all races, of all classes, of all ages. Many came with children and spoke, as they circuited the casket, of the significance of Justice Marshall's life. Some offered tangible tributes-flowers or letters addressed to Justice Marshall or his family. One left at the side of the casket a yellowed slip opinion of Brown v. Board of Education.' There never before has been such an outpouring of love and respect for a Supreme Court Justice, and there never will be again. As I stood and watched, I felt (as I will always feel) proud and honored and * Assistant Professor, University of Chicago Law School; law clerk to Justice Marshall, 1987 Term. 
' 347 U.S. 483 (1954). grateful beyond all measure to have had the chance to work for this hero of American law and this extraordinary man. 
I first spoke with Justice Marshall in the summer of 1986, a few months after I had applied to him for a clerkship position. (It seems odd to call him Justice Marshall in these pages. My co-clerks and I called him "Judge" or "Boss" to his face, "TM" behind his back; he called me, to my face and I imagine also behind my back, "Shorty.") He called me one day and, with little in the way of preliminaries, asked me whether I still wanted a job in his chambers. I responded that I would love a job. "What's that?" he said, "you already have a job?" I tried, in every way I could, to correct his apparent misperception. I yelled, I shouted, I screamed that I did not have a job, that I wanted a job, that I would be honored to work for him. To all of which he responded: "Well, I don't know, if you already have a job . . . ." Finally, he took pity on me, assured me that he had been in jest, and confirmed that I would have a job in his chambers. He asked me, as I recall, only one further question: whether I thought I would enjoy working on dissents. 
So went my introduction to Justice Marshall's (sometimes wicked) sense of humor. He took constant delight in baffling and confusing his clerks, often by saying the utterly ridiculous with an air of such sobriety that he half-convinced us of his sincerity. (There was the time, for example, when he announced sadly that he would have to recuse himself from Gwaltney of Smithfield v. Chesapeake Bay Foundation2. When we pressed him for a reason, he hemmed and hawed for many minutes, only finally to say: "Because I 1-o-o-o-o-v-e their ham." When we laughed, he assumed an attitude of great indignation and began instructing us on proper recusal policy. It was early in the Term; perhaps we may be forgiven for thinking for a moment that, after all, this was not a joke.) He had an endless supply of jokes, not all of them, I must admit, appropriate to print in the pages of a law review. And he was the greatest comic storyteller I have ever heard, or ever expect to hear. This talent, I think, may be impossible to communicate to those never exposed to it. It was a matter of timing (the drawn-out lead-up, the pregnant pause), of vocal intonations and inflections, and most of all of facial expressions (the raised brow, the sparkling eyes, the sidelong glance). Suffice it to say that at least once in the course of every meeting we had with him (and those were frequent), my coclerks and I would find ourselves holding our sides and gasping for breath, as we struggled to regain our composure. 
Thinking back, I'm not sure why we laughed so hard-or rather, I'm not sure why Justice Marshall told his stories so as to make us laugh-because most of the stories really weren't funny. To be sure, some were pure camp. (When Justice Marshall was investigating racial discrimination in the military in Korea, a soldier demanded that he provide a password; the hulking [and, of course, black] Marshall looked down at the soldier and asked, "Do you really think I'm North Korean?" And when assisting in the drafting of the Kenyan Constitution, the Justice was introduced to Prince Philip. "Do you care to hear my opinion of lawyers?" Prince Philip asked in posh British tones, mimicked to great comic effect by Justice Marshall. "Only," Justice Marshall repliedbefore the two discovered mutual ground in a taste for bourbon-"if you care to hear my opinion of princes.") But most of the stories, if told by someone else, would have expressed only sorrow and grimness. They were stories of growing up black in segregated Baltimore, subject to daily humiliation and abuse. They were stories of representing African-American defendants in criminal cases-often capital cases-in which a fair trial was not to be hoped for, let alone expected. (He knew he had an innocent client, Justice Marshall said, when the jury returned a sentence of life imprisonment, rather than execution.) They were stories of the physical danger (the lynch mobs, the bomb-throwers, the police themselves) that the Justice frequently encountered as he traversed the South battling state-imposed segregation. They were stories of prejudice, violence, hatred, fear; only as told by Justice Marshall could they ever have become stories of humor and transcending humanity. 
The stories were something more than diversions (though, of course, they were that too). They were a way of showing us that, bright young legal whippersnappers though we were, we did not know everything; indeed, we knew, when it came to matters of real importance, nothing. They were a way of showing us foreign experiences and worlds, and in doing so, of reorienting our perspectives on even what had seemed most familiar. And they served another function as well: they reminded us, as Justice Marshall thought all lawyers (and certainly all judges) should be reminded, that behind law there are stories-stories of people's lives as shaped by law, stories of people's lives as might be changed by law. Justice Marshall had little use for law as abstraction, divorced from social reality (he muttered under his breath for days about Judge Bork's remark that he wished to serve on the Court because the experience would be "an intellectual feast"); his stories kept us focused on law as a source of human well-being. 
That this focus made the Justice no less a "lawyer's lawyer" should be obvious; indeed, I think, quite the opposite. I knew, of course, before I became his clerk that Justice Marshall had been the most important-and probably the greatest-lawyer of the twentieth century. I knew that he had shaped the strategy that led to Browm v. Board of Education and other landmark civil rights cases; that he had achieved great renown (indeed, legendary status) as a trial lawyer; that he had won twenty-nine of the thirtytwo cases he argued before the Supreme Court. But in my year of clerking, I think I saw what had made him great. Even at the age of eighty, his mind was active and acute, and he was an almost instant study. Above all, though, he had the great lawyer's talent (a talent many judges do not possess) for pinpointing a case's critical fact or core issue. That trait, I think, resulted from his understanding of the pragmatic-of the way in which law worked in practice as well as on the books, of the way in which law acted on people's lives. If a clerk wished for a year of spinning ever more refined (and ever less plausible) lawschool hypotheticals, she might wish for a clerkship other than Justice Marshall's. If she thought it more important for a Justice to understand what was truly going on in a case and to respond to those realities, she belonged in Justice Marshall's chambers. 
None of this meant that notions of equity governed Justice Marshall's vote in every case; indeed, he could become quite the formalist at times. During the Term I clerked, the Court heard argument in Torres v. Oakland Scavenger Co.' There, a number of Hispanic employees had brought suit alleging employment discrimination. The district court dismissed the suit, and the employees' lawyer filed a notice of appeal. The lawyer's secretary, however, inadvertently omitted the name of one plaintiff from the notice. The question for the Court was whether the appellate court had jurisdiction over the party whose name had been omitted; on this question rode the continued existence of the employee's discrimination claim. My co-clerks and I pleaded with Justice Marshall to vote .(as Justice Brennan eventually did) that the appellate court could exercise jurisdiction. Justice Marshall refused. As always when he disagreed with us, he pointed to the framed judicial commission hanging on his office wall and asked whose name was on it. (Whenever we told Justice Marshall that he "had to" do something-join an opinion, say-the Justice would look at us coldly and announce: "There are only two things I have to dostay black and die." A smarter group of clerks might have learned to avoid this unfortunate grammatical construction.) The Justice referred in our conversation to his own years of trying civil rights claims. All you could hope for, he remarked, was that a court didn't rule against you for illegitimate reasons; you couldn't hope, and you had no right to expect, that a court would bend the rules in your favor. Indeed, the Justice continued, it was the very existence of rulesalong with the judiciary's felt obligation to adhere to them-that best protected unpopular parties. Contrary to some conservative critiques, Justice Marshall believed devoutly-believed in a near-mystical sense-in the rule of law. He had no trouble writing the TorTes opinion. 
Always, though, Justice Marshall believed that one kind of law-the Constitution-was special, and that the courts must interpret it in a special manner. Here, more than anywhere else, Justice Marshall allowed his personal experiences, and the knowledge of suffering and deprivation gained from those experiences, to guide him. Justice Marshall used to tell of a black railroad porter who noted that he had been in every state and every city in the country, but that he had never been anyplace where he had to put his hand in front of his face to know that he was black. Justice Marshall's deepest commitment was to ensuring that the Constitution fulfilled its promise of eradicating such entrenched inequalities-not only for AfricanAmericans, but for all Americans alike. 
The case I think Justice Marshall cared about most during the term I clerked for him was Kadnas v. Dickinson Public Schools.' The question in Kadrmas was whether a school district had violated the Equal Protection Clause by imposing a fee for school bus service and then refusing to waive the fee for an indigent child who lived sixteen miles from the nearest school. I remember, in our initial discussion of the case, opining to Justice Marshall that it would be difficult to find in favor of the child, Sarita Kadrmas, under equal protection law. After all, I said, indigency was not a suspect class; education was not a fundamental right; thus, a rational basis test should apply, and the school district had a rational basis for the contested action. Justice Marshall (I must digress here) didn't always call me "Shorty"; when I said or did something particularly foolish, he called me (as, I hasten to add, he called all his clerks in such situations) "Knucklehead." The day I first spoke to him about Kadrmas was definitely a "Knucklehead" day. (As I recall, my handling of Kadrnns earned me that appellation several more times, as Justice Marshall returned to me successive drafts of the dissenting opinion for failing to express-or for failing to express in a properly pungent tone-his understanding of the case.) To Justice Marshall, the notion that government would act so as to deprive poor children of an education-of "an opportunity to improve their status and better their lives"'-was anathema. And the notion that the Court would allow such action was even more so; to do this would be to abdicate the judiciary's most important responsibility and its most precious function. 
For in Justice Marshall's view, constitutional interpretation demanded, above all else, one thing from the courts: it demanded that the courts show a special solicitude for the despised and disadvantaged. It was the role of the courts, in interpreting the Constitution, to protect the people who went unprotected by every other organ of government-to safeguard the interests of people who had no other champion. The Court existed primarily to fulfill this mission. (Indeed, I think if Justice Marshall had had his way, cases like Kadrmas would have been the only cases the Supreme Court heard. He once came back from conference and told us sadly that the other Justices had rejected his proposal for a new Supreme Court rule. "What was the rule, Judge?" we asked. "When one corporate fat cat sues another corporate fat cat," he replied, "this Court shall have no jurisdiction.") The nine Justices sat, to put the matter baldly, to ensure that Sarita Kadrmas could go to school each morning. At any rate, this was why they sat in Justice Marshall's vision of the Court and Constitution. And however much some recent Justices have sniped at that vision, it remains a thing of glory. 
During the year that marked the bicentennial of the Constitution, Justice Marshall gave a characteristically candid speech. He declared that the Constitution, as originally drafted and conceived, was "defective"; only over the course of 200 years had the nation "attain[ed] the system of constitutional government, and its respect for . . . individual freedoms and human rights, we hold as fundamental today."' The Constitution today, the Justice continued, contains a great deal to be proud of. "[B]ut the credit does not belong to the Framers. It belongs to those who refused to acquiesce in outdated notions of 'liberty,' 'justice,' and 'equality,' and who strived to better them."' The credit, in other words, belongs to people like Justice Marshall. As the many thousands who waited on the Supreme Court steps well knew, our modern Constitution is his. 
6 Thurgood Marshall, The Constitution's Bicentennial: Commemoratingthe Wrong Document?, 40 Vand. L. Rev. 1337, 1338 (1987). 
' Id. at 1341. On Marshall's Legal Legacy 
Was Justice Thurgood Marshall an egalitarian? Did he believe that the Constitution should be used to produce "equality of result" for those he happened to favor? 
I write at a time when many people, especially those in the federal judiciary, believe that both questions should be answered with an emphatic "Yes." But it isn't so. 
Above all, Thurgood Marshall will be remembered for his role in Brown v. Board of Education,' and indeed it is in that case that one can find many of the central elements of Marshall's conception of the Constitution. Brown is commonly thought to have been a case about racial discrimination. It is even said to have established a constitutional norm of "color-blindness." But to the participants in the case, and to the Court at the time, the case was fundamentally about education.2 The briefs and oral argument stressed not color-blindness, but the need for equal educational opportunity. And the Court listened. In the passage that Justice Marshall particularly liked to quote, the Court said: 
. Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. The author was law clerk to Justice Marshall during the 1979 Term. 
347 U.S. 483 (1954). 
2 Brown was followed by Boiling v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497 (1954). According to Professor Hutchinson, an early draft of the Bolling opinion stated explicitly that education is a fundamental interest for constitutional purposes. The draft read: 
This Court has applied similar reasoning to analogous situations in the field of education, the very subject now before us. Thus children and parents are deprived of the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause when the children are prohibited from pursuing certain courses, or from attending private schools and foreign-language schools. Such prohibitions were found to be unreasonable, and unrelated to any legitimate governmental objective. Just as a govemment may not impose arbitrary restrictions on the parent's right to educate his child, the government must not impose arbitrary restraints on access to the education which the government itself provides.... We have no hesitation in concluding that segregation of children in the public schools is a far greater restriction on their liberty than were the restrictions in the school cases discussed above. 
Dennis J.Hutchinson, Unanimity and Desegregation: Decisionmaking in the Supreme Court, 1948-1958, 68 Geo. L.J. 1, 45 (1979) (citation omitted). Professor Hutchinson reports that Justice Marshall was genuinely delighted to see that early draft, responding, "That's it! That's what the case was about!" Personal Communication from Dennis Hutchinson (Dec. 7, 1991). 
Today, education is perhaps the most important function of state and local governments. Compulsory school attendance laws and the great expenditures for education both demonstate our recognition of the importance of education to our democratic society. It is required in the performance of our most basic public responsibilities, even service in the armed forces. It is the very foundation of good citizenship. Today it is a principal instrument in awakening the child to cultural values, in preparing him for later professional training, and in helping him to adjust normally to his environment. In these days, it is doubful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an education.3 
Brown was a case about education. In this, I believe, lies the clue to understanding the wellsprings of Marshall's life, work, and vision of the Constitution. 
The long struggle by the NAACP-a struggle within and against the "separate but equal" doctrine-was undertaken, first and foremost, with an eye toward the achievement of equal educational opportunity. Above all, Marshall and others objected to a practice that would engrain second-class citizenship in children, and do so with respect to the social service most indispensable for an equal chance in life. Hence what seems to me the most revealing moment in Justice Marshall's argument in Brown. In response to a question from Justice Reed about whether the state should consider desegregation's potential negative impact on "law and order," Marshall said: 
[Whites and blacks] are fighting together and living together. For example, today they are working together in other places. . . . I know in the South where I spend most of my time, you will see white and colored kids going down the road together to school. They separate and go to different schools, and they come out and play together. I do not see why there would necessarily be any trouble if they went to school together.4 
Marshall's early commitment to equal educational opportunity carried over to his work on the Court. It helps explain many of his votes and writings; it unites a number of seemingly disparate ideas.' A conspicuous example is Marshall's greatest opinion, dissenting in San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez, 6 a case that has emerged as one of the most important since Brown itself. In that case, the Supreme Court upheld significant disparities in per-pupil expenditures in school financing in Texas. Marshall's dissenting opinion rested above all on the centrality of education to constitutionally protected liberties. First, Marshall said, education is connected with freedom of speech: "Education directly affects the ability of a child to exercise his First Amendment rights, both as a source and as a receiver of information and ideas, whatever interests he may pursue in life."' 
Second, education is central to the system of selfgovernment: "Education may instill the interest and provide the tools necessary for political discourse and debate. Indeed, it has frequently been suggested that education is the dominant factor affecting political consciousness and participation."' 
Third, Marshall argued that education is a crucial mechanism for allowing people to overcome disadvantaged conditions. It ensures, not equality of resources or outcomes, but a fair chance. "[T]he right of every American to an equal start in life, so far as the provision .. . of education is concerned, is far too vital to permit state discrimination on grounds as tenuous as those presented by this record."' This is s In 1986, at the Judicial Conference of the Second Circuit, Justice Marshall repeated words I heard at the end of a clerks' reunion: [Tihe goal of a true democracy such as ours, explained simply, is that any baby born in these United States, even if he isborn to the blackest, most illiterate, most unprivileged Negro in Mississippi, is, merely by being born and drawing his first breath in this democracy, endowed with the exact same rights as a child born to a Rockefeller. 
Of course it's not true. Of course it never will be true. But I challenge anybody to tell me that it isn't the type of goal we should try to get to as fast as we can. 
Thurgood Marshall, Address Before the Annual Judicial Conference of the Second Judicial Circuit of the United States (Sept. 5, 1986), in 115 F.R.D. 349, 354 (1987). 
6 411 U.S. 1 (1973). 7 Id. at 112 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 8 Id. at 113 (footnote omitted). 
9 Id. at 71; see also Kadrmas v. Dickinson Pub. Sch., 487 U.S. 450, 471 (1988) (Marshall, J., dissenting) ("For the poor, education is often the only route by which to become full participants in our society. In allowing a State to burden the access of poor persons to an education, the Court denies equal opportunity and discourages hope."). not an egalitarian theme. It is about prospects from the start, not results in the middle. 
The same themes appear throughout Marshall's work. For him, education supplies "the basic tools and opportunities that might enable [people] to rise."'" Thus the Constitution should be seen to reflect "a deep distrust of policies that specially burden the access of disadvantaged persons to the governmental institutions and processes that offer members of our society an opportunity to improve their status and better their lives."" Such distrust is justified because [a] statute that erects special obstacles to education in the path of the poor naturally tends to consign such persons to their current disadvantaged status. By denying equal opportunity to exactly those who need it most, the law not only militates against the ability of each poor child to advance herself or himself, but also increases the likelihood of the creation of a discrete and permanent underclass. 2 
Marshall was not an egalitarian. His conception of equality was extremely old-fashioned. An outgrowth of his experiences with segregation, that conception involved, as its defining feature, a commitment to equality of opportunity. In Marshall's constitutional vision, this commitment entailed, first and foremost, a right to equal prospects in education. But it also required more generally an opposition to all caste systems-understood as second-class citizenship, in which one group is systematically below others on the basis of a morally irrelevant factor such as race, sex, or disability. In his view, rejection of caste was the central lesson of the Civil War Amendments: "The intent of the Fourteenth Amendment was to abolish caste legislation. When state action has the predictable tendency to entrap the poor and create a permanent underclass, that intent is frustrated." " 
Thus the equal protection principle did not ban all racial differentiation. It did not require colorblindness. For Marshall, this precept was ahistorical; 'o Kadrmas, 487 U.S. at 469 (Marshall, J., dissenting). "Id. at 468-69. 
U Id. at 470; see also Martinez v. Bynum, 461 U.S. 321, 345-51 (1983) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (reiterating his view that a child's education is a fundamental interest). 
' Kadnnas, 487 U.S. at 469 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (citations omitted). it was insufficiently attuned to the particular history behind the Civil War Amendments. The principal point of those Amendments was not to require that people who were similarly situated be treated "the same." Instead, Marshall thought that the core meaning of the Equal Protection Clause was that the government could not translate morally irrelevant differences into a form of second-class citizenship. It could not take skin color, or gender, and turn these into social disadvantages for blacks or women. It is highly misleading to say that this is a vision of the Fourteenth Amendment that favored the "rights of groups" over "the rights of individuals." In any effort to dismantle a caste system, caste membership is highly relevant to remedial policies, and precisely in the interest of "the rights of individuals." At least Marshall thought that government could reasonably so believe. 
It was on this ground that Marshall argued that discrimination on the basis of disability should be subject to special scrutiny under the Fourteenth Amendment." And most notably, it was on this ground that he rejected the constitutional assault on affirmative action. 6 For him, that assault was filled with bitter ironies. There was no basis, he thought, for the view that affirmative action offended the vision of the framers of the Civil War Amendments, who had themselves engaged in affirmative action." 
Nor was invalidation of affirmative action compelled by principle. In Marshall's view, most racial discrimination was objectionable because of its particular purposes and its particular effects-that is, because it served to create a system of caste. When " See Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57, 86 (1981) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (arguing that the exclusion of women from registration for the draft is unconstitutional); Personnel Admin. of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 281 (1979) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (arguing that veterans' preference statute constitutes impermissible gender discrimination). It isnotable that Justice Marshall was the most vigorous voice of opposition, under the Equal Protection Clause, to official practices connected to the exclusion of women from the military; he insisted that this exclusion was part and parcel of women's second-class citizenship. Id.at 285. 
'5 City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr., Inc., 473 U.S. 432, 455 (1985) (Marshall, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). 
16 City of Richmond v. ].A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 528 (1989) (Marshall, J., dissenting); Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 517 (1980) (Marshall, J., concurring); Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 387 (1978) (Marshall, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). 
" Bakke, 438 U.S. at 396-98. the use of race has quite different purposes and effects, it should be evaluated more leniently. 
To Marshall, the deepest irony of the modem attack on affirmative action was that it ripped the hardwon victories against racial discrimination entirely. out of their particular historical context, when it was precisely that context that made the words ones of opprobrium. Thus for Marshall, the constitutional assault on affirmative action "pervert[ed] the intent of the Framers by substituting abstract equality for the genuine equality the Amendment was intended to achieve."" 
By "genuine equality," Marshall did not mean equality of result. Instead, he referred to a system in which the caste-like features of American society had been dismantled-a dismantling that was part and parcel of the attack, decades earlier, on Jim Crow. Hence his unusually personal last paragraph in Bakke: 
I fear that we have come full circle. After the Civil War our Government started several "affirmative action" programs. This Court in the Civil Rights Cases and Plessy v. Ferguson destroyed the movement toward complete equality. For almost a century no action was taken, and this nonaction was with the tacit approval of the courts. Then we had Brown and the Civil Rights Acts of Congress, followed by numerous affirmative-action programs. Now, we have this Court again stepping in, this time to stop affirmative-action programs of the type used by the University of California.'9 
Thus far I have suggested that Marshall's constitutional vision included a commitment to equality of opportunity, particularly in education, and a rejection of caste. Of all Justices to serve on the Supreme Court, Marshall was also by far the most insistently protective of poor people. Indeed, he moved very close to a belief in a constitutional right to freedom from desperate conditions. This right is the third and final cornerstone in Marshall's conception of equality. It was also connected, though less directly, with the original wellsprings of Brown. 
At the very least, Marshall believed that any system that left an identifiable class of Americans in I Bakke, 438 U.S. at 398. '9 Id. at 402 (citations ommitted). conditions of this kind should be subject to careful scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause. Under this view, no one should be deprived, without good reason, of adequate education, police protection, food, shelter, or medical care.20 
This principle ishardly egalitarian. It merely affords a basic minimum. It allows enormous variations in living standards. There is no evidence that Marshall objected to such variations. But it would not permit people to fall below a specified floor. Certainly Marshall believed that poor people could not be deprived of access to the basic institutions of a democratic society, including the political process, the judicial process," and education. In an appropriate case, I think that he would also have held that the government could not constitutionally deprive people of the basic means of subsistence-that it could not allow them to fall beneath a decent minimum.2 
Marshall was not an egalitarian. But in his conception of the Constitution, courts were to assume an aggressive role in promoting equality of opportunity. At a minimum, that role entailed vigilance over discrimination with respect to education, probably even a right to education; an attack on caste systems; and a willingness to look skeptically at any state action that allowed people to be subject to desperate conditions. 
The Supreme Court has rejected this vision of the Constitution in all of its fundamentals. It is by no means clear that the Court has been wrong to do this. A serious commitment to Marshall's vision would entail an extraordinary judicial role, one for which the courts are quite ill-suited. There is good evidence that courts are generally ineffective in bringing about systematic, stable social change. 23 20 See Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 337 (1980) (Marshall, J., dissenting); Memorial Hosp. v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250, 259-62 (1974); Dandridgev. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 508 (1970) (Marshall, J., dissenting). 
21 See United States v. Kras, 409 U.S. 434, 458 (1973) (Marshall, J., dissenting). 
22 See Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471, 508, 522 (1970) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (noting that the Supreme Court "has already recognized that when a benefit, even a 'gratuitous' benefit, is necessary to sustain life, stricter constitutional standards, both procedural and substantive, are applied to the deprivation of that benefit"). (citations omitted). 
2 See Gerald N. Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope 72-106 (1991). Like Rosenberg, I am referring to broad social change through the courtslarge-scale institutional shifts, not "negative" decrees that do not involve such shifts. Implementation is always required, and implementation will sometimes encounter unexpected obstacles. Courts are ill-equipped to understand the complex systemic effects of ad hoc intervention. 
Even when courts are effective, there are serious problems in judge-led reform from the standpoint of democratic legitimacy. Reform through the courts may dampen the practice of citizenship, an individual and collective good. And if reform does not have a democratic pedigree, it may run into severe resistance. Such resistance may in turn undermine the very causes that the Court purports to favor. The judicial struggle with abortion may well be an example. It is at least plausible to think that Roe v. Wade14 demobilized the women's movement, contributed to the defeat of the Equal Rights Amendment, and helped create the moral majority, in a way having quite adverse effects for the cause of equality on the basis of sex." 
In any case, the era of Brown-an era that produced so many extraordinary developments in American law, many of them engineered by Marshall-was an exceptional one in American history. It had no real predecessors. It is doubtful whether it will have any real successors. 
The capacities of the courts are one thing; the relationship of the Constitution to American life is another. Many Americans continue to live in desperate conditions. They are without hope, food, or shelter. They are subject to both random and systemic criminal violence-usually from the private sector, sometimes from the police. Blacks and women are disproportionately victims. Many children are without decent life prospects. A system with castelike features currently exists with respect to race, sex, and disability. Many Americans never receive a decent education. In educational opportunities there are persistent, extraordinary, and unnecessary disparities, and these are correlated with race and other moral irrelevancies. 
Even if the Supreme Court of the United States lacks the willingness, the tools, or the competence to respond to the situation, it remains plausible to think that the Constitution of the United States is not an 225 S4e1e0GU..SR.os1e1n3b(e1r9g7,3s)u.pranote 29, at 336-43. irrelevance. Other institutions, most notably Congress, the President, and state governments, have duties of fidelity to the founding document. Those institutions are not burdened with the limits that face the judiciary. 
It is fully plausible to think that Marshall's vision of the Constitution will continue to have a conspicuous place in American constitutional thought. But increasingly, its place may be the halls of the legislatures and the bureaucracies, rather than the judiciary. This is an extraordinary irony: More than anyone else, Marshall is responsible for the idea that social reform, through the courts in the name of the Constitution, was both possible and desirable. 
The last words come from Marshall himself. In 1980, the city of Baltimore erected a statute of Thurgood Marshall. It was able to persuade him to attend the ceremony-a real accomplishment in light of his storied reluctance to receive public tribute. But this was a remarkable event. Baltimore had been a segregated city, and one of Marshall's first endeavors after graduating from law school was to desegregate Maryland's all-white law school. The dedication of a statue honoring a black civil rights lawyer who had abolished American apartheid would have been unfathomable fifty or sixty years before. 
Surely this was an occasion for celebration-of an extraordinary life of accomplishment, and of the remarkable achievements of the civil rights revolution. But Marshall would have nothing of it: 
Some . . . feel we have arrived. Others feel there is nothing more to do. I just want to be sure that when you see this statue, you won't think that's the end of it. I won't have it that way. There's too much work to be done." 26 Dale Russakoff, Trbute to Marshall; City of Baltimore Dedicates Statue to Ist Native Son on High Court, Wash. Post, May 17, 1980, at Cl. 
from The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, Illinois 60637 No.1. 
"A Comment on Separation of Power" 
Philip B. Kurland, November 1, 1971. 
No. 2. "The Shortage of Natural Gas" 
Edmund W. Kitch, Februrary 1, 1972. 
No. 3. "The Prosaic Sources of Prison Violence" 
Hans W. Mattick, March 15, 1972. 
No. 4. "Conflicts of Interest in Corporate Law Practice" 
Stanley A. Kaplan, January 10, 1973. 
No. 5. "Six Man Juries, Majority Verdicts 
What Difference Do They Make?" 
Hans Zeisel, March 15, 1973. 
No. 6. "On Emergency Powers of the President: Every Inch a King?" 
Gerhard Casper, May 31, 1973. 
No. 7. "The Anatomy of Justice in Taxation" Walter J. Blum and Harry Kalven Jr., 
October 1, 1973. 
No. 8. "An Approach to Law" 
Edward H. Levi, October 15,1974. 
No. 9. "The New Consumerism and the Law School" 
Walter J. Blum, February 15, 1975. 
No. 10. "Congress and the Courts" 
Carl McGowan, April 17, 1975. 
No. 11. "The Uneasy Case for Progressive Taxation in 1976" 
Walter J. Blum, November 19, 1976. 
No. 12. "Making the Punishment Fit the Crime: A Consumers' Guide to Sentencing Reform" 
Franklin E. Zimring, January 24, 1977. 
No. 13. "Talk to Entering Students" 
James B. White, August 15, 1977. 
No. 14. "The Death Penalty and the Insanity Defense" Hans Zeisel, April 15, 1978. 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
The University of Chicago Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Supreme Court Review 
This content downloaded from 157.182.150.22 on Mon, 19 Sep 2016 03:00:53 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 
STANDING INJURIES In Association of Data Processing Serv Org v Camp,1 the Sup Court, in an opinion written by Justice William O. Douglas, r lutionized the law of standing. The Court rejected the old idea th a "legal interest" is a necessary basis for standing. Instead, it out a new requirement: the plaintiff must show an "injury in fa The Court clearly thought that it was possible to identify "in in fact" in an entirely law-free way. On the Court's view, ju should answer the question whether there was injury by loo at consequences, and without examining the relevant law. 
The Data Processing Court did not make clear whether in setti out the "injury in fact" test, it was speaking of the Administrat Procedure Act3 or the Constitution. But eventually the Court 
Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chi Law School and Department of Political Science. 
AUTHOR'S NOTE: I am grateful to Thomas Brown for excellent research assistance. S397 US 150 (1970). 
the zone of interests" protected by the statutory or constitutional provision at issue, 156; but the Court meant this test to be quite lenient, and it is largely irrelevant for p purposes. If the discussion here is correct, however, the "zone" test holds some promi refocusing standing law on the question of congressional instructions. The recent tight of the "zone" test, see Air Courier Conference of America v American Postal Workers Unio US 51 whether Congress has conferred a right to bring suit. I cannot discuss this issue here, t it should emerge from the discussion that there is an intriguing relationship betwee reading of Northeastern Contractors and the possible tightening of the "zone" test. 
3 The relevant provision, which the Court purported to be interpreting, is 5 US "A person suffering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely affected or agg by agency action within the meaning of a relevant statute, is entitled to judicial r thereof." The interpretation was misconceived; the APA contains no "injury in fact" t On the injury in fact idea and the APA, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 L Rev 163, 181-82 (1992). 
? 1994 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0-226-36248-5/94/1993-0003$02.00 37 cluded that an injury in fact is a con standing under Article III of the Constit one has standing. This is an extraordi Contrary to the Court's recent claims, t has no basis in the text or history of th 
Indeed, the Court has never thoroughl "legal interest" to "injury in fact." But i said that it wanted to make it unnecessa its" in order to decide issues of standi instead to make the standing problem into the harm suffered by the plainti whether the plaintiff had standing woul or constitutional provision at issue.6 commonsensical, largely value-free in harm. If you are harmed, you have st you cannot sue. 
All this seems very simple and straig know whether an injury has been incu more vexing than it might appear. Co way; he thinks that the project woul believes that if the project is built, he w an actual incidence of cancer? An increased risk of cancer? A diminished opportunity to enjoy days without sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere? A diminution in the value of his property? Communication Commission is going to award a license to a rock music station on 104.3 FM. Is her injury the actual unavailability of classical music in her area? Her diminished opportunity to hear classical music? The unavailability of classical music on 104.3 FM? Her offense at the presence of rock music on the airwaves? against the father of her child, who was born out of wedlock; she hopes that the proceedings will convince him to pay child support. But the prosecutor acts only in cases involving children born within 
See, e.g., Simon v EKWRO, 426 US 26 (1976); Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). 
5 See Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. 6 Subject to the qualification in note 2 supra. wedlock. Is Richardson's i child support? The actual a have her child treated the procedural injury, consisti environmental impact stat What sort of an injury mu Must they live near the wat to prepare the statement w harms must they connect 
Questions of this kind ma difference. Take a recent think that if the North A is ratified, the air will beco what, exactly, is their inju broadly-as, say, increase may have standing to cont acterized narrowly-as, say would not otherwise occur be deprived of access to co and they will be unable t defendant's conduct or lik favor. Few who are subjec show that they will get so 
Similar conclusions might b music. Such listeners will preferred fare elsewhere on fense" at rock music will point that raises further co inquiry into whether ther t7o CpeoompplearientTehreesFteudndinfostruAdyniinmgalbsisvonE an environmental impact statement. S Cir 1992), characterizing a similar inj s See the discussion in Lujan v Defend 9 The issue arose in Public Citizen district court found standing witho dressability. The court of appeals rev 10 Compare Office of Communication 1966); Public Citizen v Friends of the held,"1 it is highly speculative to sugges will necessarily lead a delinquent father to support payments. Therefore-as the C could be shown. 12 
It is astonishing but true that the Supreme Court has given very little guidance on a key issue in modern administrative law: how injuries should be characterized for purposes of standing. Its most serious and sustained confrontation with the issue came last term in Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated General Contractors v Jacksonville (hereafter Northeastern Contractors)." The result and the reasoning in the case are in conspicuous tension with other Supreme Court precedents, most of them quite recent. And the Court's distinctive approach, offered in an intriguing setting, has the potential to allow the Court to sort out much of the law in this area, and also to move standing doctrine in some generally salutary directions. This is so especially in light of the fact that, as we will see, the Northeastern Contractors case exposes the fundamental flaw in Data Processing-the view that it is possible to identify injuries without looking at law. One of the important legacies of Northeastern Contractors will be the understanding that in characterizing injury, it is the law that counts. In deciding whether there is standing, what matters is what the law says. There can be no law-free inquiry into the subject of injury. This will be my principal claim here. 
A. DESCRIPTION 
In Jacksonville and Duval County, Florida, there tion of construction contractors, operating under Northeastern Florida Chapter of the Associated Ge tors (hereinafter AGC). In 1991 AGC challenged Jac nority Business Enterprise program, which requir total city contract funds be set aside for minority prises. A minority business enterprise is defined owned at least 51% by a woman or a member of a min " Linda RS v Richard D, 410 US 614 (1973). 12 Id. " 113 S Ct 2297 (1993). 
AGC's members are mostly They regularly bid and per of Jacksonville. They com excluded from bidding on th minority business enterpri non-minority members of if not for the set-aside pro provides a cause of action f state law, they claimed that of the laws. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit held that AGC lacked standing. " The key point was that its members had not alleged that they "would have bid more successfully on any one or more of these contracts if not for the ordinance."'16 They therefore could not show injury in fact. In the court's view, it was purely speculative to say that if the program were invalidated, AGC's members would be awarded any additional contracts. The plaintiffs action thus ran afoul of a number of Supreme Court decisions holding that there must be a concrete and definable injury to the plaintiff, one that was attributable to the defendant's conduct and likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiff's favor.17 
The Supreme Court reversed." The centerpiece of the Court's decision consisted of a description of the injury not as a failure to receive a contract, but instead as an inability to compete. This description of the injury stemmed from the Court's understanding of the Equal Protection Clause. "When the government erects a barrier that makes it more difficult for members of one group to obtain a benefit than it is for members of another group, a member of the former group seeking to challenge the barrier need not alleged that he would have obtained the benefit but for the barrier 14 42 USC ? 1983: "Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress." 'i 896 F2d 1283 (1990). 16 Id at 1219. 
"7 For discussion of these cases, see Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163; text at notes 38-50 infra. 
18 113 S Ct 2297 (1993). in order to establish standing."'9 The in was met by "the denial of equal treatment sition of the barrier."20 
It was therefore sufficient for the plaint ready and able to bid on contracts and from doing so as a result of the discri cluding, the most important precedent wa which Allan Bakke was allowed to challe program without showing that he would out the program. And in an intriguing an note, the Court added that because of t injury, the redressability requirements the Court appeared to say that since the i with the opportunity to compete, it w conduct; and it also followed that any j tiffs' favor would remedy their injury. 
The Court was aware that its decision was in some conflict with earlier outcomes, especially that in Warth v Seldin.23 In the Warth case, the Court had denied standing to a construction association that was seeking to challenge an allegedly discriminatory zoning ordinance. In trying to come to terms with Warth, the Court made two points. First, the association in Warth did not contend that it could not apply for variances and permits on an equal basis; its complaint was that it could not obtain variances and permits. Second, there was no allegation in Warth that any members had actually applied for a permit or variance for a current project. Here, by contrast, actual applications were alleged.24 B. EVALUATION 
It is not necessary to linger long over the questi Court's decision was correct. Section 1983 confers a cause of action on people whose federal rights have been violated by state law. 19 Id at 2303. 20 Id. 21 See Regents of the University of California v Bakke, 438 US 265, 281 n 14 (1978). 22 Id at 2303 n 5. 23 422 US 490 (1975). 
24 There was also a question of mootness, on which two justices dissented, id at 2305 (O'Connor, joined by Blackmun); but that question is not relevant for my purposes here. 
RIES The 
Equal 
to compete on an equal basis. sional schools in 
ar in 
Arkansas, they have been matter whether any par tic ul been admitted under a no plain tif fs in 
decree invalid ating the discr sion or award of a contract pend on what happens when The Court's conclu sion th ture of the interest protec itself hig hly nota ble, and it standin 
The 
been resolved if the 
dently of law. 
In order ev 
had to look at the So much for the at tempt la i would inquire into "injury cases is, in in which the every case-an issue is explo Something has to be said, the easy cases, the injury because law is irrelevant. 
s I legal 
background.28 In any case, what sense w to prove that they would a 2s Of course this question depends 
formulation on what "equal does n prote 26 The case may be different if ther admitted if he applied. But in almo admission is enough. I do not discu application for admission. Application would be futile-and in such a case a This issue was not squarely presented to suggest an application would be r 27 This is so their claim is correct on the merits. 
at least if we assume, as 28 I cannot discuss some of the complexities underlying this claim. For general discussion, see Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 Yale L J 221 (1988); Sunstein, What's Standing After Lujan? 91 Mich L Rev 163. See also text at notes 53-55 infra (discussing the ways in which any claim about consequences is in fact underlain by norms). contracts? How would constitutional odd requirement? It may be difficult struct the facts sufficiently to assess th would have happened in a counterfactu difficult after the fact. Moreover, tha have no point. Because it would serve poses, it would be a waste of judicia would be some saving of judicial reso need to resolve disputes whose outcome award of a contract to any party; but sources, any gains seem likely to be smal constitutional goal seems to require the contract would be awarded. At least this is what the Court in Northeastern Contractors seemed to assume. Some such assumption must be implicit in the Court's readiness to characterize the injury as involving an opportunity rather than a more discrete harm. 
There is one possible line of response to this argument, suggested in the recent cases29 though, surprisingly, not even discussed i Northeastern Contractors. Certainly courts ought to minimize the oc casions for intervening with political processes; almost certainl this is especially so if we are dealing with a constitutional attac on state law. If the plaintiffs' interest is widely shared-and an "opportunity" is by definition likely to be widely shared-perhap judges should refuse to interfere with the outcomes of electora processes. And if the interest is as broad as the opportunity t compete, it is indeed going to be widely shared. On this view, t construction contractors in Northeastern Contractors-perhaps n incidentally, members of the white majority,30 though this particu lar point need not be emphasized here-ought to have been force to rely on the political process unless and until they could sho that contracts would actually have been awarded to them. Witho such a showing, all they had was a "generalized grievance," on that is best taken up before legislative bodies. Courts ought, i short, to require tangible, concrete harm, rather than injury t opportunities, as a way of minimizing the occasions for interfering 
JURIES with political processes. It f ern Contractors was right af 
In form, the Supreme Co persuasive in other contexts. should have addressed this of its prominence elsewher a significant gap in the Co 
The construction contrac not, however, an electoral m cal remedy may be relevant claim,32 it does not justif heard at all. The contracto taxpayers or ordinary citize fused, was not felt by all judicial interference with justify a restriction on stan been precluded from comp color. The dispute was har courts were to be made un would be unavailable to a constitutional or statutory c case,33 for example, equally their claims; the same is tru under (for example) th Clauses.34 A refusal to chara nity"-if based on the num stake-would wreak havoc with too much established law. For all these reasons, the outcome in Northeastern Contractors is unexceptionable. 
There is a further point. I have noted that in section 1983, Congress granted a cause of action to all those whose federal constitutional rights have been violated by state law.35 In Northeastern Contractors, the plaintiffs alleged that the set-aside program violated 46 THE SUPREME COURT their rights under the Equal Protectio congressionally conferred cause of act cient to establish standing. The Supre phasize this point-the creation of a whose federal rights have been violate major gap in the opinion. The Court did source of federal law that conferred plaintiffs. But if we attend to section simple. 
One final issue. In many cases since Data Processing, the Court has been faced with the implicit issue of how to characterize injuries in standing cases.36 Often the question is whether to characterize an injury in terms that are familiar to the common law. At common law, a discrete wrongdoer typically imposes a discrete wrong on a discrete person at an easily identifiable time. This is the basic form of the common law allegation, and it can easily be transplanted to the administrative law setting, where we might ask whether the same framework is at work. In public law cases, however, it is possible that the common law understanding should be rejected, on the theory that it is poorly adapted to the goals and functions of the modern state. The alternative is to characterize an injury as involving (for example) an increased probability of harm, an injury to an opportunity, or a failure to have potential wrongdoers face the kinds of incentives that Congress (or the Constitution) seeks to impose on them. In many cases the Court has opted for the common law characterization, and thus denied standing, when the public law alternative was fully available. Strikingly, in Northeastern Contractors the Court seemed to think that a common lawlike understanding, one that speaks in terms of discrete harms to discrete people, would make no sense; the Equal Protection Clause protects the opportunity to compete, not the award of contracts. We need not quarrel with this result in order to insist that the Court ought to have explained how this characterization of the injury fits, or fails to fit, with other cases. And it is here that the case leaves a conspicuous gap not only in logic but also for the future. 
36 See text at notes 38-50 infra. 
From what has been said thus far, it seems clear that Northeastern Contractors does not coexist easily with recent cases and trends in the area of standing. For this reason the case, though seemingly minor and technical, raises a host of complex and novel issues. It will be useful to begin by showing how the same analytic strategy used in Northeastern Contractors might have been used in a wide range of cases in which standing was denied. That strategy consists of recharacterizing the injury so as to ensure simultaneous compliance with the requirements of injury in fact and redressability.37 
Consider, for example, Linda RS v Richard D. 38 It will be recalled that the case involved a complaint that the local prosecutor had failed to prosecute fathers of illegitimate children for failure to provide child support. The plaintiff claimed that the discriminatory prosecution policy was in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. The Court denied standing. On the Court's analysis, the problem for purposes of standing was that the plaintiff could not show that her injury would be redressed by a decree in her favor. Perhaps the father would simply go to prison. Structurally, this approach is the same as that of the Court of Appeals in Northeastern Contractors. The failure of redressability stemmed from the narrow characterization of the injury, just as the broad characterization of the injury in Northeastern Contractors eliminated any problem with redressability. 
But it would have been equally plausible to say that the injury suffered in Linda RS involved not the absence of child support, but the opportunity to ensure that payments by the child's father were subject to the same incentives as everyone else similarly situated. That was the violation of the equality principle, and with respect to that violation, there was no problem with either injury or redressability-just as in Northeastern Contractors. Imagine, for example, if a local prosecutor initiated proceedings against white fathers 7 There are really two such requirements: the injury must be due to the defendant's conduct, and the injury must be likely to be remedied by a decree in the plaintiffs favor. In most cases, these will lead to the same result. See Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984). 38 410 US 614 (1973). for child support, but not against bla such circumstances a mother of a child whose father is black complains that the discrimination has made it impossible for her to support her child. Would there be any problem with standing? Certainly there should not be,39 and Northeastern Contractors is a powerful precedent in her favor. The injury consists not of the absence of child support, but of the fact that her opportunity to receive child support is not subject to the same incentives as that of others similarly situated. 
The only difference between Linda RS and Northeastern Contractors is that the former involved an action against a criminal prosecutor to enforce the law. It therefore raised the arguably distinctive considerations involved in a proceeding by a private party against the government to require it to proceed against another private party. In Lujan v Defenders of Wildlife,40 the Supreme Court brought out this point, which had been largely implicit in several other cases.41 In Lujan, the Court said that a case in which a plaintiff sought enforcement action was the weakest case for standing. In the Court's view, the injury in such cases is especially likely to be speculative. As we have seen, however, whether the injury is speculative cannot be decided in the abstract; everything depends on how the injury is described.42 On that particular question, there is no difference between an ordinary action and one brought against the government for unlawful enforcement activity. On that particular question, it is utterly irrelevant whether the government is being asked to initiate proceedings. If the injury is characterized broadly, as it was in Northeastern Contractors, this difference should not make a difference. Certainly there is no Article II problem with a suit against a state or local prosecutor for unlawful discrimination.43 
Perhaps Article II concerns should bear on standing in cases in which the federal executive is the defendant. But any such concerns should be analytically separate. They should not be folded into the inquiry whether the injury is "speculative." The merger of these two questions-both complex enough-is a recipe for confusion. 39 See Heckler v Mathews, 465 US 728 (1986). 40 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). "' See, e.g., Allen v Wright, 468 US 737 (1984). 42 See text at notes 22, 38-39 supra. 3 See also Sunstein, Article II Revisionism, 92 Mich L Rev 131 (1993). I conclude, then, that on t Northeastern Contractors co RS, so as to allow standing 
So much for Linda RS. Tu redressability requiremen Simon v Eastern Kentucky W denied standing to indigent lations implementing the alleged that they had soug emergency rooms. They c that the new regulations d provide medical care to the plaintiffs should be denied that the change in policy of services of which they not show injury, for they policy had been in place, t For all we know, the denia any event. (Notice the struc ruling in Northeastern Contr 
But in Eastern Kentucky We characterized the relevant said that the injury involve are subject to the incentiv through the relevant provi plaintiffs could have comp opportunity to receive med the incentives for which t odd;4s but why would such appropriate than the parallel The Court itself has offered no answer. 
The second tax case is Allen v Wright.46 In that case, parents of schoolchildren attending schools undergoing a process of desegregation complained about an IRS policy granting tax deductions to people who send their children to all-white private schools. Ac44 426 US 26 (1976). 
"5 If it does, it is, I think, because of the persistence of common law thinking about injuries. See below. 
46 468 US 737 (1984). cording to the plaintiffs, the deduction existence jeopardized the desegregation "white flight." The Supreme Court deni the Court, the parents could not show tha would be affected in any way by a cha 
As a factual claim, the Court's point s is hardly clear that such a change would a But suppose that the plaintiffs had urge child would be affected in any particula had been injured in a legally cognizable fa to ensure that the process of desegregat fected by the grant of unlawful tax dedu have described their injury as involving desegregation process unaffected by unla flight. Here as well-the now-familiar used in Northeastern Contractors could ea thorize standing. 
As a further example, consider Lujan v There the plaintiffs were people interes endangered species and planning to go a at some unspecified future date. The pl the relevant agency's failure to apply t extraterritorially, a failure that, in their prospects as professionals and tourists. that the plaintiffs lacked standing, sin injury. Their "abstract" interest in pro members of the relevant species was no hand, the plaintiffs had acquired a plan the endangered species were imminentl deed be a concrete harm.48 Otherwise, n harm was speculative or merely ideolog 
Suppose, however, that following the a Contractors, the plaintiffs described thei to see a particular species at a particula harm to their opportunity to see certai 47 112 S Ct 2130 (1992). 
48 On this point see Japanese Whaling Ass'n v ACS, 47 to prospective whale watchers); Animal Protection Inst. 1992) (same, and characterizing injury as involving an o would this description be il tionally inadequate? Is the formal bids in Northeastern the conception of the injur 
Consider, finally, the most ministrative Procedure Act complains of agency nonco ments of the APA. Is there whether the agency would do dures were followed? Surel stems from the agency's fail has specified. It does not mat procedures, nonetheless fail injury consists of the increas the failure to comply with 
Northeastern Contractors sh gree of manipulability in the ing cases. In nearly every denied standing, it would h in such a way as to meet al that Northeastern Contractor terize the relevant injury. for the future-the Suprem 
A. POSITIVE LAW-AND THE DEMISE OF DATA PROCESSING 
I suggest that when courts are deciding how to ch ries, the starting point is positive law. The key q the initial one-involves constitutional or congre tions. It follows that the question of standing is question whether the plaintiff has a cause of act 49 5 USC ?? 551 et seq. 
50so Compare the discussion of procedural injuries in Lujan, which view: "This is not a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a pr the disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of their requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their license applicat requirement for an environmental impact statement before a federal next door to them)." 112 S Ct at 2130, 2142. 
5s To the same effect see Fletcher, supra note 28; Currie, Misunders Supreme Court Review 41. mistake in the last generation, made i in Data Processing, was to split these issue is: Has the law entitled someone t look to the underlying provision of la injury that it is designed to prevent. No easy because it was clear that the const the opportunity to compete on an equ of a particular contract. EKWRO and cause in those settings, it is much har instructions on how to characterize th 
This general approach suggests that it decide whether there is an "injury" a courts must characterize injuries by l where else might they look in order t reject the effort of the Court in Data Pr interest" test in favor of "injury in divorce of these questions was brough consciously by Justice Douglas in the cessing case. It is hopeless to divorce t cannot know whether there is an injury law is. Before the enactment of the c example, a victim of racial discrimin was no harm for courts to redress; any and no basis for a lawsuit. After enac question of standing became trivially requirement was met." 
To be sure, it is sometimes transpare injury-as, for example, when someon jail. But even in such easy cases, an u some important conceptual work. We liberty as "injury" partly because our tradition makes such matters clear. I cases we can identify injuries as such wi the law. But as participants in the le cases are connected with shared unde background; and when the cases beco 52 See Fletcher, supra note 28 (collecting authorities 53 See Havens Realty Corp. v Coleman, 455 US 363 (1982) Co., 409 US 205 (1972). law is indispensable to an poses, there is harm. 
There is a close relationsh much broader claim that a in fact mediated by social n matter, and helping us to de who purport to be pure c may well be relying on a b purely consequential in cha all, and exactly how those t in social decisions. Consequ or perhaps never simply co we can understand, for ex offense is not a legally cogn nications Act, or for that 
If injuries are a product o broad limits (and perhaps decide whether people are that the appropriate charac on an understanding of posi eastern Contractors itself pa Processing, and explicitly so. Court actually reasoned abo stake under the Equal Pr Northeastern Contractors as that "legal interest," rathe in standing cases. 
B. STATUTORY SILENCE 
Positive law is a start; but it is only that. Freque does not attend with anything like particularity standing; frequently it is not easy to make inferences text, structure, and history. Frequently the character injury will be far from simple. To be sure, the statut and history might help. In EKWRO and Allen, fo Court might have been responding to the general 4 See generally Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (19 Of5 LcouujarnsevtDheefeCnodnesrtsitouftion might sometimes create causes of action an 
Wildlife, 112 S Ct 2130 (1992), imposes a limit on t 
COURT person ought not to be allowed to litiga other.56 If this idea is in fact attributa goals and understandings, both cases mi of absence of injury, but because this o standing of the governing statutes. On thi say how the injury should be characteriz taken to have expressed a judgment abou excludes third-party actions in tax cases. 
In other settings, however, there is no judgment with which to work. In such s tion of the injury will be a product of ground understandings on the part of t of anything realistically attributable to approaches seem to be plausible candidat 
The first, a common law model of standi acterization of injury. This is so for t group of citizens should presumptively be ical process rather than the courts, and lems, constitutional in origin, whenever ci the executive to undertake enforcement action on their behalf. The second candidate, a public law model of standing, favors broad characterization of the injury. It does so principally on the theory that broad characterization is most likely to fit with congressional goals and expectations.58 
Of course broad-gauged models of these kinds cannot substitute for close engagement with particular statutes and facts. We cannot come up with a simple approach to unite the appropriate characterization of injuries in cases involving consumers, radio listeners, victims of discrimination, environmentalists, purchasers of securities, and many more. Any real case will require knowledge of the particular legal claim, and for these purposes abstractions provide at best broad orientation. But these alternative positions do seem 56 See EKWRO, supra note 4, at 46 (Stewart concurring). 
57 The general standing provision is 5 USC 702, see note 3 supra, and it is of course binding. The problem is that it is uninformative on the question at hand. If it is taken to require an "injury in fact," the question remains how any alleged injury is to be characterized. If it is to be taken to require a legal interest (as I think that it should), the question remains how to decide whether one exists. The APA provision therefore leaves a number of uncertainties. the most important draw on these positions ar the rest of this essay to a b 
The common law model. to begin with a dis tinction b subjected to governmental c tion59 (people for whom ers to the radio, vic tims sta of the ests objects of regula tion h are at stake, and the their right to judicial revie In to any case, no one denies t standing. 
But perhaps cou ing to beneficiaries of regul very numerous, and at least action of a certain kind or involving appropriate cha those with denying standing to r these facts foremost really turn on "injury"-th instead on a pa tional backdrop. 
That unde numerous beneficiaries ask t 
This idea might be justified on various grounds. Perhaps numerous beneficiaries ought to be relegated to their political remedies. 
Perhaps an agency that (for example) fails to apply the Endangered Species Act extraterritorially, or to prepare an environmental impact statement before going forward with NAFTA, ought to be forced to defend itself before the public and in democratic arenas, 
59 A qualification is necessary here: The distinction between regulated objects and regulatory beneficiaries depends on some controversial assumptions. These include the decision to take the common law system as the ordinary or natural state of affairs, and to see departures from that system as regulatory impositions into an otherwise prepolitical status quo. See Sunstein, supra note 3, at 196-97. I stay with conventional usage here, but for ease of exposition, not because of acceptance of what underlies that usage. Note also that the "beneficiaries" of regulation could plausibly be (a) narrow interest groups of various kinds, including companies exempted from statutory requirements, or (b) people who are actually the "objects" of regulation, that is, people who can be imposed upon only because of what the law says. On the latter point, see Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Problem of Freedom, 39 UCLA L Rev 295 (1991). 
60 See Yakus v US, 321 US 414 (1944). rather than in court. This is a complex deliberation ought to be strongly favor course courts should be available if ther jury, of the sort familiar to the common l is at stake, standing should be denied. 
There are, moreover, good reasons to be c conscription of public resources-a prob issue in cases brought by regulatory be pany stops the government from regula conscription is at work.) If beneficiaries an agency on the ground that it has no sufficient intensity, perhaps there is a ris groups will be able to obtain enforcemen of others. The problem is especially serious an agency always has before it a wide ra scarce enforcement resources. A suit b make it harder for various social benefi ment-to be granted to group Y. Enviro tivity in Ohio may compromise efforts discrimination in California may impair en nois. This problem will rarely be visible to the particular problem before it. Considera Supreme Court to conclude that agency action, should be presumed unreviewabl 
Such considerations have special strength latory programs that must be coordinated time. Typically an agency is charged wi variety of different statutes, and it has t bringing about a coherent overall sche together provisions that were enacted at d must be implemented in a temporally ra is in an especially good position to decid be addressed, and when. A court is most cient overview to examine such issues.62 Thi that courts ought to presume that Congres to beneficiaries alleging only an "opportun in general, something more concrete m 6' Heckler v Chaney, 470 US 821, 832 (1985). 62 See the discussion of coordination in Breyer, Closing that discrete harms-of the sort demanded in EKWRO and Allenmust be shown in the typical administrative law case. 
On the approach I am suggesting, ideas of this sort would not have constitutional status. Congress could override the presumption against standing for "opportunity-type" harms by a clear statement. When it has done so, standing should be available for regulatory beneficiaries, however numerous, and however much courts will be overseeing (for legality) enforcement action. This is one way to understand things in the area of environmental law, where beneficiary suits are plentiful, and where Congress has firmly endorsed them.63 The common law model of standing would serve only to provide the background understandings against which to understand congressional silence. It would disallow suits by especially numerous beneficiaries unless Congress has said otherwise. Narrow characterization of the injury would really be a proxy for the relevant background understandings. In deciding standing cases, we would really be talking not of "injury in fact," but of the appropriate allocation of authority among Congress, courts, and agencies. 
This approach has the advantage of synthesizing a good deal of current law. It helps reconcile Northeastern Contractors with the cases that preceded it, most notably Allen v Wright and Lujan. It explains why the strategy in Northeastern Contractors-broad characterization of the injury-would not make sense when regulatory beneficiaries are seeking to compel enforcement action. The capacity for rationalization itself counts as a strong argument in favor of this approach. 
points. First, the common law model is untrue to the best understanding of Congress' goals and expectations. Second, the relevant constitutional concerns are without force. Suits by regulatory beneficiaries produce no constitutional difficulties. 
The initial point here is that regulatory statutes are rooted in ideas quite foreign to the common law. Typically they are enacted not to prevent discrete harms by discrete actors, but to restructure incentives or to ensure against what we might describe as probable or systemic harms. When Congress requires an environmental impact statement, for example, it is trying to restructure incentives 63 See, e.g., 30 USC 1270; 42 USC 6305; 42 USC 7604. by ensuring consideration of environment identifiable harms to identifiable people. schools receiving federal funds may not di sex, it is creating an incentive for sex equ particular results on particular schools students. When Congress imposes natio standards, it is trying to reduce system particular incidences of cancer. When Co hicles to reduce levels of air pollution, it i identifiable respiratory problems, but t produces lower aggregate risks. 
This is the characteristic form of mod Risk management, rather than redress o tional goal.64 In many ways, this differe departure from the more narrow right-du tic of the common law. In the face of that to be closely attuned to what Congre quence-a public law model of standinging to people complaining of opportunityCongress has not provided otherwise. He that listeners to radio, breathers of air in tims of discrimination, and others shoul to prevent the sorts of injuries that th designed to prevent. This understandin ensure that agencies adhere to the will of tion of "injury" would track the best unde to the national legislature in light of its g tions. 
Other considerations support this basi tion between regulated objects and regulat shaky conceptual foundations.6s The pu lation might well be counted as bene statutory and common-confers on the that are advantageous to their interests. of regulation might well be regarded a 64 Of course, risk management was a goal of the com Economic Analysis of Law (4th ed 1992). But the common la in the kinds of structural reform sought by modern reg 65 See note 59 infra. law-statutory and commo interests that they would p cases, the distinction betw take the common law as th and this judgment, howeve theory, ought not to be mad contrary views from Cong ensure that modern standin Deal shift in national legisla 
Moreover, it is plausible to t programs are at least somet the implementation process.6 to exert continuing influen cost barriers to exerting suc lic interest" organizations c tional problems. Often stat by a process of inadequate im of political pressure by reg adequately countered by th Whether or not transaction reason to believe that regu systematic disadvantage co if this is right, an asymme that lies at the heart of the from Congress' own standp nize insufficient enforceme the same time subjecting ag review.68 This result is hardl enacting regulatory statutes. 
Nor is it entirely persuasiv be required to resort to pol be able to win in court only them to victory. This mea 66 See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutional 67 See, e.g., The Politics of Regulati Bureaucracy (1990). There is a compl James Tierney, Organized Interests and 68 To say all this is hardly to argue t pathologies in the regulatory state. Th supra note 62; Cass R. Sunstein, After 
COURT have-in the important sense-alread cess. To this extent, judicial review h processes by testing agency decisions aga tions, which are the ultimate source o 
Perhaps these ideas do not apply wh source of the plaintiffs' claims. In such demonstrate the "passive virtues"69 an to deliberate as long as possible. It seems will be cautious about allowing plaintif ruling on legislative or executive actio sonable to say that courts should not r stitution creates private rights of acti generally require a discrete harm to a di ing a case based solely on the Constitutio ing a cause of action.70 But statutory ca The argument for judicial refusal to hea weaker when plaintiffs are complainin forbids legislative action, but that a de requires a regulatory agency to take ac a case of that sort, considerations of de than against access to court. There is administrative or bureaucratic deliberation from an attack based on a statute where an interest protected by that statute is at stake. In any event, the regulated entities are, by hypothesis, entitled to judicial relief; they need not resort to the political process. Here too it is important to avoid building an asymmetry into the law of standing.71 None of this means that plaintiffs need not show an interest at all. But it does mean that in deciding whether a legal interest is at stake, the constitutional considerations do not counsel against granting standing to people who invoke "opportunity-type" harms. 
The same considerations suggest the difficulty of invoking Article II as a basis for denyin says that the President sha executed." Its basic purpose of enacted law. To be sur laws. But it does not forbi agency has failed to execu quired to do. Of course th to require agencies to enfo legal requirements to this e in the cases at hand. Articl the law. Suits by beneficia of executive default on that mine the allocation of pow so if a genuine legal claim of action is the best reading 
I think that these conside sions. First, Warth itself cause the plaintiffs' claim w ably right for the Court before assessing that claim. ences between constitution standing. Second, Allen an ing cases. Northeastern Cont could well have been desc applicable requirements. T outcomes in these cases wo assessment of the liabilit another. Perhaps Congress in that event, both cases but as a reading of the key Northeastern Contractors o that when Congress has be to characterize their injuri to opportunities. It follow began this essay, a creative 72 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for a late the relevant injury in such a wa standing.73 It also follows that the pu to fit well with most of current law, Wright as tax cases; emphasizing the d tional and statutory cases; and seeing requiring a more definite plan on the pa like the equivalent of a bid in Northeaste 
If the public law model is to be resi should adopt a clear statement principle, at the behest of large numbers of reg to require the executive to enforce th require an explicit congressional state ground concerns that are constitutional first and adjudication last, and that insis tial control over the enforcement proces principle should be adopted, but it is its apparent adversary-the public la approach would have the large benefit o tractors together with a set of cases easily coexist. In other words, both of discussed here would serve to synthesi with the complex body of law that pr 
Northeastern Contractors is the Court's first sustained encounter with a key issue in the new law of standing: the appropriate characterization of injuries. The Court's conclusion is unobjectionable, and there is nothing terribly wrong with the particular reasoning that underlay that conclusion. Section 1983 grants a cause of action to all those whose federal rights have been invaded by state law. The contractors in Northeastern Contractors complained that the set-aside program violated their constitutional rights. The Equal Protection Clause safeguards not particular outcomes, but general opportunities; and if the plaintiffs were correct on the merits, their legal rights had been violated. 
The basic problem with Northeastern Contractors is conceptual, 73 For some qualifications, see Sunstein, Standing and the Privatization of Public Law, supra note 58, at 1467-69. and though it does not bear goes very deep. The case e case, a fundamental probl assumption, key to Data P fied without reference to Whether there is an injur what the law says. The Cour Contractors confirm the decide the case without re Protection Clause. The case the view, vindicated by con istrative Procedure Act, th tion whether some source of law has conferred a cause of action on the plaintiff. 
Although a trend in this direction would be salutary, the Court has a large task of sorting out the relations among its previous decisions, nearly all of which ignore the issue of how to characterize injuries for purposes of standing. Northeastern Contractors fits poorly with the many cases in which the Court assumed or asserted a narrow characterization of the relevant injury. In all of those cases, the Court might easily have done what it did in Northeastern Contractors. It now remains to decide how the question of characterization is to be resolved. 
I have suggested here that the answer lies in positive law; it depends on congressional (or constitutional) instructions. Recognition of this point would itself be a significant advance insofar as it would maintain fidelity with both the Administrative Procedure Act and relevant constitutional provisions. But often congressional instructions are unclear, and they must be constructed on the basis of an understanding of the legislative and constitutional background. In the modern regulatory state, statutes are typically designed to restructure incentives, to diminish risks, or to protect opportunities, rather than to guarantee particular results to particular people. If this is correct, a broad characterization of the injury is generally appropriate in administrative law cases. Hence the strategy used in Northeastern Contractors-recharacterization of the 74 See also the discussion of the "zone" test, note 2 supra. 75 See Sunstein, supra note 17, for details. injury so as to ensure compliance with ought to be broadly generalizable. 
An alternative view would suggest that background, and the need for judicial forcement programs, standing ought gress has expressly granted standing harm, one that can be described in dis is at stake. This view would have the a Northeastern Contractors and a number on apparently similar facts. And altho alternative is ultimately unsound, the favor, for it would also have the virtu fundamental flaw of Data Processing, is both desirable and inevitable for co instructions, rather than to pretend to basis of "injury in fact" alone. 
of Chicago 
0 1993 VOLUME 60 NUMBERS 3 & 4 
SUMMER/FALL 1993 Words, Conduct, Caste 
Cass R. Sunsteint 
How do we know what counts as speech and what counts as conduct? When is government disabled from regulating conduct that is intended to express ideas? What is the relationship between constitutional principles of equality and constitutional principles of free expression? And how do these questions bear on current controversies over pornography and hate speech? In this Essay, I propose some answers to these questions. I offer these general propositions: 
commitment to equality should be understood as a prohibition against systems with caste-like features. Courts should play a cautious role t Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, The University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science.'For financial support I am grateful to The Russell Baker Scholars Fund and The James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. This Essay was originally produced for the conference, "Speech, Equality, and Harm: Feminist Legal Perspectives on Pornography and Hate Propaganda," held at The University of Chicago Law School on March 3-5, 1993; the purpose of the presentation was to provide a broad overview of legal questions raised by controls on hate speech and pornography. In putting the presentation together, I draw on a several other writings, especially Cass R. Sunstein, Democracyand the Problemof Free Expression (Free Press, 1993), which puts the arguments offered here in the context of a much broader discussion of the meaning of the free speech principle. Related issues are discussed in Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitutionchs 7-8 (Harvard, 1993). The reader is asked to make allowances for an essay originally intended for oral presentation. in eliminating the caste-like features of current society; the job of implementation belongs mostly to the elected branches of government. Although speech is hardly the principal culprit, some forms of expression can contribute to the maintenance of such systems. 
meaning of the First Amendment if they are intended and received as part of the exchange of ideas. 
speech-regulable only under the rarest circumstances-if they are intended and received as part of public deliberation about some issue. Through this distinction, I mean to reassert the line between political speech on the one hand and other forms of communication on the other. 
as part of the exchange of ideas are not protected by the First Amendment at all. 
independent unlawful act. 
To decide First Amendment cases, these propositions are hardly enough. It is necessary to look not only at whether and how "speech" is involved, but also at the means by which government regulates speech. There are three principal kinds of restrictions on speech: viewpoint-based, content-based, and content-neutral.1 Government cannot regulate speech on the basis of viewpoint; that is, it may not single out for approval or disapproval a particular point of view. Content-based but viewpoint-neutral regulation is presumed unconstitutional, but it is acceptable in certain, narrow circumstances. Content-neutral restrictions are evaluated through a balancing test, one that looks at the extent of the harm, the existence of alternative outlets, the availability of less restrictive means of regulation, and so forth. 
These general propositions lead to some concrete conclusions for hate speech and pornography: 
as speech. In some circumstances, it is high-value speech. Much racist speech belongs at the free speech core because it is a selfconscious contribution to social deliberation about political issues. Government may, of course, regulate such speech through the trespass laws or through other content-neutral methods. In many of 
I The best discussions are Geoffrey R. Stone, Content Regulation and the First Amendment, 25 Wm & Mary L Rev 189 (1983); Geoffrey R. Stone, Content-NeutralRestrictions,54 U Chi L Rev 46 (1987). the hard cases, the question is whether the relevant regulation is adequately neutral. 
restrictions on hate speech if the speech in question is not reasonably taken to be part of the exchange of ideas. Colleges and universities ought to have mildly broader authority over hate speech, because restrictions on some such speech may be necessary to the educational mission. 
not plausibly intended or received as a contribution to political deliberation, and they fall within the low-value category. They may be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing of harm than the First Amendment requires for regulation of political speech. 
analyzed in either of two ways. We might treat discrimination, if purely verbal, as low-value speech, regulable because of the distinctive harms it causes. Alternatively, we might say that some forms of discrimination amount to the commission of acts that may be prohibited by law. 
There is a broader agenda behind these claims. Sometimes constitutional doctrine seems to have lost sight of the point of central constitutional commitments. Sometimes the commitment to free speech seems like an abstraction insufficiently closely connected with democratic goals, or indeed with any clearly describable set of governing aspirations. A good first step is to insist that the First Amendment has a point, or a set of points, that this includes the promotion of a well-functioning democratic system, and that the interpretation of the Amendment should have this goal in mind. Similarly, the commitment to equality sometimes seems to have lost sight of its original foundations in the commitment to the rejection of the system of caste. Sometimes it seems as if equality, as a constitutional concept, has no clear connection to this commitment, or to any identifiable commitment at all. Of course there are sharp institutional limits on the capacities of courts to promote the goals of the Civil War Amendments, as the framers were well aware.' Enforcement of those goals now seems to have fallen to other branches-a highly salutary development-and when Congress and the President have attempted to carry forward their constitutional responsiblities, courts should be hospitable rather than grudging. 
' See text accompanying notes 9-11. 
This Essay is organized into five sections. Section I briefly sets out an equality principle that bears on free speech problems. Using conventional doctrinal categories, Section II offers an argument for allowing regulation of certain forms of pornography and hate speech. Section III discusses the view that regulation of this kind is impermissibly selective. Section IV attempts to sort out some complex issues involving the distinction between words and conduct. Section V outlines some possible directions for the future; it pays special attention to the possibility of preventing harms through strategies that do not raise First Amendment problems. 
I. THE ANTICASTE PRINCIPLE-AND FREE SPEECH 
I am concerned here with the relationship between equality and free speech. To discuss that relationship, we must first identify the appropriate conception of equality. At the origin, the central target of the Fourteenth Amendment was not irrational distinctions based on race, but rather the system of racial caste in-American society.3 For those who ratified the post-Civil War Amendments, the problem was that the law had contributed to a system of caste based on race, thought to be a morally irrelevant characteristic. 
Those who framed and ratified these Amendments were aware that the system of racial hierarchy had often been attributed to nature. Thus in the aftermath of the American Civil War, it was expressly urged, "God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree. ' '4 In the same period, antidiscrimination law was challenged squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "unnatural relation . . . to each other."' The post-Civil War Amendments thus rejected the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy. The framers thought this hierarchy was a function not of natural difference but of law, most notably the law of slavery and 
I See Charles Fairman, Does The Fourteenth Amendment Incorporate the Bill of Rights: The Original Understanding,2 Stan L Rev 5, 21-24, 138-39 (1949); Cass R. Sunstein, The PartialConstitution340-41 (Harvard, 1993). 
4 Speech of Representative M.L Southard, 43d Cong, 1st Sess (Jan 7, 1874), in 2 Cong Rec app 1, 3. 
5 43d Cong, 2d Sess (Fed 4, 1875), in 3 Cong Rec 983 (statement of Representative Eldredge). the various measures that grew up in the aftermath of abolition.6 The animating purpose of the Civil War Amendments was an attack on racial caste. 
We might similarly understand the problem of sex discrimination as the existence of a caste-like system, based on gender and often operating through law. That system, like the racial caste system and others as well, is often attributed to "nature" and "natural differences." Consider here Mill's remarks: 
But was there any domination which did not appear natural to those who possessed it? . . . So true is it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that everything which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men being a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears unnatural.7 A principal feature of the caste system based on gender consists of legal and social practices that translate women's sexual and reproductive capacities into a source of second-class citizenship. Consider, for example, inequalities in political influence, the disproportionate subjection of women to poverty and sexual violation, and differences in educational opportunity and health care.8 
In these circumstances, I suggest that the appropriate equality principle in the areas of both race and sex equality is an opposition to caste. The legal objection should be understood as an effort to eliminate, in places large and small, caste-like discrimination rooted in race and gender. The controlling principle is not that blacks and women must be treated "the same" as whites and men, but that blacks and women must not be second-class citizens. 
With respect to vindication of the anticaste principle, there are important differences between the obligations of the courts and 
Consider, for example, Senator Pratt's remarks during debate on proposed amendments to the Civil Rights Act of 1875: "You object because they have been a servile race and are as yet unfit to perform the duties of citizenship. But who made them slaves and kept them in ignorance?" 43d Cong, 1st Sess (May 20, 1874), in 2 Cong Rec 4082. 
John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women, reprinted in John M. Robson, ed, 21 Collected Works of John StuartMill 259, 269-70 (Toronto, 1984). Compare this description of attitudes in prerevolutionary America: 
So distinctive and so separated was the aristocracy from ordinary folk that many still thought the two groups represented two orders of being .... Ordinary people were thought to be different physically, and because of varying diets and living conditions, no doubt in many cases they were different. People often assumed that a handsome child, though apparently a commoner, had to be some gentleman's bastard offspring. Gordon S. Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution 27 (Knopf, 1992). 
" See Mary Becker, Politics,Differences and Economic Rights, 1989 U Chi Legal F 169, for a discussion of many of these inequalities. the obligations of legislatures. It should not be forgotten that the nation originally anticipated legislative enforcement of the obligations of the Civil War Amendments.9 Indeed, the judicial enforcement of the Fourteenth Amendment stands as one of the most profound ironies in constitutional history. In the aftermath of the Dred Scott decision, the ratifiers anticipated legislative rather than judicial implementation of the Civil War Amendments, and Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment was thought especially important.10 
History aside, a high degree of judicial caution is justified on many grounds. Courts lack the relevant factfinding abilities and policymaking competence. Because their judgments are not selfimplementing, judges often fail when they attempt to produce large-scale social reform.1" There are also serious problems of democratic legitimacy when courts seek to introduce large changes on their own. For these reasons, courts ought to play a cautious role in the elimination of caste. But the need for judicial caution should not obscure the substantive point: The anticaste principle lies at the heart of the constitutional prohibition, and that principle imposes substantial duties on Congress and the President. 
The concept of caste by no means defines itself. I will have to offer a brief and inadequate account here. 12 In so doing I do not suggest that the caste-like features of all societies containing race and sex inequality are the same. Certainly, the American system of race and sex discrimination is far less oppressive than most systems of racial and gender caste. But I do claim that the caste-like features are what justify social and legal concern. 
The motivating idea behind an anticaste principle is, broadly speaking, Rawlsian in character. 3 It holds that without very good reasons, social and legal structures ought not to turn morally-irrelevant differences into social disadvantages, and certainly not if the disadvantage is systemic. A difference is morally irrelevant if it has no relationship to individual entitlement or desert. Race and sex are certainly morally irrelevant characteristics in this sense; the bare fact of skin color or gender does not entitle one to social superiority. Of course, individual needs may depend in part on race or gender, and those needs may bear on what government should 14 
A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines in multiple important spheres of life, and applies in realms that relate to basic participation as a citizen in a democracy. These realms include education, health care, freedom from private and public violence, wealth, political representation, and political influence. 15 The anticaste principle means that one group ought not to be systematically beneath another with respect to basic human capabilities and functionings.1' A particular concern is that self-respect and its social bases ought not to be distributed along the lines of race and gender. 17 The social practices in a system of caste produce a range of obstacles to the development of self-respect, largely because of the presence of the morally irrelevant characteristic that gives rise to caste-like status. 
In the areas of race and sex discrimination, the problem is precisely this sort of systemic disadvantage. A social or biological difference systematically subordinates the relevant group-not because of "nature," but because of social and legal practices. The resulting inequality occurs in multiple spheres and along multiple indices of social welfare: poverty, education, health, political power, employment, susceptibility to violence and crime, and so forth. 8 That is the caste system to which the legal system should respond. This point does not deny the fact of biological difference or even biological disadvantage. I do not claim that there would be equality in the state of nature, a question that is irrelevant for our purposes. 9 The point is that social and legal practices make biological differences count, or matter, and this point is not falsified by showing what would happen in "nature." What is at issue is whether the social and legal practices are justified. 
Very provisionally, I propose that the free speech principle attempts to protect all symbols, whether or not words, that contribute to the exchange of ideas. (I offer many refinements and qualifications below.) Thus understood, the free speech principle can march hand-in-hand with the anticaste principle, and there is usually no tension between them. When tension does arise, courts ought to minimize infringements on either principle. But it is certainly imaginable that unrestricted speech can contribute to gender and racial caste. For example, a principal feature of a caste system consists of disproportionate subjection to public and private violence. Acts that are symbolic and expressive in character-like some lynchings and some rapes-are important features of a constitutionally unacceptable caste system. But the problem is not limited to expressive acts. It is plausible that in their production and use, some forms of pornography are associated with violence against women. 20 It is also plausible that both pornography and racial hate speech have corrosive consequences on the self-respect of women and blacks. In these circumstances, unrestricted speech may contribute to the maintenance of a system with castelike features. 
The constitutional task then is to interpret the free speech and anticaste principles in such a way as to accommodate both aspirations. We might perform this task in two ways. First, the definition of protected speech could seek to exclude the most damaging forms of expression, on the theory that those forms do not belong in the "top tier" of constitutional protection and can be regulated because they cause sufficient harms. Second, the government might be permitted to justify certain narrow restrictions on speech by reference to the Civil War Amendments, by claiming that the interest in equality is sufficiently neutral and weighty to support those restrictions.21 I will invoke both of these strategies below. 
CONVENTIONAL DOCTRINE 
In this Section, I set the debate over pornography and hate speech in the context of general First Amendment doctrine.22 Current law distinguishes between low-value and high-value speech; it treats bribery, perjury, unlicensed medical and legal advice, misleading commercial speech, and much else as bannable on the basis of a lesser showing of harm.23 An approach of this sort is not only embedded in current law; it is also practically unavoidable. There is no way to run a system of free expression without making distinctions between different forms of speech in terms of their centrality to free speech ideals. I suggest that much pornography stands far afield of those ideals and is regulable because of the tangible harms that it causes. Hate speech often does stand at the free speech core, but it can be regulated (a) in a content-neutral way, as through the trespass laws, and (b) with narrow controls on epithets amounting to "fighting words." I also suggest that colleges and universities should have mildly greater authority over this form of speech. 
A now-familiar position, originally developed by Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon, has emerged on the question of legal control of pornography.24 The precise nature of this position is of course a matter of controversy. As I shall present the argument here, the basic claim is that sexually explicit speech should be regulated not because it is sexually explicit (the problem of "obscenity") but because and when it merges sex with violence (the problem of "pornography"). The problem of pornography does not stem from offense, from public access to sexually explicit materials, from an unregulated erotic life, or from violation of traditional values or community standards. Instead, the problem consists of tangible real-world harms, caused by the portrayal of women and children as objects for the control and use of others, most prominently through sexual violence. The objection to pornography is thus closely associated with the anticaste principle, as that principle manifests itself in many efforts to prevent sex-related violence. 25 
My argument here thus deals with pornography that involves violence or coercion 26 and with the claim that pornography should be regulated because and when it harms women. Not all of those who focus on this problem understand it in this way. Some people treat pornography as a problem of sex discrimination not only because of its association with coercion and violence, but also because it is connected with subordination and dehumanization more generally.27 It is certainly reasonable to think that non-violent material might portray women in a subordinate way, or treat women as objects for the use and control of others, and that here too there is reason for legal concern. If we moved beyond coercion and violence, we might ask more broadly about the role of pornography in creating inequality through the sexual subordination or objectification of women. I restrict the discussion here, however, to pornography that is associated with violence or coercion either in its production or in its use. I do so for two reasons. First, subjection to violence and coercion is an important ingredient in sexual inequality. Second, the broader understanding of the harms that pornography produces raises trickier First Amendment difficulties; it is helpful to begin with a relatively narrow understanding. 
The approach I am discussing involves not a criminal ban, but a civil remedy for those who can prove actual harm as a result of pornography. 8 This remedy would work most simply on behalf of women abused in the production of pornography. It would also offer a tort-like remedy for women who can prove, under normal le25 See MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified at 32-45, 166-95. 
26 1 use the words "violence" and "coercion" in their most conventional sense. It is possible that someone could be coerced to participate in nonviolent pornography, and this could be tortious under the approach I am suggesting. 
217See, for example, Rae Langton, Whose Right?: Ronald Dworkin, Women, and Pornographers,19 Phil & Pub Aff 311, 335-36 (1990) (interpreting MacKinnon's argument). MacKinnon's own position on this is complex. Subordination is her principal target, not simply violence; but I think that violence or coercion in some form underlies much of the argument and almost all of her examples. See MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified at 32-45, 166-95. 
28 See MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified at 175-95, 200-05. gal standards, that they have been harmed by the use of pornography to stimulate sex crimes. 29 In both cases, the usual remedy would be an award of monetary damages for actual harm. In some circumstances, a victim might also seek an injunction to prevent continued distribution or use of harmful material. For example, a woman forced to participate in a pornographic movie might be permitted to enjoin further sale of the movie. 
Under this approach, the category of regulable speech might be relatively broad or extremely narrow. We might, for example, adopt the basic approach but decide to ensure protection for all material with serious social value. We might also refuse to regulate speech unless it has little real cognitive content. Or we might seek to regulate a subcategory of obscenity defined in terms of harms to women. In any case, the category of regulable speech could prove to be much smaller than the category now subject to regulation under the antiobscenity approach. This important point is often missed. The real difference between this approach and the current focus on obscenity 0 lies not in greater breadth of coverage but in its emphasis on discrimination and harm to women rather than offense or contemporary community standards.31 
How is the First Amendment issue affected if women injured by pornography are given a civil action and if criminal prosecutors have no enforcement authority? In some ways, the civil action helps alleviate the First Amendment concerns. There is a special problem whenever the government proceeds against speech that it deems harmful, and a private suit does not pose this problem. In particular, there might seem to be no free speech problem if a woman injured in the production of pornography brings suit to recover damages for the harms done to her.32 On the other hand, the 2' See Marianne Wesson, Girls Should Bring Lawsuits Everywhere... Nothing Will be Corrupted:Pornographyas Speech and Product, 60 U Chi L Rev 845 (1993) (in this issue). 
30 See Miller v California,413 US 15 (1973). The Miller standard defines obscenity as material that (a) under contemporary community standards appeals to the prurient interest; (b) "depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law"; and (c) taken as a whole "lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value." Id at 24. 
31 See Elena Kagan, Regulation of Hate Speech and PornographyAfter R.A.V., 60 U Chi L Rev 873, 878-79 (1993) (in this issue). 
11 To be sure, it is sometimes the case that the state cannot punish speech that is produced through illegality; it may punish the illegality but not the publication. See New York Times v United States, 403 US 713, 730-40 (1971) (White concurring) ("Pentagon Papers" case). This idea makes most sense when (a) the speech is high-value; (b) the punishment of the illegality should provide sufficient deterrence, that is, there are no special reasons to think that a ban on publication is a necessary adjunct to the criminal law; or (c) both. state is unquestionably involved when it awards damages for harms done by speech, and we know from New York Times v Sullivan3 that the First Amendment imposes barriers to government efforts to force speakers to pay for the real costs that their speech produces. The parallel to New York Times is very close if the government says that anyone who produces art and literature must pay for injuries that result from his work. The question is not limited to material containing sexual violence. Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment is said to have been followed by a series of copycat murders in Russia. 
Serious constitutional problems would arise if government were to say that all speakers must pay the victims to restore losses from any crimes proximately resulting from their speech. First, any judge or jury decision about causation might well be unreliable, suspect, or affected by bias of various sorts. Second, the actor, not the speaker, should normally bear the burden for harm, at least when the normal First Amendment standards have not been met.34 (This concern does not arise when the actor is the speaker.) And at least if we are talking about speech that is genuinely in the First Amendment core, New York Times seems to say that government may not require speakers to "internalize" the costs of what they say.35 The Court's rationale is that cost-internalization will impose an excessive chilling effect on valuable speech.3 6 It is possible to question this view,3 7 but it seems to be the law, and so long as it is, a civil action for harms that result from speech is not fundamentally different from criminal prosecution. Aside from the case of a damage remedy for harms to participants in pornography, as to which the free speech concerns seem minimal, 38 I will therefore proceed on the assumption that as far as the First Amendment is concerned, the civil and criminal remedies stand on the same basic ground. The assumption may not be accurate insofar as we are dealing with speech far afield from the free speech core. But I will put this point to one side. 
33 376 US 254, 267-83 (1964). 
3, See Brandenburgv Ohio, 395 US 444 (1969) (articulating the current standard for punishing speech that constitutes "seditious advocacy"). 
35 376 US at 267-83. 36 Id. 
(discussing non-speech-chilling methods of compensating victims of speech-related harms). 38 See note 32 and accompanying text. 
It is often suggested that the antipornography position raises especially serious free speech questions and that the antiobscenity and "no regulation" positions are far preferable. 9 In fact, however, there is a quite straightforward argument for regulating at least some narrowly defined class of pornographic materials. The first point, made by traditional obscenity law as well, is that much pornographic material lies far from the center of First Amendment concern.4  Under current doctrine, and under any sensible system of free expression, speech that lies at the periphery of constitutional concern may be regulated on a lesser showing of harm than speech that lies at the core. 
To be sure, it is not simple to define the core and the periphery. Debates over that issue are a staple of First Amendment controversy.4 1 Familiar organizing theories look to whether the speech at issue is connected with the exchange of ideas4, or is intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation about some issue.4" This latter position, with roots in James Madison, seems to me most plausible,4 but under nearly any standard, at least some pornographic materials will be easily classified in the free speech periphery. Such materials fall in the same category as misleading commercial speech, libel of private persons, conspiracies, unlicensed medical or legal advice, bribes, perjury, threats, and so forth. These forms of speech do not appeal to deliberative capacities about public matters, or about matters at all-even if this category is construed quite broadly, as it should be, and even if we insist, as we should, that emotive and cognitive capacities are frequently intertwined in deliberative processes and that any sharp split between "emotion" and "cognition" would be untrue to political discussion. Many forms of pornography are not an appeal to the exchange of ideas, political or otherwise; they operate as masturbatory aids and do not qualify for top-tier First Amendment protection under the prevailing theories. 45 
An important qualification is necessary here. Those who write or read sexually explicit material can often claim important expressive and deliberative interests. 46 Sexually explicit works can be highly relevant to the development of individual capacities. For many, they are important vehicles for self-discovery and self-definition.41 In light of the complexity of sexuality, the same might be said of some of the most graphic forms of sexually explicit material, even if they feature violence. Perhaps such speech is not intended and received as a contribution to democratic debate. But the development of individual capacities is instrumental to democratic characteristics, 4s and in any case it might be urged that the presence of expressive and deliberative interests qualifies material for treatment as within the free speech core. 
In this space I cannot fully evaluate this view. No one has set out an approach to free speech value based on expressive and deliberative value. Such an approach would, however, have a questionable historical pedigree. Wherever it may stand in philosophy, it appears to be something of a newcomer to our constitutional tradition. Moreover, it does not connect well with an understanding of when government's motives are least likely to be trustworthy.4 9 In any case, the approach appears to fit poorly with both existing law and ordinary convictions about particular cases. For example, child pornography and scientific speech might well be able to claim expressive and deliberative interests, and it seems hard to claim '5 To be sure, pornography is political in the sense that it has political consequences. But this does not mean that it is political in the First Amendment sense of that word. Much speech that does not belong in the top tier-misleading commercial speech, attempted bribery of public officials-has political consequences. If speech qualifies for the top tier whenever it has such consequences, almost all speech would so qualify, and First Amendment doctrine would be made senseless. Instead, the test is whether it is intended and received as a contribution to democratic deliberation-and much pornography fails that test. It is true that the recent attack on pornography has drawn attention to its political character, but this fact does not undermine the First Amendment argument, since the First Amendment conception of "the political" is properly and importantly different from the conception of "the political" in popular discussion. 
4' See Joshua Cohen, Freedom of Expression, 23 Phil & Pub Aff (forthcoming, 1993). 47 See Robin West, The Difference in Women's Hedonic Lives: A Phenomenological Critique of Feminist Legal Theory, 3 Wis Women's L J 81, 116-33 (1987). 
4' As Meiklejohn urged in his extended conception of the political. See Alexander Meiklejohn, The FirstAmendment Is An Absolute, 1961 S Ct Rev 245. 
49 I discuss the relevance of these concerns in Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Expression ch 5 (cited in note 22). that they belong in the free speech core. If they did, they could not be regulable in light of the stringent standards applied to material within the core. To be sure, such materials are associated with harm; but for material in the core, the proper approach would be to attack the offending conduct directly rather than the speech, and to allow the speech so long as the Brandenburgv Ohio50 standard has not been met. These considerations suggest that material ought not to belong in the free speech core, or in any top tier of protection, by virtue of its connection with deliberative and expressive interests, even if it is assumed that pornography is wellconnected with those interests. 
I do not claim that expressive and deliberative interests are irrelevant. When they are at stake, the material at issue is entitled to at least a degree of constitutional protection. It cannot be banned or controlled without a showing of genuine harm-much like commercial speech, private libel, and scientific speech. But because at least some sexually explicit material is far from the center of constitutional concern, it can be regulated on the basis of a lesser showing of harm. 
Pornographic material causes sufficient harms to justify regulation under the more lenient standards applied to speech that does not fit within the free speech core. Of course it is possible to question the extent of the relevant harms; the empirical debates are complex, and I will only summarize some of the evidence here. But the harms do create a far stronger case for regulation than underlies the antiobscenity position, which relies on less tangible aesthetic goals and on the more vague idea of adherence to conventional moral standards. Notably, the relevant harms consist of acts committed against women by men. The category of regulable speech would therefore less plausibly include homosexual pornography, for which the same showing of harm cannot be made (so far as I am aware). 
The harms fall in three categories. 1 First, the existence of the pornography market produces a number of harms to models and actresses. 5 2 Many women, usually very young, are coerced into pornography. Others are abused and mistreated, often in grotesque ways, once they enter the pornography "market." To be sure, most 50 395 US 444 (1969). 
"1The following argument draws upon Cass R. Sunstein, Pornographyand the First Amendment, 1986 Duke L J 589, 591-602. 
"' See the summary in US Department of Justice, Attorney General's Commission on Pornography, 1 FinalReport 888-89 (US GPO 1986). women who participate are not so abused. It is therefore tempting to respond that government should adopt a less restrictive alternative. Rather than regulating the speech, government should ban the coercion or mistreatment, as indeed current state law does. Usually this strategy is indeed better and even constitutionally required. 3 But in this peculiar setting, such an alternative would be a recipe for disaster, because it would simply allow existing practices to continue. The enforcement problems are so difficult that restrictions on the material are necessary to supplement the criminal ban. 4 
Second, it is reasonable to think that there is a causal connection between pornography and violence against women. 5 The extent of the effect and the precise relationship between exposure to pornographic and sexual violence are sharply disputed. No one suggests that sexual violence would disappear if pornography were eliminated, or that most consumers of violent pornography act out what they see or read. But a review of the literature suggests a reasonable legislature could conclude that pornography does increase the incidence of sexual violence against women. The evidence includes laboratory experiments, longitudinal studies of the effects of increased availability of pornography, and victim and po53 It is by no means clear that government can ban speech merely because there is illegality in its production or acquisition. See New York Times v United States, 403 US 713 (1971) (allowing publication of material that was acquired unlawfully). Especially when the material belongs in the free speech top tier, the proper remedy is to prevent the illegality rather than to prevent the publication, at least if the Brandenburgstandard cannot be met. In most cases, government should be required to proceed against the offending conduct. But in the context of pornography, these strictures should not apply. By hypothesis, the material is not in the top tier, and for reasons stated in the text, it seems inadequate to require the government to proceed against the conduct. 
The Court recognized this point in the context of child pornography in New York v Ferber,458 US 747, 759-61 (1982). 
Pornography:Research Findings and Policy Implications 86-107 (Free Press, 1987); Mary R. Murrin and D.R. Laws, The Influence of Pornographyon Sex Crimes, in W.L. Marshall, D.R. Laws, and H.E. Barbaree, eds, Handbook of Sexual Assault: Issues, Theories, and Treatment of the Offender 73 (Plenum, 1990); Edward Donnerstein, Pornography:Its Effect on Violence Against Women, in Neil M. Malamuth and Edward Donnerstein, eds, Pornography and Sexual Aggression 53 (Academic Press, 1984); Attorney General's Commission on Pornography, 1 FinalReport at 888-89. On the problem of causation, see Frederick Schauer, CausationTheory and the Ca 
" See Donnerstein, Linz, and Penrod, The Question of Pornographyat 172; Anthony D'Amato, A New Political Truth: Exposure to Sexually Violent Materials Causes Sexual Violence, 31 Wm & Mary L Rev 575 (1990); Robert C. Post, CulturalHeterogeneity and Law: Pornography,Blasphemy, and the FirstAmendment, 76 Cal L Rev 297, 325-26 (1988). lice testimony.57 All three sources indicate a plausible connection between exposure to sexually violent material and sexually violent acts. 
Evidence of this kind presents severe methodological problems. Laboratory experiments may inadequately connect to the real world, longitudinal studies cannot easily control for other variables, and victim and police testimony is anecdotal. Even if there were a close causal connection between pornography and real-world violence, social science would have a hard time proving it. But the current evidence is sufficiently suggestive to indicate that the real question is not the existence of a causal connection but its degree. In light of current information, it would be reasonable for a legislature to think that there would be genuine benefits from regulation of violent pornography. 
These first two arguments-harm to participants and a causal connection with violent acts-suggest that antipornography legislation should be addressed only to movies and pictures, and not the written word. Of course it is only in movies and pictures that abuse of participants will occur. (One might similarly support a law against child pornography in movies and print while allowing written essays that amount to child pornography.) Moreover, the evidence on pornography as a stimulus to violence deals mostly with movies and pictures, and the immediacy and vividness of these media suggest a possible distinction from written texts. I do not discuss the exact breadth of an antipornography statute here. But the possibility of exempting written texts, no matter what they contain, suggests the weakness of the objection from neutrality: a statute that exempts written texts is very plausibly treated as harmbased rather than viewpoint-based.58 
The third and most general point is that pornography promotes degrading and dehumanizing behavior toward women. Significantly, this behavior includes a variety of forms of illegal conduct, prominent among them sexual harassment. The pornography industry operates as a conditioning factor for some men and women, a factor that has consequences for equality between men and women. These conditioning effects are associated with harmful consequences for self-respect. Of course, pornography is more symptom than cause; but it is cause as well. One need not believe " See Section Ill.A. that the elimination of pornography would bring about sexual equality, eliminate sexual violence, or change social attitudes in any fundamental way in order to agree that a regulatory effort could reduce violence and diminish views that contribute to existing inequalities. 
Invoking the injury to self-respect, a common argument holds that this dehumanizing behavior has the effect of "silencing" women: making them believe that their opinions are of less importance, will be ignored, will meet social sanctions, or worse. 59 It is surely reasonable to think that such silencing occurs. But hard questions are raised by the claim that the argument from "silencing" properly plays a significant role in the First Amendment inquiry. This form of silencing is produced by social attitudes resulting from speech itself, and perhaps one cannot find that to be a reason for regulation without making excessive inroads on a system of free expression. Many forms of speech do indeed have silencing effects, and this is not a sufficient reason to regulate them.60 There are two problems here. First, it is uncertain whether the form of silencing that results from speech itself should be, in principle, a basis for regulating speech. Certainly in general it seems right to say that people intimidated by the speech of others should learn not to be intimidated, rather than receive a right to silence intimidating speech. 1 Second, even if we resolve the question of principle in favor of the "silencing" argument, government institutions are peculiarly unlikely to be able to make reliable judgments on this issue. It is plausible to think that would-be speakers are often silenced by especially vigorous challenges, and government regulation of those challenges, based on "silencing," might well be rooted in objectionable motivations and untrustworthy conclusions. Much remains to be done on this difficult subject. But in the area of pornography regulation, it seems best to avoid the most controversial and adventurous claims, and so I will not rely on the silencing argument here. 
Taken as a whole, these considerations suggest a quite conventional argument for regulation of pornography, one that fits well with the rest of free speech law. For example, misleading commercial speech is regulable because it is not entitled to the highest 5 See MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified at 181, 188-89 (cited in note 24). 10 See Dworkin, Two Concepts of Liberty at 107-09 (cited in note 39). 
61 Under some narrow circumstances, this conclusion may not hold. The university setting is a possible example in that certain sorts of abusive faculty speech may silence student speech. form of protection and because the harms produced by such speech are sufficient to allow for regulation. The same is true of libel of private persons, criminal solicitation, unlicensed legal or medical advice, and conspiracy. Certain forms of pornography should be approached similarly. Indeed, the argument for regulation-in view of the nature of the material and the evidence of harm-seems more powerful than the corresponding argument for many forms of speech now subject to government control. Thus far, then, the hard issues have to do with the appropriate breadth and clarity of any prohibition, not with the basic approach. 
Hate speech raises quite different issues from pornography. Hate speech is often part and parcel of public debate on certain questions; pornography is not. Many forms of pornography are far from the center of constitutional concern; nothing of this sort can be said for the many kinds of hate speech that are designed and received as judgments about certain social questions. If restrictions on hate speech cover not merely epithets but also speech that is part of social deliberation, they appear overbroad and unconstitutional for that very reason.6 2 Speech that is intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation is constitutionally protected even if it amounts to hate speech-even if it is racist and sexist. 
In a famous case, Justice Frankfurter, speaking for a 5-4 majority, seemed to reject this view. Beauharnais v Illinois3 upheld an Illinois law making it unlawful to publish or exhibit any publication that "portrays depravity, criminality, unchastity, or lack of virtue of a class of citizens, which [publication] exposes the citizens of any race, color, creed or religion to contempt, derision, or obloquy or which is productive of breach of the peace or riots. 64 The law was applied to ban circulation of a petition urging "the need to prevent the white race from becoming mongrelized by the negro," and complaining of the "aggressions, rapes, robberies, knives, guns and marijuana of the negro. 6 5 
" Doe v University of Michigan, 721 F Supp 852, 864-66 (E D Mich 1989) (invalidating university hate speech regulation); UWM Post,Inc. v Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin, 774 F Supp 1163, 1172-78 (E D Wis 1991) (same). 
6- 343 US 250 (1952). 
14 Id at 251, quoting Ill Rev Stat ch 38(1)  471 (1949), codified at Ill Crim Code  224a (1979). 
65 343 US at 252. gitimate? The point bears on almost all efforts to regulate hate speech.8 
Subject matter restrictions are not all the same. We can imagine subject matter restrictions that are questionable ("no one may discuss homosexuality on the subway") and subject matter restrictions that seem legitimate ("no high-level CIA employee may speak publicly about classified matters relating to the clandestine affairs of the American government."9 ) As a class, subject matter restrictions appear to occupy a point somewhere between viewpoint-based restrictions and content-neutral ones. Sometimes courts uphold such restrictions as a form of permissible content regulation. For example, the Court has permitted prohibitions of political advertising on buses 00 and of partisan political speech at army bases. 101 These cases show that there is no per se ban on subject matter restrictions. When the Court upholds subject matter restrictions, it is either because the line drawn by government gives no real reason for fear about lurking viewpoint discrimination, or (what is close to the same thing) because government is able to invoke neutral, harm-based justifications for treating certain subjects differently from others. In raising this issue, hate speech restrictions pose many of the same problems discussed above in connection with pornography. 
If the subject matter restriction in the cross-burning case is acceptable, it must be because the specified catalogue of regulated speech is sufficiently neutral and does not alert the judge to possible concerns about viewpoint discrimination, or because (again a closely overlapping point) it is plausible to argue that the harms, in the specific covered cases, are sufficiently severe and distinctive to justify special treatment. This was the issue that in the end divided the Supreme Court. 
In his separate opinion in R.A.V., Justice Stevens argued that the harms were indeed sufficiently distinctive. He wrote: "Just as Congress may determine that threats against the President entail more severe consequences than other threats, so St. Paul's City 93 In the following discussion, I draw on Cass R. Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning, 106 Harv L Rev 741, 759-66 (1993), though I have made a number of new points here. See also Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Expression ch 7 (cited in note 22), which discusses R.A.V. and the issue of viewpoint discrimination in more detail. 
" This example comes from Snepp v United States, 444 US 507, 510-13 (1980) (per curiam) (upholding the imposition of a constructive trust on a book produced by a former CIA agent in contravention of a nondisclosure agreement with the government). 100Lehman v Shaker Heights, 418 US 298, 304 (1974). 101 Greer v Spock, 424 US 828, 838 (1976). Council may determine that threats based on the target's race, religion, or gender cause more severe harm to both the target and society than other threats."' 1 2 In his view, "[t]hreatening someone because of her race or religious beliefs may cause particularly severe trauma or touch off a riot. . . such threats may be punished more severely than threats against someone based on, for example, his support of a particular athletic team." 10 3 Thus there were "legitimate, reasonable, and neutral justifications" for the special rule.104 Justice Stevens' argument is highly reminiscent of the claim that antipornography legislation should be seen as an acceptable response to harm rather than an imposition of a point of view. 
In its response, the Court said that this argument "is wordplay. ' !1 05 The reason that a race-based threat is different "is nothing other than the fact that it is caused by a distinctive idea, conveyed by a distinctive method. The First Amendment cannot be evaded that easily."10 6 But at first glance, it seems that a legislature could reasonably decide that the harms produced by this narrow category of hate speech are sufficiently severe as to deserve separate treatment. Surely it seems plausible to say that crossburning, swastikas, and the like are an especially distinctive kind of "fighting word"-distinctive because of the objective and subjective harm they inflict on their victims and on society in general. An incident of cross-burning can have large and corrosive social consequences. A reasonable and sufficiently neutral government could decide that the same is not true for a hateful attack on someone's parents, union affiliation, or political convictions. 
A harm-based argument of this kind suggests that in singling out a certain kind of regulable speech for special controls, the legislature is responding not to ideological message, but to real-world consequences. Unlike in most cases of viewpoint discrimination, it appears that we have no special reason for suspecting government's motives. According to Justice Stevens, a state is acting neutrally if it singles out cross-burning for special punishment, because this 1.2 R.A. V., 112 S Ct at 2565 (Stevens concurring in the judgment). The relevant statute is 18 USC  871 (1988). See also 18 USC  879 (1988) (regulating threats against former presidents). Justice Stevens was responding to the majority's argument that laws increasing the penalty for threats against the President are permissible because the reasons for these laws relate to the justification for punishing threats in the first place. See text accompanying note 92. 
103 112 S Ct at 2561 (Stevens concurring in the judgment). 104 Id. 105Id at 2548 (majority opinion). 216Id. kind of "fighting word" has especially severe social consequences. According to the Court, on the other hand, a state cannot legitimately decide that cross-burning is worse than (for example) a vicious attack on your political convictions or your parents. A decision to this effect violates neutrality. But the Court's conception of neutrality seems wrong. There is nothing partisan or illegitimate in recognizing that this unusual class of fighting words causes distinctive harms. 
My claim here is very narrow; I do not argue for broad bans on hate speech. Most such bans would indeed violate the First Amendment because they would forbid a good deal of speech that is intended and received as a contribution to public deliberation. But here we are dealing with hate speech limited to the exceedingly narrow category of admittedly unprotected fighting words. The argument on behalf of this kind of restriction might benefit from Justice Stevens's analogy to the especially severe legal penalties directed toward threats against the President.10 7 Everyone seems to agree that this restriction is permissible, because threats against the President cause distinctive harms and can therefore be punished more severely. But if the government can single out one category of threats for special sanction because of the distinctive harm that those particular threats cause, why cannot the same be said for the fighting words at issue here? 
Justice Scalia's response is probably the best that can be offered: "[T]he reasons why threats of violence are outside the First Amendment (protecting individuals from fear of violence, from the disruption that fear engenders, and from the possibility that threatened violence will occur) have special force when applied to the President."108 But exactly the same could be said of the hate speech ordinance under discussion: the justification for the fighting words exemption has special force because of the context of racial injustice. Here, as in cases involving threats against the President, we are dealing with a subcategory of unprotected speech challenged as involving impermissible selectivity, and the justification for the selectivity involves the particular harms of the unprotected speech at issue. That justification seems sufficiently neutral. 
Consider another analogy. Supplemental criminal penalties for racially-motivated "hate crimes" seem to be a well-established part of current law, appearing in the statutes of the vast majority of 107 Id at 2565-66 (Stevens concurring in the judgment). See note 102. 108 Id at 2546 (majority opinion). states. 09 Do those penalties violate the First Amendment? In Wisconsin v Mitchell1,10 a unanimous Supreme Court said that they do not, and I believe the Court was right. But consider the fact that the government imposes the additional penalty because it thinks that hate crimes create distinctive subjective and objective harm. The distinctive harm is produced in part because of the symbolic or expressive nature of hate crimes. This justification is the same as that in the cross-burning case. This does not mean that it is impossible to draw distinctions between enhanced penalty statutes and "hate speech" laws. But it does mean that if the justification for the hate crimes measures is sufficiently neutral, the same should be said for narrow restrictions on hate speech. 
Perhaps we can respond to this claim with the suggestion that hate crimes are not speech-not because of discredited versions of the "speech/conduct" distifiction, but because hate crimes are not intended and received as contributions to deliberation about anything and do not communicate ideas of any kind."' This was one of the Supreme Court's major arguments in the Mitchell case. According to the Court, cross-burning is speech, whereas hate crimes are unprotected conduct." 2 Perhaps laws that regulate conduct are permissible even if some of the relevant conduct is communicative. Moreover, it may well be true that most hate crimes do not have a communicative intention or effect. But some certainly do. The lynching of black people, for example, is thoroughly communicative. When a hate crime has a communicative purpose, are enhanced penalties invalid if the reason for enhancement is what I have described? I do not believe that there is anything illegitimate about the state's belief that the subjective and objective harm justify enhancement. 
In Mitchell, the Supreme Court relied heavily on this belief." 3 For this reason, the line between R.A.V. and Mitchell seems quite thin. As I have emphasized, all the justices in R.A.V. agreed that the expressive acts at issue were unprotected by the First Amendment, because the state court had said that the statute was limited to unprotected "fighting words." R.A.V. therefore involved constitutionally unprotected acts, just as Mitchell did. And everyone in Mitchell agreed that the First Amendment issue did not disappear simply because conduct was involved. The Court said that "a physical assault is not by any stretch of the imagination expressive conduct protected by the First Amendment"114; but it rightly added that a genuine First Amendment issue is raised when a state "enhances the maximum penalty for conduct motivated by a discriminatory point of view." 1 5 
Understood in these terms, R.A.V. and Mitchell are very close, and the Court did not adequately explain the difference between them. Perhaps the major distinction between the two cases is that the Minnesota law in R.A.V. covered speech as well as expressive conduct, and cross-burning is characteristically expressive -whereas the enhancement statute was directed only at conduct, and many hate crimes are not intended or received as a communication on anything at all. For this reason, the enhancement penalty can perhaps be seen as a content-neutral restriction on conduct that is not ordinarily expressive, while the Minnesota law was a content-based restriction on speech, including expressive conduct. This is a reasonable distinction. But it is not clear that the distinction really rescues the R.A.V. outcome. The question remains whether the state had a legitimate justification for doing what it did. The Mitchell Court emphasized that the state treated "biasinspired" conduct more severely because that conduct inflicts "greater individual and societal harm." 1 6 This was Justice Stevens's argument in R.A.V., and it seems to have equal weight in both cases. 
One final analogy seems to suggest that R.A.V. is wrong on the neutrality issue. The civil rights laws say that you may not fire someone because of his race, even though you" may fire him for many other reasons.1 17 On one view, the civil rights laws are therefore unconstitutional, because they penalize someone for his politi214 Id at 2199. 115 Id. 26 Id at 2201. 
"1 See Civil Rights Act of 1964,  703(a)(1), as amended, codified at 42 USC  2000e2(a)(1) (1988); McDonnell Douglas Corp. v Green, 411 US 792, 800-03 (1973) (discussing burdens of proof in employment discrimination cases and noting that although an employee does not have a right to a job, she has the right to a workplace free from unfair discrimination). cal convictions. In this respect, they are similar to a prohibition on flag-burning. They single out conduct (or mere words) for special penalty simply because of the message communicated by that conduct. 
To be sure, most discriminatory discharges are not intended to communicate a general political message, but some discharges do have such an intention. It would be most adventurous, to say the least, to claim that the First Amendment prohibits application of the civil rights laws to politically-motivated discrimination. But if R.A.V. is right on the issue of neutrality, it is not simple to explain why the civil rights laws survive constitutional attack. Perhaps it could be said that most discriminatory discharges are not communicative in nature, and that the claim that such discharges are distinctly harmful has a sufficiently neutral justification. Perhaps it could be said that the civil rights laws sweep up communicative discharges as an incidental part of an effort to prevent a class of activities defined in terms of conduct rather than expression. But if the justification behind the civil rights laws is in fact sufficiently neutral, the same seems to be true of the statute in the R.A. V. case. 
The arguments from these analogies are not decisive. Plausible distinctions can be drawn. But some of the distinctions seem thin. I conclude that as the Mitchell Court held, the First Amendment is not violated by laws enhancing the punishment of hate crime. I also conclude that no serious First Amendment problem is raised by the civil rights laws, even though those laws sometimes punish speech. And a restriction on cross-burning and other symbolic hate speech is a permissible subject-matter classification, so long as the restriction is narrowed in the way described. 
In R.A.V. the Supreme Court offered a tempting and clever response: 
In its practical 'operation, moreover, the ordinance goes even beyond mere content discrimination to actual viewpoint discrimination. Displays containing some words-odious racial epithets, for example-would be prohibited to proponents of all views. But 'fighting words' that do not themselves invoke race, color, creed, religion, or gender-aspersions based upon a person's mother, for example-would be seemingly usable ad libitum in the placards of those arguing in favor of racial, color, etc. tolerance and equality, but could not be used by that speaker's opponents. . . . St. Paul has no such authority to license one side of a debate to fight freestyle, while requiring the other to follow Marquis of Queensbury Rules. 118 The short answer to this argument is that the ordinance at issue does not embody viewpoint discrimination as that term is ordinarily understood. Viewpoint discrimination occurs if the government takes one side in a debate, as in, for example, a law saying that libel of the President will be punished more severely than libel of anyone else. Viewpoint discrimination is not established by the fact that in some hypotheticals, one side has greater means of expression than another, at least-and this is the critical point-if the restriction on means has legitimate, neutral justifications. 
We can make this point by reference to the fact that it is a federal crime to threaten the life of the President. Recall that the Supreme Court said in R.A.V. that such statutes are permissible even though they make distinctions within the category of unprotected threats. Imagine the following conversation: John: "I will kill the President." Jill: "I will kill anyone who threatens to kill the President." John has committed a federal crime; Jill has not. In this sense, the presidential threat case involves the same kind of de facto viewpoint discrimination as the R.A.V. case. If it is not unconstitutional for that reason"'-and the Court indicated that it is not-the Court should not have found the statute in R.A.V. viewpoint discriminatory. 
The point has general implications. It suggests that the state can attack hate speech dealing with certain matters, as Stanford has done, without running afoul of the prohibition on impermissible selectivity. It also suggests that some narrowly drawn viewpoint discriminatory restrictions-protecting against hate speech directed at blacks or women-might well be permissible.1 2 0 Thus, for example, a locality might decide that cross-burning and hate speech directed against blacks pose special risks not posed by hate speech directed against whites. For the reasons I have outlined, I do not believe that there is anything illegitimate about a public judgment that hate speech against blacks creates distinctive subjective and objective harm. 
112 S Ct at 2547-48. 11 See the discussion of pornography in Section III.A. 120 See Amar, 106 Harv L Rev at 151-61 (cited in note 21). 
In the previous Section, I argued for the constitutionality of narrow restrictions on hate speech, but R.A. V. suggests that courts might invalidate such restrictions as unacceptably selective. After R.A.V., a university might well be forbidden to single olit for punishment speech that many universities want to control: (a) a narrowly defined category of insults toward such specifically enumerated groups as blacks, women, and homosexuals; or (b) a narrowly defined category of insults directed at individuals involving race, sex, and sexual orientation. Under current law, a restriction that involves (a) is viewpoint-based, and to that extent worse than the restriction in R.A. V. itself. A restriction that involves (b) is a subject-matter restriction, not based on viewpoint, 121 but it is still impermissibly selective in the same sense as the restriction invalidated in the R.A.V. case. We might think that the conclusions in R.A.V. are incorrect in principle, because there are sufficiently neutral grounds for restrictions (a) and (b): A public university could neutrally decide that epithets directed against blacks, women, and homosexuals cause distinctive harms.1 22 But this conclusion is hard to reconcile with the R.A.V. decision. 
If such conclusions are to be resisted-if R.A.V. does not apply to the campus-it must be because public universities can claim a degree of insulation from judicial supervision. The principal point here is that colleges and universities are often in the business of controlling speech, and their controls are hardly ever thought to raise free speech problems.2 3 There are major limits on what students can say in the classroom. For example, they cannot discuss the presidential election if the subject is math. The same is true for faculty members. Universities also impose restrictive rules of decorum and civic participation. A teacher can even require students to treat each other with basic respect. It would certainly be legitimate to suspend a student for using consistently abusive language in the classroom, even if that language would receive firm constitutional protection on the street corner. 
The problem goes deeper. A paper or examination that goes far afield from the basic approach of the course can be penalized without offense to the First Amendment. Usually the penalty is a 121 But see R.A.V., 112 S Ct at 2545. 122 Recall that a private university can do whatever it likes. 
123 See Mary Becker, ConservativeFreeSpeech and the Uneasy Case for JudicialReview, 64 U Colo L Rev 975 (1993). I am very grateful to Mary Becker for helpful discussion of the subject in this section. form of subject-matter restriction, but it may well turn out to be viewpoint-based in practice. In many places, a student who defends fascism or communism is unlikely to receive a good grade, and not only because it is hard to argue well on behalf of fascism or communism. Viewpoint discrimination is undoubtedly pervasive in practice, and even though it is usually objectionable, courts cannot and perhaps should not attempt to police it. This is not so only for judgments about student performance. Initial hirings, tenure, and promotion all involve subject matter restrictions, and in practice viewpoint discrimination as well. 
These examples do not mean that any and all censorship is acceptable in an academic setting. It does not even mean that existing viewpoint discrimination is constitutionally acceptable. A university can have a good deal of power over what happens in the classroom, so as to promote the educational enterprise, without also being allowed to decree a political orthodoxy by discriminating on the basis of viewpoint. If a public university were to ban students from defending certain causes in political science classes, a serious free speech issue would be raised. There are therefore real limits to permissible viewpoint discrimination within the classroom, even if it is hard for courts to police the relevant boundaries. 
Certainly the university's legitimate control over the classroom does not extend to the campus in general. A university could not say that outside of class, students can talk only about subjects of the university's choice (excluding, say, a war, or feminism, or race relations, or AIDS). From these various propositions, we might conclude that the university can impose subject-matter or other restrictionson speech only to the extent that the restrictionsare reasonablyrelated to its educational mission. If a university is to educate, it must discriminate on the basis of quality and subject matter, and these forms of discrimination will inevitably shade over into certain forms of viewpoint discrimination.12 But in cases in which the educational mission is not reasonably at stake, restrictions on speech should not stand. Certainly this would be true in most cases in which a university attempts to impose an orthodoxy, whether inside or outside the classroom. 
How does this bear on the hate speech issue? Perhaps a university could permissibly conclude that its educational mission requires unusually firm controls on this kind of speech, so as not to 124 In this respect, the question of speech restrictions in the university is close to the question of selective funding of art. See Sunstein, The PartialConstitutionat 308-15 (cited in note 3). compromise the values of education itself. The university might think, for example, that it has a special obligation to protect its students as free and equal members of the community. It might believe that certain narrowly defined forms of hate speech are highly destructive to the students' chance to learn. Perhaps a university should have more leeway to restrict hate speech than a state or locality, precisely because it ought to receive the benefit of the doubt when it invokes concerns of this kind. At least courts should be reluctant to second-guess judgments of this sort when the university can plausibly claim that it needs a relatively narrow restriction in order to safeguard the educational mission. 
This point bears on two issues. First, it suggests that universities might be allowed to enact mildly broader restrictions than states and localities. The educational mission ought to grant the university somewhat greater room to maneuver, especially in light of the complexity and delicacy of the relevant policy questions. Second, the point suggests that courts should be reluctant to find viewpoint discrimination -or impermissible selectivity. Perhaps there should be a presumption in favor of a university's judgment that hate speech directed at blacks or women, or showing racial or gender hatred, produces harm that is especially threatening to the educational enterprise. 
This conclusion is buttressed by two additional factors. First, there are numerous colleges and universities; many students can choose among a range of alternatives, and a restriction in one, two, or more imposes an extremely small incursion into the system of free expression. Colleges that restrict a large amount of speech may find themselves with few students. Second, the Constitution is itself committed to the elimination of second-class citizenship, and this commitment makes it hard to say that an educational judgment opposed to certain narrowly described forms of hate speech is impermissibly partisan. 
I think that an analysis of this kind makes sense for narrowly defined hate speech restrictions. Consider the Stanford regulation described above. If a public university adopted that restriction, the major constitutional problem, fueled by the outcome in R.A.V., would not be breadth but unacceptable selectivity. Why has the university not controlled other forms of "fighting words," like the word "fascist," or "commie," or "bastard"? Does its selectivity show an impermissible motivation? Should we find its selectivity to be impermissibly partisan? I do not think that we should. Notwithstanding R.A.V., a university could reasonably and neutrally decide that the harms caused by the regulated fighting words are, at least in the university setting, more severe than the harms caused by other kinds of fighting words. 
IV. CONDUCT As SPEECH, WORDS As CONDUCT 
Free speech law has been bedeviled by the "speech-condu~t" distinction. In this Section, I argue that some forms of conduct should be treated as speech, but that some words should not be treated as speech. A general conclusion follows from the argument: The constitutional protection of "speech" refers to something that we should consider a term of art. That term covers all symbols that are intended and received as expressing messages. Under this view, some words are not "speech" within the meaning of the First Amendment, and some "conduct" does qualify as speech. Under this view, we should make no rigid distinction between "speech" and "conduct." We should distinguish instead between words and conduct, with the understanding that the Constitution protects speech, a term that includes some, but hardly all, words and conduct. And under this view, a theory of free speech value, referred to in Section I, helps explain why some conduct is regulable only (a) on a content-neutral basis or (b) when government can make the ordinary showing required for restriction of political speech. 
What counts as speech within the meaning of the First Amendment? Justice Black famously thought that the Constitution protected "speech" absolutely and "conduct" not at all.125 But no purely formal test can tell us what falls within the two categories. Someone burns a flag as part of a war protest. The "conduct" communicates ideas. Moreover, it communicates ideas in a distinctive way. Should it be excluded from the category of "speech"? Surely not. "Speech" consists of symbols that communicate messages. 128 Words are simply one kind of symbol. The category of speech is not coextensive with the category of words. Flag-burning, insofar as it is a symbol that communicates a message, is speech. It may be regulable on a content-neutral basis, or even on the basis 121See Cohen v California, 403 US 15, 27 (1971) (Blackmun dissenting) (an opinion that Justice Black joined, arguing that petitioners' action was unprotected because it was conduct and not speech); see also Thomas Emerson, The System of Freedom of Expression 8, 17-18 (Random House, 1970) (making an expression-action distinction). 126 See Amar, 106 Harv L Rev at 133-37 (cited in note 21). of content when there is harm of a certain nature and degree, but that is a different matter. 
Words then are signs-symbols of expressive meaning. But the category of symbols of expressive meaning is not limited to words. Sign language, for example, does not consist of words, but it is entitled to constitutional protection. The same is true for the "act" of wearing an armband,12 7 or of joining a demonstration. 128 The constitutional protection of speech should not stop with words. The term "speech" is best understood to include all symbols of expressive meaning, whatever the form of those symbols. 
The point seems inescapable if we accept the view that speech qualifies for protection if it is intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation about some issue. If speech is entitled to special protection because and when it does this, any sharp line between "words" and "expressive conduct" becomes extremely artificial. Some forms of conduct, like flag-burning, have an expressive and communicative character. Their purpose and effect are to express a political message. They are part of social deliberation. In this way they qualify as "speech," regulable only if the government can generate a strong, sufficiently neutral justification. Or suppose that we accept a narrower understanding of the free speech principle, believing speech to be protected, or specially protected, if and only if it is connected with democratic processes. A sharp line between words and expressive acts cannot be justified in terms of democratic values, for much expressive conduct is intended and received as a contribution to democratic discussion. The constitutional protection covers "speech"; acts that qualify as signs with expressive meaning should qualify as speech within the meaning of the Constitution. 
This is hardly to say that the government can never regulate expressive conduct. On the contrary, government often does have a special and sufficiently neutral justification for regulating such conduct. Protection of the President from assassination, or the Lincoln Memorial from graffiti, 129 can be supported by reference to powerful, legitimate reasons, such as keeping the peace and protecting public monuments. When the government regulates expressive conduct, it is usually trying to promote a purpose entirely unrelated to the suppression of communication. But some restrictions on expressive conduct, like those on flag-burning, may well not be 127 Tinker v Des Moines Community School District, 393 US 503, 505-07 (1969). 128 Edwards v South Carolina,372 US 229, 235-38 (1963). 128 Texas v Johnson,491 US 397, 434 (1989) (Rehnquist dissenting). supportable in this way. Thus in the flag-burning cases, the Supreme Court emphasized that the government did not have a reason for regulation independent of the government's objection to the ideas that flag-burning embodies. The justification for regulation was illegitimate.1 30 
On this view, the speech-conduct distinction has been made necessary not because expressive conduct is undeserving of protection, but because government frequently has a sufficiently strong and neutral justification for regulating conduct. The key to the distinction, often thought to lie in the determination of whether the conduct qualifies for initial protection, actually lies in the fact that government often has good reasons for regulating it-just as it has good reasons for applying the trespass laws to political demonstrations." 1 Now that much expressive conduct has been understood to qualify for protection, courts can focus on what is really the central question: the existence of acceptably strong and neutral justifications. 
Thus far, then, we have seen that conduct carrying a political message qualifies as speech within the meaning of the First Amendment. The same conclusion rightly follows for other conduct, like dance, that is both expressive and communicative even if nonpolitical. When it is expressive and communicative but nonpolitical, such conduct belongs in a second tier of protection, at least if we accept a two-tier view of the First Amendment. 32 Such speech is regulable more easily than political speech, but it is protected in the absence of neutral justifications.3' 3 1 o See id at 410-14; United States v Eichman, 496 US 310, 315-18 (1990). 131 See Adderley v Florida,385 US 39 (1966). 
131 See Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Expression ch 5 (cited in note 22). On this view, government would have the power to regulate some forms of (for example) nude dancing. Such dancing does warrant at least a degree of First Amendment protection. It is both communicative and expressive. But a state could plausibly decide that some kinds of nude dancing are associated with a range of serious real-world harms, including prostitution, criminal activity of various sorts, and sexual assault. See Barnes v Glen Theatre, 111 S Ct 2456, 2468-71 (1991) (Souter concurring). At least this is so if government can muster evidence that the regulated form of nude dancing does produce these harms, which would be sufficient to justify regulation under the lower-tier speech standards. I conclude that the Supreme Court was probably correct to rule that the First Amendment did not protect nude dancing in the Kitty Kat Lounge. Id at 2463. This is so even if the majority erred in emphasizing the state's moral reservations about public nudity rather than the existence of more tangible harms. See id at 2461-63. Of course, a quite different issue would be raised in a case in which nude dancing was part of a political protest, or if the particular acts could not plausibly be associated with real-world harms. 
...It is insufficient to respond that if people want to convey a message, they should be required to do so through words rather than action. A message cannot be so readily separated from the particular means chosen to express it; if the means are changed, the message 
I conclude that what is apparently conduct should qualify as speech for First Amendment purposes if it is intended and received as an effort to communicate a message. This conclusion might seem to have extreme consequences-for example, an attempted assassination of the President may well qualify as speech. It does not raise anything like a serious free speech question, however, because government can invoke strong content-neutral reasons for protecting the President's life. But under this test, flagburning, draft-card burning, and cross-burning all qualify as speech; indeed this classification is the easy part of the relevant cases. 
We have seen that some of what is familiarly characterized as "conduct" actually counts as speech. The converse may also be true. Suppose that the head of a computer company asks the head of other computer companies whether they might not agree to fix prices. Suppose we have nothing but talk, but the talk produces a conspiracy in violation of the Sherman Act. Or suppose that an employer discharges an employee by saying, "I don't want people of your religion to work for me." There is no free speech problem in either case. But it is not easy to explain why. 
I suggest that we might distinguish among (a) speech that amounts to the commission of an independently illegal act or that is evidence that the act has been committed; (b) speech that creates or constitutes conditions that can constitutionally be made illegal; (c) speech that leads immediately to illegality; (d) speech that is produced as a result of illegality; and (e) speech that leads proximately, but not immediately, to illegality or otherwise to constitutionally cognizable harm. My hypothesis is that speech falling in category (a) is properly treated as action, even if it consists solely of words. Words and conduct that fall within categories (b), (c), (d), and (e) all qualify as speech, and they may be regulable only under the standards set out in Sections I and IV.A. 
Let us start with a straightforward explanation for the wordsconduct distinction. Perhaps words are classified as conduct when they offer no ideas. If the First Amendment protects the exchange changes too. Form and content cannot be distinguished so simply. Flag-burning conveys the relevant message more sharply and distinctively than anything else. If the speaker says instead, "My country is doing wrong," the message will be so muted as to be fundamentally transformed. The availability of purely verbal alternative forms of expression cannot therefore justify failing to protect expressive conduct. of ideas, then price-fixing agreements, threats, bribes, and unlawful discharges probably do not count as speech within the meaning of the Amendment. Alternatively, suppose that the First Amendment protects speech that is intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation about some issue,134 or that words deserve to be treated as speech when their regulation would be an insult to the moral autonomy of the speaker or the listener.13 5 On either of these views, the suppression of some words may not threaten the values that underlie a system of free expression and may be justified if there are sufficient real-world harms. 
On this view, the treatment of some words as "conduct" provides a shorthand, if misleading, description of a more extended argument that the speech at issue does not promote First Amendment values and creates sufficient harms to be regulable under the appropriate standards. Here, the regulation of the relevant forms of speech does not really stem from a distinction between speech and conduct, but instead from an argument about value and harms. When it is said that certain speech is regulable as "conduct," what is actually meant is that the speech at issue lies far from the center of constitutional concern and that it is harmful enough to be regulable. 
This much seems true; but I want to try a different argument. Perhaps some cases involve something that is properly characterized as conduct rather than speech. The written or oral statement, "You're fired," is an act,13 6 not merely speech, in the sense that the words are simply a way of committing an unlawful discharge. The statement, "I agree to fix prices with you," is a way of fixing prices, indeed the most efficient way of doing so. These words do not merely cause action; they constitute the relevant action. The same appears to be true of purely verbal sexual harassment. If someone says to an employee, "Sleep with me or lose your job," we say that he is committing an act of harassment. The words do not cause the act. The words are the act. The same is plausibly true of bribery, perjury, and threats. Most free speech cases-even those in which people lose their free speech claims-are very different. If a political revolutionary encourages someone to take over a building, we may have incitement, and it may be regulable; but it is not action. '3 See Scanlon, 1 Phil & Pub Aff at 214-15, 222-24 (cited in note 41). 
"" David A. Strauss, Persuasion,Autonomy, and Freedom of Expression,91 Colum L Rev 334, 353-60 (1991). 
'36The argument here obviously has connections with J.L. Austin, How to Do Things With Words (Clarendon, 2d ed 1975), but I will not deal with those connections here. 
This argument suggests that some statements are properly classified as conduct because they amount to the commission of acts that are legitimately and independently made unlawful. For example, a racially motivated discharge is low-value speech that creates harms sufficient to justify regulation. But we can also say that the discharge is an independently unlawful act. A purely verbal discharge is simply a means of committing the unlawful act. 
We are now prepared to offer some distinctions. The statement, "You're black, and therefore fired," is a version of (a). The words are simply a means of committing an independently unlawful act; they are that act. Sexual harassment can be analyzed in a broadly similar fashion. If someone says, "Sleep with me or lose your job," the statement is a way of violating the civil rights laws. Or suppose that an employer posts violent pornography all over the workplace, so that wherever a woman goes, she sees sexual violence aimed against women. It would be fully plausible to say that posting the pornography violates the civil rights laws.137 We could conclude not that the posting "leads to" or "causes" such a violation, but that it is a violation. 
But, on reflection, the sexual harassment cases fall in category (b) rather than (a). They differ from a discriminatory discharge in that the latter is independently illegal, and the words are simply evidence that a discriminatory discharge has taken place. They are evidence of the illegality because a pretextually work-related but really discriminatory discharge is also illegal, even if discriminatory words were not used. When the words are used in court, they are evidence of the underlying illegality, that is, the discharge based on a discriminatory motive. It is the discharge itself that is unlawful. There remains the question whether a discriminatorily motivated discharge can be made unlawful consistently with the First Amendment; I have discussed this issue in Section III, and in any case R.A.V. seems to suggest that Congress can constitutionally outlaw a general category of acts that includes some expressive conduct. My basic claim here is that certain verbal expression is a way of performing an illegal act, and that there is no problem in classifying such expression as the act itself, at least when the words are evidence that the illegality has occurred. 
Purely verbal sexual harassment can be made illegal, but it is not evidence of an independently illegal act. Instead it creates or 137 See Robinson v JacksonvilleShipyards, 760 F Supp 1486, 1524-25 (M D Fla 1991). This case is currently on appeal before the Eleventh Circuit. See Howard Troxler, What More Unlikely Foes? NOW vs. ACLU, St Petersburg Times 1B (Nov 4, 1991). constitutes conditions that can be made unlawful. This is true for quid pro quo harassment; it is also true of the "hostile-environment" harassment, including the pornography case. Both of these are versions of (b), and in an important way different from (a). Cases that fall in category (b) are harder than those in category (a). They are harder because the government is targeting words themselves rather than words as evidence of an independent illegality. Often the government might want to claim that a statement amounts to the commission of an illegal act, or helps create conditions that violate some law. Whether it can do so depends on the ordinary standards applied to regulation of speech. In other words, government must say something about the issues of value and harm. The view that sexual harassment is regulable under (b) depends on a resolution of those issues. 
At least in the ordinary run of cases, no serious free speech question is raised by legal controls on purely verbal sexual harassment. This is not because such harassment is conduct, but because it belongs in a lower tier of protection, and because the relevant harms are sufficient to justify regulation. A full justification of these claims would require a more extended statement than I can offer here. But it seems clear that workplace harassment is not intended and received as a contribution to the exchange of ideas, and also that it is not closely connected with speaker or (especially) listener autonomy. It is for this reason that the prevention of discrimination seems clearly sufficient to override the relatively weak free speech interests. 
Many cases of "speech brigaded with action"'' 8 are really versions of (c). Consider the words "Ready, Set, Fire" said to a firing squad; or, "Kill, Rover" said to a trained attack dog.'$9 These cases do not involve conduct, and they are also quite different from (a) and (b). We should think of them as low-value speech causing immediate harm, and therefore as readily bannable. But they do not count as conduct or action standing by themselves. 
How do pornography and hate speech fare under this approach? I believe that they generally fall in categories (d) and (e). Category (c) is inapplicable because imminent harm, let alone intended harm, can rarely be connected with any particular material.14 0 If the government is trying to regulate the material because 135 See Brandenburgv Ohio, 395 US 444, 456 (1969) (Douglas concurring). 
I'l See MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified at 156 (cited in note 24) ("But which is saying 'kill' to a trained guard dog, a word or an act?"). 
10 Thus the standards in Brandenburgare not likely to be met. it was produced through illegality-case (e)-it is trying to regulate speech, not conduct. If there is illegality in the production of the material, the case may involve acceptable regulation under category (d) but not because the material is itself "conduct." Under existing law, category (e) does not allow for regulation.' 41 It follows from all this that we cannot justify regulation of hate speech and pornography on the ground that these forms of speech constitute action-although the presence of action in the production of materials, or action as a result of the use of the materials, may be relevant to the First Amendment inquiry. An interesting question is whether we can use the pornography in the workplace example-category (b)-as a ground for saying that some pornography is action, analytically speaking. At this point it is not easy to see how this argument can be made persuasively. I conclude that most pornography is speech, not conduct, but that it is sometimes bannable for the reasons stated in Sections I and IV.A. 
I have questioned the outcomes in both R.A.V. and Hudnut. But so long as those decisions stand, there are sharp constitutional limits on regulation of hate speech and pornography. It is, of course, important to inquire whether current law is correct, especially in light of the fact that free speech doctrine sometimes changes rapidly. But it would be most disappointing if those interested in eliminating the harms caused by pornography and hate speech were to restrict themselves to criticizing what may well become firmly entrenched law. An important task for the future will be to develop responses to the new legal developments. When pornography is harmful, what approaches should be taken by those concerned with minimizing the relevant harms? If we aim to eliminate caste-like features of current systems, what approaches would make sense? 
It is clear that the prevention of violence against women-an important aspect of these caste-like features-might be made a greater priority of state and federal government. There are substantial initiatives in this direction, quite outside of the category of speech.4 2 These initiatives, sometimes criticized as an unjustified incursion into the federal structure, fit exceedingly well with the 141 See Brandenburg,395 US at 447 (speech must incite or produce "imminent lawless action"). 
142 See, for example, Violence Against Women Act of 1993, S 11, 103d Cong, 1st Sess (Jan 21, 1993). post-Civil War Constitution, which has as one of its purposes the use of federal authority to prevent the disproportionate subjection of certain groups to public and private violence. It seems clear, too, that sexual violence is not only an inadequately enforced crime; it is also an inadequately addressed tort. There should be a range of civil actions against people, including pornographers, who have abused children and women in the home or in the production of their work. An important advantage of this route is that the "reasonable doubt" standard of criminal law need not be met, and recovery can occur under the civil law's more lenient "preponderance of the evidence" standard. Here the First Amendment issues are trivial. Well-publicized tort actions might also deter criminal activity and spur new statutory initiatives. 
Moreover, content-neutral laws might be invoked to prevent hate speech, hate crimes, and injuries that result from pornography. For example, the law of trespass can and should be used against cross-burning. Universities can use general requirements of civility and decent behavior to stop hate speech-not as part of specialized speech codes, but as part of a less selective ban on conduct on campus inconsistent with educational requirements. Prosecutors can pay special attention to criminal acts that reflect racial hatred or misogyny. We should encourage greater enforcement efforts to protect against child pornography. Current obscenity law offers considerable opportunity to proceed against materials that involve violence or coercion in their production and use. When allocating scarce resources, prosecutors should proceed against such materials, not against materials that are offensive because of their sexual explicitness. 
We should also encourage much more experimentation with a wide range of different kinds of legal approaches to the problem of pornography. There is no reason for localities to believe themselves bound to take the judicially-invalidated Dworkin/MacKinnon ordinance as the universal model for regulation of pornography. A constitutional banality is pertinent here: One of the principal advantages of a federal system is that it offers enormous scope for experimentation. R.A.V. and Hudnut, taken together, mean that courts will quickly strike down many imaginable regulations of pornography. In these circumstances it makes sense to have a broad range of proposals, in order to escape the problems of selectivity, vagueness, and overbreadth. 14 3 Some localities might try, for "' Kagan, 60 U Chi L Rev at 883-901 (cited in note 31). example, to regulate a subcategory of speech that is already regulable under Miller. Other localities might combine the obscenity and pornography approaches and exempt from control all speech with serious social value. Those are simply some of a large number of possible experiments designed to do some good while increasing the chances of judicial validation. 
Finally, private or public pressure might be brought to bear against material that sexualizes violence, especially when the material appears on television or in movies. A promising model is provided by an innovative measure enacted through the initiative of Senator Paul Simon in 1990.144 Senator Simon's statute exempts from the antitrust laws any effort by the television networks to reduce violence on television. This measure does not require any agreement among the networks. It does not censor any speech.145 But it does say that an agreed-upon set of principles will not violate the antitrust laws. In this way, it encourages networks to reach agreements that would otherwise be unlawful. 
The Simon initiative is especially valuable insofar as it recognizes that competition for viewers can lead to an undesirable state of affairs, one in which there is an increasing incidence of violence. In late 1992, the networks did indeed reach a shared set of principles. 4s The agreement should significantly affect programming in 1993 and after. Among other things, the new principles say that programs should not depict violence as glamorous or as an acceptable solution to human conflict; should avoid gratuitous violence; and should avoid mixtures of sex and violence. Perhaps it will be possible to build on this idea to counteract some of the problems of the broadcasting media, without resorting to government regulation at all. 
144 Television Program Improvement Act of 1990, Pub L No 101-650, Title V, 501, 104 Stat 5127 (Dec 1, 1990), codified at 47 USC  303(c) (Supp 1992). 
145 There is, however, a possible First Amendment issue under the R.A.V. decision. It would clearly be unlawful to exempt from the antitrust laws any agreement to limit criticism of the President. The question then becomes whether a subject matter exemption, limited to violence, is unacceptably selective in the same sense as the law invalidated by the R.A.V. Court. I do not believe that there is unacceptable selectivity in the light of the absence of viewpoint discrimination, the plausibility of the claim of harm, and the lack of reason for suspicion about viewpoint discrimination. 
TV, LA Times Al (Dec 
CONCLUSION 
I have made three claims in this Essay. First, certain narrowly defined categories of pornography and hate speech can be regulated consistently with the First Amendment. They count as "low value" speech, and they cause sufficient harms to be regulable under existing standards. Broadly speaking, the argument for regulating pornography is stronger than the corresponding argument for regulating hate speech, on both the value and the harm sides; but some well-defined categories of hate speech might be subject to legal controls. Second, the prominent objections from neutrality are misplaced. Some regulations of pornography and hate speech can be neutrally justified, even if they appear discriminatory on the basis of content, subject matter, or even viewpoint. They can be neutrally justified in large part because of the anticaste principle. Third, we should jettison the "speech-conduct" distinction in favor of an approach that explores whether the symbols at issue are intended and received as a contribution to the exchange of ideas about some issue. 
Under this approach, flag-burning, cross-burning, and much else will qualify as speech, though it may be bannable because of sufficiently neutral justifications. Under this approach, moreover, some "words" do not qualify as speech, because they amount to a way of committing an independently unlawful act. These claims raise many questions and leave a number of ambiguities. But they will resolve the vast majority of issues raised by government regulation of pornography and hate speech and help orient treatment of the rest. 
I have also outlined a number of possible approaches for those who seek to prevent the harms produced by pornography, hate speech, and hate crimes. A particular priority is to attack those harms through measures that (a) do not implicate speech at all and (b) are content-neutral if they do implicate speech. Strategies of this kind cannot counteract all of the harms produced by hate speech and pornography. But they can do a great deal of good, and so long as Hudnut and R.A. V. stand as the law, they are, I suggest, among the best routes for the future. 
A more general lesson follows from these claims. The concerns about pornography and hate speech are in one sense new, but in another sense very old; they recall the original goal of the Civil War Amendments: the elimination of caste systems. As I have emphasized, the caste-like features of current practices are not as severe as those of traditional caste systems, but they are nonetheless conspicuous. An important element of those practices consists of the disproportionate subjection of women and blacks to public and private violence and to frequent intrusions on their self-respect-the time-honored constitutional notion of stigma. 147 Many imaginable limits on sexually explicit materials and on racist speech would indeed violate the First Amendment. But, I suggest that narrow and well-defined legal controls on pornography and hate speech are simply a part of the attack on systems of racial and gender caste. If they are understood in this light, and if they are appropriately narrow and clear, they can operate without making significant intrusions into a well-functioning system of free expression. 
