A New Deal for Speecht by 
(1993), THE PARTIAL CONsTrrrION (1993), and Exchange; Speech in the Welfare State: Free Speech Now, 59 U. CHI. L. REv. 255 (1992). An earlier version of this Article was presented on February 25, 1994, at a symposium entit Expression Issues, sponsored by and held at the Columbia Institute for Tele-Information (CIT), Columbia Business School, Columbia University. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor, University of Chicago and Department of Political Science. A.B., Harvard College, 1975; J.D., Harvard Law School, 1978. 
A New Deal is necessary for speech, one that would parallel the New Deal provided to property rights during the 1930s. 1 The goal of the New Deal should be to promote attention to public issues and diversity of view, and, in this way, to diminish the influence of money over the content of broadcasting. 
To compress a long story:2 Before the New Deal, the Constitution was often understood to be a constraint on government "regulation." In practice, this meant that the Constitution often prohibited governmental interference with existing distributions of rights. From this pre-New Deal view, existing distributions marked the boundary not only between neutrality and partisanship, but inaction and action as well. The rallying cry "laissez-faire" of course captured such ideas. The fear, and more important, the very concept of government intervention did the same. 
The New Deal reformers argued that this entire framework was built on fictions. Ownership rights were a creation of law. The government did not act only when it disturbed existing distributions. It was responsible for those distributions in the first instance. What people had, in markets, was partly a function of the entitlements that the law conferred on them. The notion of "laissez-faire" thus stood revealed as a conspicuous myth. 
To the reformers, different forms of governmental ordering had to be evaluated pragmatically and in terms of their consequences for social efficiency and social justice. Markets would not be identified with liberty in any a priori way; they would have to be evaluated through an examination of whether they served liberty or not. This did not mean that markets would be rejected, for they were often, as they are today, associated with liberty and productivity, and indeed with a form of equality. But interferences with markets-which are themselves made possible only by law-would be evaluated for what they did for human beings, and not taken as per se invalid. 
Unfortunately, these ideas of the New Deal have played little role in the law of free speech. That is, for purposes of speech, contempo1. Something of this general sort is suggested in Onora O'Neill, Practicesof Toleration, in DEMOCRACY AND THE MASS MEDIA 155 (Judith Lichtenberg ed., 1990); T.M. ScanIon, Jr., Content Regulation Reconsidered, in DEMOCRACY AND THE MASS MEDIA 331 (Judith Lichtenberg ed., 1990); J.M. Balkin, Some Realism About Pluralism: Legal, Realist Approaches to the FirstAmendment, 1990 DUKE L.J. 375; Owen M. Fiss, Why the State?, 100 HARV. L. REV. 781 (1987); Owen M. Fiss, FreeSpeech and Social Structure,71 IOWA L. REV. 1405 (1986). 
rary understandings of neutrality and partisanship, or action and inaction, are identical to those that predate the New Deal. The category of government "intervention" is defined accordingly. Status quo neutrality dominates the law of free expression. 
This is not to say that there is not much good in the contemporary use of pre-New Deal understandings. Free speech absolutism-even if it is wildly simplistic, even if it fails to grapple with hard cases, even if it cannot survive reflection-is an important safeguard against myopic or oppressive legislation. Nevertheless, recent First Amendment controversies in the area of broadcasting confirm the wisdom of the New Deal and show that American constitutionalism, with respect to freedom of expression, has failed precisely to the extent that it has not taken that reformation seriously enough. 
I do not mean to suggest that speech rights should be freely subject to political determination, as are, say, current issues of occupational safety and health. I do not mean to suggest that markets in speech are generally abridgements of speech, or that they usually disserve the First Amendment. Nor do I mean to say that government can favor some views over others, that free speech is a myth, or that the goal of equality ought to be balanced against the goal of free speech. But I do mean to say that at a minimum, what seems to be government regulation of speech might, in some circumstances, promote free speech, and should not be treated as an abridgement at all. I mean also to argue, though more hesitantly, that what seems to be free speech in markets might, on reflection, amount to an abridgement of free speech. Consider here Robert Hale's suggestion, capturing much of my argument, that "the power to set judicial machinery in motion for the enforcement of legal duties" should "be recognized as a delegation of state power." 3 This recognition-of prime importance in the area of broadcasting-is precisely what is missing from current free speech law. 
In this regard, however, I must make a general clarification. It will be tempting to think that the argument to follow amounts to a broad and perhaps bizarre plea for more regulation of speech. This might be so because many of the practices and conditions that I will challenge are commonly taken to involve private action and therefore are not considered to involve the Constitution at all. (Recall the state action doctrine, which stands for the proposition that private behavior Compulsion, 35 COLUM. L. REV. 149, 197 (1935). is not subject to the Constitution.)4 For example, the outcome of the "market" for expenditures on campaigns and the practices of broadcasters and managers of newspapers raise no constitutional question because presumably no state action is involved. What is constitutionally problematic, however, is government regulation of the market. 
In fact, there should be enthusiastic agreement that the First Amendment is aimed only at governmental action, and that private conduct raises no constitutional question. On this point the Constitution is clear. 5 It seems clear, too, that to find a constitutional violation, one nee.ds to show that governmental action has "abridged the freedom of speech."6 That action must usually take the form of a law or regulation. 
But if the New Deal is taken at all seriously, it follows that governmental rules lie behind the exercise of rights of property, contract, and tort. This is so especially when the law grants people rights of exclusive ownership and use of property-and emphatically when the law grants owners or speakers such rights. But it does not follow from this that private acts are always subject to constitutional constraint, or ,even that legally-conferred rights of ownership violate any constitutional provision. This is so because to find a constitutional question, it is always necessary to point to some exercise of public power.7 And to find a constitutional violation, it is necessary to show that public power has compromised some constitutional principle.8 But it does not follow that a claim on behalf of, for example, new efforts to promote greater quality and diversity in broadcasting is a plea for government intervention where none existed before. Instead, it is a claim for a new regulatory system. 
What I want to suggest first and foremost is that legal rules that are designed to promote freedom of speech and that interfere with other legal rules (e.g, the law of property) should not be invalidated if their purposes and effects are constitutionally valid.9 In fact, it may follow that some existing rules may themselves be subject to constitutional objection, and in some surprising places, if and when such rules Metropolitan Edison Co., 419 U.S. 345 (1974). 

Wilson, 405 U.S. 518 (1972). 
536 (1927). 

notes 20-22. "abridge the freedom of speech" by preventing people from speaking at certain times and in certain places. 
I 
While these remarks may seem uncomfortably abstract or unconventional, they have a clear foundation in no lesser place than New York Times Company v. Sullivan,10 one of the defining cases of modern free speech law. The Sullivan Court concluded that a public official could not bring an action for libel unless he could show "actual malice," that is, knowledge of, or reckless indifference to, the falsity of the statements at issue.1 Sullivan is usually taken as the symbol of broad press immunity for criticism of public officials. Even more, Sullivan is often understood to reflect the conception of freedom of expression advocated by Alexander Meiklejohn-a conception of selfgovernment connected to the American principle of sovereignty. 12 
What is striking about Sullivan, however, is that the lower court held that the common law of tort, and more particularly libel, was not state action at all, and was therefore entirely immune from constitutional constraint. 3 A civil action, according to the lower court's view, involved a purely private dispute. The Supreme Court quickly disposed of this objection, as seems obviously right. The Court's rationale was that the use of public tribunals to punish speech is conspicuously state action.14 What is interesting is not the Supreme Court's rejection of the no state action argument, but the fact that such an argument could be made by a state supreme court as late as the 1960s. How could reasonable judges perceive the rules of tort law as purely private? 
The answer lies in the persistence of pre-New Deal understandings in which the common law simply implements existing rights, or private desires, and does not amount to "intervention" or "action" at 
SELF-GovERNMENT 14-19 (1948). The link is made explicitly in William J. Brennan, Jr., The Supreme Court and the Meiklejohn Interpretationof the FirstAmendment, 79 HARV. L. REV. 1 (1965). 
(1964). It is notable here that in Sullivan, the government was not a party-something that distinguishes the case from most others in which First Amendment objections had been raised. But to see this as meaning that there is no state action is simply another version of the problem discussed in the text. 
all.' 5 The view that the common law of property should be taken as prepolitical and just, and as a refusal to use government power-the view that the New Deal repudiated-was the same as the view of the state supreme court in Sullivan. Reputation is of course a property interest,16 and just as in the pre-New Deal era, the protection of that interest did not appear to involve government action at all. 
The Supreme Court's rejection of that claim seemed inevitable in Sullivan itself, and indeed this aspect of the case is largely forgotten. But many aspects of current law are based on precisely the same understandings that underlie the forgotten view of that obscure court. In fact, we might generalize from Sullivan the broad idea that protection of property rights, through the law, must always be assessed pragmatically in terms of its effects on speech. This idea has major implications. In a regime of property rights, there is no such thing as no regulation of speech; the question is, what forms of regulation best serve the purposes of the free speech guarantee? 
right of access to the media, or seek controls on broadcasting in general. May broadcasters be required to be common carriers of programming, as the 1992 broadcasters deal little or not at all with issues of public importance, restricting themselves to stories about movie stars or sex scandals. Suppose, too, that there is no diversity of view on the airwaves, but instead a bland, watered-down version of conventional morality. 
What this suggests is that a large part of the problem for the system of free expression is the governmental grant of legal protectionrights of exclusive use-to institutions having huge resources with which to provide communication. 8 This grant of power-sometimes through the common law, sometimes through statute-is usually taken not to be a grant of power at all, but instead to be purely "private." Thus the exclusion of people and views from the airwaves is immunized from constitutional constraint on the theory that the act of (1951). 

102-385, 106 Stat. 1460 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 47 U.S.C.) (specifically 47 U.S.C. § 534 (Supp. IV 1992)). 
original constitutional goals: promotion of attention to public issues and opportunity to speak for diverse views. I take up the issue of scarcity and its demise below. See infra text accompanying notes 31-37. exclusion is purely private; thus rights of access to the media are thought to involve governmental intervention into the private sphere. 
It might be helpful in this regard to consider that in Sullivan, the Supreme Court said, as against a similar claim, that legal rules should be inspected for their conformity with the overriding principle that government may not restrict freedoms of speech and press: "The test is not the form in which state power has been applied but, whatever the form, whether such power has in fact been exercised."' 9 
We might apply this understanding to current problems. If the First Amendment is regarded as an effort to ensure that people are not prevented from speaking, especially on issues of public importance, then the commitments that currently dominate free speech law seem ill-adapted to current conditions. Above all, the concept of government regulation turns out to misstate important issues and sometimes to disserve the goal of free expression itself. With broadcasting, the form of the exclusion is rights of exclusion that prevent certain people from speaking, and that do so through law. 
Consider a case in which a network decides not to sell advertising time to a group that wants to discuss some public issue or to express some dissident view. Under current law, the refusal raises no First Amendment question, in part because a number of the justices-perhaps now a majority-believe that there is no state action. 20 But broadcasters are given property rights in their licenses by government, and the grant of such rights is unambiguously state action. To be sure, it is generally good to have a system in which government creates ownership rights or markets in speech, just as it is usually good to create rights of ownership, and markets, in property. But the key point is that a right of exclusive ownership in a television network is governmentally conferred; the exclusion of the would-be speakers is backed up, or made possible, by the law of (among other things) civil and criminal trespass. It is thus a product of a governmental decision. 
A system in which only certain views are expressed or made available to most of the public is a creation of law. The constitutional question is whether reforms eliminating exclusive ownership rightsor, more precisely, reforms eliminating an element of such rights by conditioning the original grant, perhaps by creating common carrier obligations-are consistent with the First Amendment. Or, to put it another way, the question is whether the government grant of exclusive ownership rights violates the First Amendment. We cannot answer such questions merely by saying that ownership rights are governmental. We need to know the purposes and effects of the grant. That question cannot be answered a priori,or in the abstract. We need to know a lot of details. 
A tempting response to these questions might be that the Constitution creates "negative" rights rather than "positive" ones, or at least that the First Amendment is negative in character-a right to protection from the government, not a right to help from the government. So stated, the claim certainly captures the conventional wisdom. Any argument for a New Deal for speech must come to terms with the view that the Constitution does not create positive rights and should not be understood to do so. 
There are two replies to this view. The first and most fundamental is that no one is asserting a positive right in these cases. Instead the claim is that government sometimes cannot adopt a legal rule that imposes a (negative) constraint on those who can speak and where they can do so. When someone with view X is unable to state that view on certain stations, it is because the civil and criminal law prohibits him from doing so. Negative liberty is indeed involved. 
This is the same problem that underlies a wide range of familiar constitutional claims; consider a ban on door-to-door soliciting. An attack on content-neutral restrictions of this kind is not an argument for positive government protection. It is merely a claim that legal rules that stop certain people from speaking in certain places must be reviewed under First Amendment principles. In fact, the response that a New Deal for speech would create a positive right trades on untenable, pre-New Deal distinctions between positive and negative rights.2 1 
The second point is that the distinction between negative and positive rights fails even to explain current First Amendment law. There are two obvious counter examples. The Supreme Court has come very close to saying that when an audience becomes hostile and threatening, the government is obligated to protect the speaker. Under current law, reasonable crowd control measures are probably constitutionally compelled, even if the result is to require a number of a positive right as one that requires for its existence some act by government, and a negative right as one that amounts merely to an objection to some such act. There is nothing incoherent about this distinction. The argument in text is directed against the view that an objection to rights of exclusive ownership is a call for a positive right; in fact that objection is mounted against something that government is actually doing. police officers to come to the scene.22 The right to speak thus includes a positive right to governmental protection against a hostile private audience. 
Or return to the area of libel. By imposing constitutional restraints on the common law of libel, the Court has held, in effect, that those who are defamed must subsidize speakers by allowing their reputation to be sacrificed to the end of broad diversity of speech. Even more than this, the Court has held that government is under what might be seen as an affirmative duty to "take" the reputation of people who are defamed in order to promote the interest in free speech. The First Amendment requires a compulsory, governmentally produced subsidy of personal reputation for the benefit of speech.2 3 
Cases of this sort reveal that the First Amendment, even as currently conceived, is no mere negative right. It has positive dimensions as well. Those positive dimensions consist of a command to government to take steps to ensure that the system of free expression is not violated by legal rules giving too much authority to private persons. In the hostile audience case, government is obliged to protect the speaker against private silencing; in the libel cases, government is obliged to do the same thing, that is, to provide an extra breathing space for speech even though one of the consequences is to infringe on the common law interest in reputation. 
In any case, a constitutional question might well be raised by a broadcasting system in which government confers on all stations the right to exclude certain points of view. In principle, the creation of that right is parallel to the grant of a right to a hostile audience to silence a controversial speaker, subject only to the speaker's power of self-help through the marketplace (including the hiring of private police forces). In the hostile audience setting, it is insufficient to say that any intrusion on the speaker is private rather than governmental. It is necessary instead to evaluate the consequences of the system by reference to the purposes of the First Amendment-just as it is necessary 379 U.S. 536, 550 (1965); Edwards v. South Carolina, 372 U.S. 229, 231-33 (1963); Kunz v. New York, 340 U.S. 290, 294-95 (1951). See also Scanlon, supra note 1, at 338-39; Fiss, supra note 1, at 1416-19 (both discussing this point). 
needs a baseline. To see reputation as part of the initial set of endowments is to proceed under the common law baseline. The social contract version of this idea (the state must protect certain rights in return for the decision of citizens to leave the state of nature) might support it. But it would of course be possible to say that on the right theory, people do not have such a right to reputation, and that therefore no subsidy is involved in the libel cases. to evaluate the consequences of any system in which property rights operate to hurt some and benefit others. 
None of this demonstrates that the creation of property rights in broadcasting fails to produce broad diversity of views and an opportunity to speak for opposing sides. Especially in a period without much scarcity, we might expect a great deal of diversity and a great deal of attention to public issues. If we have these things, the market system created by law is constitutionally unobjectionable. But it is surely imaginable that a market system will have less fortunate consequences. 
We might look in this connection at the Court's remarkable opinion in Red Lion BroadcastingCo. v. FCC2.4 There the Court upheld the fairness doctrine, which required attention to public issues and a chance to speak for opposing views. (At least it required these in theory; it was rarely enforced in practice.25 ) In Red Lion Broadcasting, the Court actually seemed to suggest that the doctrine was constitutionally compelled. According to the Court,' the fairness doctrine would "enhance rather than abridge the freedoms of speech and press,"26 for free expression would be disserved by "unlimited private censorship operating in a medium not open to all."'27 The Court suggested that as far as the First Amendment is concerned those who are licensed stand no better than those to whom licenses are refused. A license permits broadcasting, but the licensee has no constitutional right to be the one who holds the license or to monopolize a radio frequency to the exclusion of his fellow citizens. There is nothing in the First Amendment which prevents the Government from requiring a licensee to share his frequency with others and to conduct himself as a proxy or fiduciary with obligations to present those views and voices which are representative of his community and which would otherwise, by necessity, be barred from the airwaves.28 Thus the Court emphasized that the people as a whole retain their interest in free speech by radio and their collective right to have the medium function consistently with the ends and purposes of the First Amendment. It is the right of the viewers and listeners, not the right of the broadcasters, which is paramount. It is the purpose of the First Amendment to preserve an uninhibited marketplace of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail, rather than to countenance monopolization of that market, whether it be by the Government itself or a private licensee. It is the right of the public to receive suitable access to social, political, aesthetic, moral, and other ideas and experiences which is crucial here. That right may not constitutionally be abridged either by Congress or by the FCC.2 9 
Compare this suggestion from the head of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the 1960s: "It was time to move away from thinking about broadcasters as trustees. It was time to treat them the way almost everyone else in society does-that is, as businesses .... [T]elevision is just another appliance. It's a toaster with pictures. 30 
The Red Lion Broadcasting vision of the First Amendment stresses not the autonomy of broadcasters (made possible only by current ownership rights), but instead the need to promote democratic self-government by ensuring that people are presented with a broad range of views about public issues. I do not mean to defend the fairness doctrine itself, about which we need not be enthusiastic. But in a market system, basic democratic goals may be compromised. It. is hardly clear that "the freedom of speech" is promoted by a regime in which people are permitted to speak if and only if other people are willing to pay enough to allow them to be heard. 
II 
A core insight of Red Lion Broadcasting is that the interest in private autonomy from government is not always the same as the interest in free speech through democratic self-governance. To immunize broadcasters from legal control may not promote quality and diversity in broadcasting. In fact, it may be inconsistent with the First Amendment's own commitments. The question, then, is what sorts of regulatory strategies have the most beneficial effects for the system of free expression. 
We might be able to generate a First Amendment "New Deal" with proposals for legal reform. Begin with the fact that for much of its history, the FCC has imposed on broadcast licensees the so-called "fairness doctrine." As noted, the fairness doctrine requires licensees to spend some time on issues of public importance, and it creates an obligation to allow access by people of diverse views. 
The last decade, however, has witnessed a mounting constitutional assault on the fairness doctrine. One reason for this is that licenses are no longer technologically scarce; indeed, there are far 
HASTINGS CoMMIENT L.J. more radio and television stations than there are major newspapers. Also, under President Reagan the FCC concluded that the fairness doctrine violates the First Amendment because it involves an effort, by government, to tell broadcasters what they may say.31 According to this view, the fairness doctrine represents a form of impermissible government intervention into voluntary market interactions. For this reason, it is a violation of the government's obligation of neutrality and a reflection of government's respect for market outcomes. Influential judges and scholars have reached the same conclusion.32 
Note, however, that the Constitution forbids any "law... abridging the freedom of speech. '33 Consequently, we must examine whether the fairness doctrine is such a law. To its defenders, the fairness doctrine promotes "the freedom of speech," by ensuring diversity of views on the airwaves, diversity that the market may fail to bring about. In response, the FCC's attack asserts, without a sufficiently full look at the real-world consequences of different regulatory strategies, that the doctrine involves governmental interference with an otherwise purely law-free and voluntary private sphere.34 This response is far from adequate. 
It is possible, however, to adopt a presumption against rigid command-and-control approaches of the kind exemplified by the fairness doctrine without thinking that the doctrine or alternatives violates the First Amendment to the Constitution. Those entrusted with interpreting the Constitution should deal with the fairness doctrine by exploring the relationships between a market in broadcasting, alternative systems, and the goals, properly characterized, of a system of free expression. 
It seems clear that a market will provide diversity in available offerings, especially in a period with numerous outlets. So long as the particular view is supported by market demand, it should find a supplier. The broadcasting status quo is far preferable to a system of centralized government regulation, at least if such a system sharply constrains choice. Markets do offer a range of opinions and options. 
Station WTVH Syracuse, New York, Memorandum Opinionand Order,2 FCC Rcd. 5043, 5057 (1987), affd sub nom. Syracuse Peace Council v. FCC, 867 F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1989), cert. denied, 493 U.S. 1019 (1990). 
AMENDMENT 214-15 (1987). 

Fairness Doctrine Obligations of Broadcast Licensees, Report, 102 F.C.C.2d 145, 147 (1985). The enormous expansion of technology means that the number of stations may be close to infinite for all practical purposes. Perhaps people will be able to see whatever they want. A government commandand-control system, if it restricted diversity of view and attention to public affairs, would indeed abridge the freedom of speech. Nothing I have said, or will say, argues in favor of governmental foreclosure of political speech. 
We should therefore distinguish among three possible scenarios. First, the market might itself be unconstitutional if it produces little political discussion or little diversity of view. For reasons suggested below, courts should be cautious here, in part because the issue turns on complex factual issues not within the competence of judges. Second, government regulation of the market might well be upheld, as against a First Amendment challenge, if the legislature has made a considered judgment, based on a record, that the particular regulation will indeed promote free speech goals. (For reasons taken up below, this judgment may be right even in a period in which scarcity is not a problem.) Such a judgment is least objectionable if there is a problem of monopoly. Third, regulation of the market might be invalidated if it discriminates against certain viewpoints, or if it is demonstrated that the regulation actually diminishes attention to public affairs or diminishes diversity of view. On this latter, highly factual question, the legislature is entitled to a presumption of constitutionality.35 
A market will of course make it unnecessary for government officials to oversee the content of speech in order to assess its value. The fact that a market removes official oversight surely counts strongly in its favor. The restrictions of the market are content-neutral, in the sense that the content of the speech is not directly relevant to the application of property law. But the restrictions of the fairness doctrine, or any similar alternative, are content-based in the sense that any such doctrine would have to be applied with government attention to the content of the speech. 
On the other hand, a market in communications could create many problems. Take first the case of a natural monopoly. If cable companies have a natural monopoly-a complex question-government "access rights" might well be justified on the simple ground of ensuring an outcome closer to that which would be provided by a well-functioning competitive system. The problem of "bottleneck control" over access suggests that the Supreme Court should uphold must-carry, at least if these rules can be shown to help ensure access 
HASTINGS COMM/ENT W. to free programming. 36 Those rules are viewpoint-neutral; they do not favor any particular standpoint. More generally, the Court lacks the expertise to second-guess a plausible legislative judgment that a natural monopoly exists, even if that judgment is ultimately wrong. (Of course an implausible legislative judgment would be invalid.) If, then, we have a reasonable legislative judgment of monopoly, and a viewpoint-neutral response, there should be no constitutional difficulty. 
Suppose, however, that there is no monopoly, but instead a property rights regime with a well-functioning competitive system. Even under these circumstances, the constitutional issue would not be at an end. A system of competitive markets is not ordained by the First Amendment to the Constitution.37 Imagine, for example, if someone proposed that the right to speak should be given to those people to whom other people were willing to pay enough to qualify them to be heard. Suppose, in other words, that the allocation of speech rights was decided through a pricing system, like the allocation of soap, or cars, or candy. It would follow that people would be prevented from speaking if other people were not willing to pay enough to entitle them to speak. 
Surely this would be a strange parody of democratic aspirationsthe stuff of science fiction, rather than self-government. It would be especially perverse insofar as it would ensure that dissident speechexpression for which people are often willing to pay-would be foreclosed. But in many respects, this is precisely what a competitive system would produce, and indeed it is the system we now have to the extent that it is competitive. Broadcasting licenses and speech opportunities are allocated very much on the basis of private willingness to pay. 
In one respect our current system is even worse, for programming content is produced not merely by consumer demand, but also by the desires of advertisers. Viewers are in this way the product as well as its users. This introduces some large additional distortions. In any case, First Amendment issues must depend in part on the details. 
III 
Much information has now been compiled on local news, which began, incidentally, as a direct response to the FCC's fairness doctrine. In fact, very little of local news is devoted to genuine news. Instead it deals largely with stories about movies and television and with sensationalized disasters of little general interest. "The search for emotion-packed reports with mass appeal has led local television news to give extensive coverage to tragedies like murders, deaths in fires, or plane crashes, in which they often interview survivors of victims about 'how they feel."'3 
During a half-hour of news, no more than eight to twelve minutes involves news at all.39 Each story that does involve news typically ranges from twenty to thirty seconds.' Even the news stories tend not to involve issues of government and policy, but instead focus on fires, accidents, and crimes. Government stories are further de-emphasized during the more popular evening show. And even coverage of government tends to emphasize not the content of relevant policies, but instead sensational and often misleading "human impact" anecdotes. In addition, there has been greater emphasis on "features"dealing with popular actors, or entertainment shows, or even stories focussing on the movie immediately preceding the news. Economic pressures seem to be pushing local news in this direction even when reporters would prefer to deal with public issues in a more serious way.4 1 
With respect to network news, the pattern is similar. In 1988, almost sixty percent of the national campaign coverage involved "horse race" issues-who was winning, who has momentum-while only about thirty percent involved issues and qualifications.42 In the crucial period from January to June 1980, there were about 450 minutes of campaign coverage, of which no less than 308 minutes dealt with the "horse race" issues.43 
It is notable in this regard that for presidential candidates, the average block of uninterrupted speech fell from 42.3 seconds in 1968 to only 9.8 seconds in 1988."4 A statement of more than ten seconds is therefore unlikely to find its way onto the major networks. There is little sustained coverage of the substance of candidate speeches. Instead, attention is placed on how various people are doing. 1994, at 1. 
HASTINGS COMM]ENT U.. 
There has been an increase as well in stories about television and movies, and a decrease in attention to public questions.45 In 1988, there was an average of thirty-eight minutes per month of coverage of arts and entertainment news; in the first half of 1990, the average was sixty-eight minutes per month.46 According to one person involved in the industry, "By the necessity of shrinking ratings, the network news departments have had to, if not formally then informally, redefine what is news."''4 According to the Executive Producer of NBC's Nightly News, [a] lot of what we used to do is report on the back and forth of where we stood against the Russians. But there is no back and forth fainllytmheortei.meI mweiathn tnhoebtohdinygiss tpaelkoipnlge aAbRoEuttatlhkeinbgomabbo,usto.4yXou have to Note the problem of circularity here: What people are talking about is in part of function of what sorts of things are presented on the popular media. 
There is evidence as well of advertiser influence over programming content, though at the moment the evidence is largely anecdotal.4 9 No conspiracy theory will have plausibility. But some recent events are disturbing. There are reports, for example, that advertisers are having a large impact on local news programs, especially with respect to consumer reports. In Minneapolis, a local car dealer responded to a story involving consumer problems with his company by pulling more than one million dollars in advertisements.5 0 He said: "We vote with our dollars. If I'm out trying to tell a good story and paying $3000 for 30 seconds, and someone's calling me names, I'm not going to be happy."51 Consumer reporters have increasingly pointed to a need for self-censorship. According to one, "We don't even bother with most auto-related stories anymore."52 According to another, "I won't do the car repair story, or the lemon story .... It's not worth the hassle. 53 
Educational programming for children sometimes cannot acquire sponsors. It is for this reason that such programming can be found' 18, 1990, at 3, 63. 

PA. L. REV. 2097 (1992). 
Reporting?,NEWSWEEK, May 20, 1991, at 48. 
mostly on PBS.5 4 A revealing recent episode involved the effort by Turner Broadcasting Systems (TBS) and the Audubon Society to produce a program dealing with the "spotted owl" controversy between loggers and environmentalists in the Pacific Northwest. Believing that the program was biased, members of the logging community did not want it to be aired; all of the eight advertisers (including Ford, Citicorp, Exxon, and Sears) pulled their sponsorship of the program. TBS aired the program in any event, but was forced to lose the $100,000 spent on production.5 5 NBC had severe difficulties in finding sponsors for its television movie, "Roe v. Wade." Fearful of boycotts by religious groups, hundreds of sponsors solicited by NBC refused to participate.5 6 It seems highly unlikely that advertisers could be found for any program adopting a "pro-life" or "pro-choice" perspective. 
We might look as well at children's television. On ordinary commercial networks, high-quality television for children has been practically unavailable. Instead children's television has been designed largely to capture attention and to sell products. In the 1960s, the FCC issued recommendations and policy statements calling for "programming in the interest of the public" rather than "programming in the interest of salability. '57 In 1974, it concluded that "broadcasters have a special obligation to serve children, 58 and thus pressured the industry to adopt codes calling for educational and informational programs. In 1984, the new FCC Chair, Mark Fowler, rejected this approach.59 
Shortly thereafter, network programming for children dramatically decreased, and programs based on products took its place.6 ° Thus, children's television became "a listless by-product of an extraordinary explosion of entrepreneurial life forces taking place elsewhere-in the business of creating and marketing toys."'" In 1983, cartoons based on licensed characters accounted for fourteen programs; by 1985, the number rose to over forty.62 It has increased since.63 
Most of the resulting shows are quite violent, and the violence increased in the period after deregulation. Statistical measures will of course be inadequate, but it is at least revealing that before 1980, there were 18.6 violent acts per hour for children's programs, whereas after 1980, the number increased to 26.4 acts per hour.' Children's daytime weekend programs, have been consistently more violent than prime-time shows. Few of these shows have educational content. 
More generally, there is a high level of violence on television.65 Seven of ten prime time programs depict violence; during prime time in 1980, there was an average of between five and six violent acts per hour. By 1989, the number increased to 9.5 acts per hour. In 1980, ten shows depicted an average of more than ten acts of violence per hour; by 1989, the number was sixteen; the high mark was in 1985, with twenty-nine such shows.66 Violence on children's television has been found to increase children's fear and also to contribute to their own aggression.67 
IV 
Regulatory strategies cannot solve all of these problems. But they could help with some of them. Some such strategies should not be treated as abridgements of the freedom of speech. 
At this point it might be suggested that in an era of cable television, the relevant problems disappear. People can always change the channel. Some stations even provide public affairs broadcasting around the clock. Both quality and diversity can be found among the dazzling array of options made available by modern technology. In this light, a concern about the broadcasting market might seem to be a puzzling, even bizarre rejection of freedom of choice. Ought not government foreclosure of expressive options be thought to infringe on freedom of speech? 
There are several answers. First, and most simply, we may have a situation of natural monopoly or "bottleneck control" over stations, at least with respect to cable. If government is responding to such a situation in a viewpoint-neutral manner, usually there should be no constitutional problem. 
Second, information about public affairs has many of the characteristics of a "public good," like national defense or clean air.6 8 It is well-known that if we rely entirely on markets, we will have insufficient national defense and excessively dirty air. The reason is that both defense and clean air cannot be feasibly provided to one person without simultaneously being provided to many or all. In these circumstances, each person has inadequate incentives to seek, or to pay for, the right level of national defense or clean air. Acting individually, each person will "free ride" on the efforts of others. No producer will have the right incentives. The result will be unacceptably low levels of the relevant goods.6 9 
Much the same is true of information, especially with respect to public affairs. The benefits of a broad public debate, yielding large quantities of information, accrue simultaneously to many or all people.7" Once information is provided to one person, or to some of them, it is also provided to many others too, or it can be so provided at minimal cost. The production of information for one or some person thus yields large additional benefits for other people as well. But-and this is the key point-the market provides no mechanism to ensure that these benefits will be adequately taken into account by those who produce the information, in this case the newspaper and broadcasting industries. 
At the same time, the benefits of informing one person-of making him an effective citizen-are likely to accrue to many other people as well, through that person's contribution to multiple conversations and to political processes in general. But these additional benefits, for each person, will not be taken into account in individual consumption choices. 
Amendment, 105 HARV. L. REV. 554, 558-62 (1991). Information is not a pure public good, for it is often feasible to provide it to those who pay for it, and copyright and patent laws can guarantee appropriate incentives for its production. But it does have much in common with pure public goods. 

Because of the "public good" features of information, no single person has sufficient incentive to "pay" for the benefits that he receives. The result will be that the market will produce too little information. Reliance on free markets in information will therefore have some of the same problems as reliance on markets for national defense or environmental protection. For this reason, a regulatory solution to the public good problem might be justified.7' 
So much for the public good issue. The third problem with reliance on the large number of outlets is that sheer numbers do not explain why there is a constitutional objection to democratic efforts to increase quality and diversity by ensuring better programming on individual stations. Even with a large number of stations, there is far less quality and diversity than there might be. Of course people can change the channel. But why should the Constitution bar a democratic decision to experiment with new methods for achieving their democratic goals? 
Fourth, it is important to be extremely cautious about the use, for constitutional and political purposes, of the notion of consumer sovereignty. Consumer sovereignty is the conventional economic term for the virtues of a free market, in which goods are allocated through consumer choices, and these goods are measured by how much people are willing to pay for things. Those who invoke the notion of free choice in markets are really insisting on consumer sovereignty. But Madison's conception of "sovereignty" is the relevant one.72 That conception has an altogether different character. 
In the Madisonian view, sovereignty entails respect not for private consumption choices, but for the considered judgments of a dem71. It might be thought that the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting market provide at least a partial solution. Because advertisers attempt to ensure a large audience, viewers are commodities as well as, or instead of, consumers. In these circumstances, it is not as if individual people are purchasing individual pieces of information. Instead, advertisers are aggregating individual preferences in seeking popular programming and, in that sense, helping to overcome the collective action problem. 
The problem with this response is that the advertisers' desire to attract large audiences does not adequately serve the goal of overcoming the public good problem with respect to information about public affairs. A program with a large audience may not be providing information at all; consider most of network television. As we have seen, advertisers may even be hostile to the provision of the relevant information. Their economic interests often argue against sponsorship of public service or controversial programming, especially if the audience is relatively small, but sometimes even if it is large. The external benefits of widely-diffused information about politics are thus not captured in a broadcasting market. The peculiarities of the broadcasting market do overcome a kind of collective action problem by providing a system for aggregating preferences, but they do not overcome the crucial difficulty. 

A NEw DEAL FOR SPEECH ocratic polity. In a democracy, laws frequently reflect those judgments, or what might be described as the aspirations of the public as a whole. Those aspirations can and often do call for markets themselves. But they might also call for intrusions on markets-a familiar phenomenon in such areas as environmental law, protection of endangered species, social security, and antidiscrimination law. Democratic liberty, then, should not be identified with "consumer sovereignty." And in the context at hand, the people, acting through their elected representatives, might well decide that democratic liberty is more valuable than consumer sovereignty. 
Finally, private broadcasting selections are a product of preferences that are a result of the broadcasting status quo, and not independent of it. In a world that provides the existing fare, it would be unsurprising if people generally preferred to see what they are accustomed to seeing. They have not been provided with the opportunities of a better system. When this is so, the broadcasting status quo cannot, without circularity, be justified by reference to preferences. Preferences that have adapted to an objectionable system cannot justify that system. If better options are put more regularly in view, it might well be expected that at least some people would be educated as a result. They might be more favorably disposed toward programming dealing with public issues in a serious way. 
It is tempting but inadequate to object that this is a form of "paternalism" unjustifiably overriding private choices. If private choice is a product of existing options, and in that sense of law, the inclusion of better options, through new law, does not displace a freely produced desire. At least this is so if the new law has a democratic pedigree. In that case, the people, in their capacity as citizens, are attempting to implement aspirations that diverge from their consumption choices. I do not suggest that preferences should be ignored. I do not say that as a matter of policy, government should disregard preferences for broadcasting fare. But I do suggest that democratic judgments that are viewpoint-neutral, but inconsistent with consumption choices, should not be per se invalid under the Constitution, so long as they are based on a plausible record and represent an effort to promote attention to public issues or diversity of view. 
For those skeptical about such arguments, it may be useful to note that many familiar democratic initiatives are justified on precisely these grounds. As against the two-term rule for the president, it is hardly decisive that voters can reject the two-term president in individual cases if they choose. The whole point of the rule is to reflect a precommitment strategy. And to those who continue to be skeptical, it is worthwhile to emphasize that the Constitution is itself a precommitment strategy, and that this strategy includes the First Amendment itself. 
What approaches might emerge from considerations of this sort? Here we should be frankly experimental. Flexible solutions, supplementing market arrangements, should be presumed preferable to government command-and-control.73 In circumstances of natural monopoly or "bottleneck control," must-carry rules are unobjectionable, at least insofar as they are designed to promote attention to public issues, even if these are local ones. There is also a strong case for public provision of high-quality programming for children, or for obligations, imposed by government on broadcasters, to provide such programming. Regulation of violence on children's television ought not to be thought objectionable, so long as the regulation is both narrow and clear.74 The FCC should begin with advice and recommendations, and hope that these will be sufficient. If self-regulation fails, narrow and clear guidelines, and even mandates, ought not to be invalid, at least if they are protective of children. Moreover, the provision of free media time to candidates would be especially helpful, simultaneously providing attention to public affairs and diversity of view, while overcoming the distorting effects of "soundbites" and financial pressures. 
More generally, government might award "points" to license applicants who promise to deal with serious questions, or provide public affairs broadcasting even if unsupported by market demand. A point system might well be adapted as a more flexible means of promoting the policies of the "must-carry" rules. Or government might require purely commercial stations to provide financial subsidies to public television, or to commercial stations that agree to provide less profitable but high quality programming. It is worthwhile to consider more dramatic approaches as well-such as rights of reply, reductions in advertising on children's television, content review of such television by nonpartisan experts, or guidelines to encourage attention to public issues and diversity of view. 
decisions about quality and public affairs. There is thus a legitimate concern that any governmental supervision of the sort I have outlined would pose risks more severe than those of the status quo. The mar73. See DAVID OSBORNE & TED GAEB SUNSTEIN, supra note 37. 
though it is not easy to draw up an adequate standard. ket, surrounded by existing property rights, will indeed restrict speech. But at least it does not entail the sort of substantive approval or disapproval, or overview of speech content, that would be involved in the suggested "New Deal." Surely it is plausible to say that the relative neutrality of the market minimizes the role of public officials in a way that makes it the best of the various alternatives. 
There are two responses. The first is that the current system is worse than imperfect; it creates extremely serious obstacles to a wellfunctioning system of free expression. The absence of continuous government supervision should not obscure the point. With respect to attention to public issues, and diversity of view, the status quo badly disserves democratic goals. 
The second point is that it does indeed seem plausible to think that the key decisions can be made in a nonpartisan way, as indeed is currently the case for public television. Regulatory policies have helped greatly in the past. They are responsible for the very creation of local news.75 They have helped increase the quality of children's television. Public television, which has a wide range of high quality fare, needs government help. We have no basis for doubting that much larger improvements could be brought about in the future. If the regulatory policies do show bias, or if they fail in practice, they should be changed or even invalidated. 
How might all this bear on the constitutional question? It seems quite possible that a law that contained regulatory remedies would promote, rather than undermine, "the freedom of speech," at least if we understand that phrase in light of the distinctive American contribution to the theory of sovereignty. The current system does not plausibly promote that understanding, but instead disserves and even stifles citizenship. 
V 
I have not argued that government should be free to regulate broadcasting, whether network or cable; however it chooses. There remain hard policy and legal questions. At the legal level, regulation designed to eliminate a particular viewpoint would of course be out of bounds. All viewpoint-discrimination would be banned. Government could not say that feminists or the religious right must be represented; it must be neutral on this count. Must-carry rules are neutral in this supra note 36. 
HASTINGS COMM/ENT L.J. 
HASTINGS COMMIENT U. way, as is the fairness doctrine. This is a necessary condition for constitutional validity. 
Moreover, many viewpoint-neutral but content-based restrictions would be unacceptable. For one thing, more draconian controls than those I have described-for example, a requirement of public affairs broadcasting around the clock-would raise quite serious questions. For another, some content-based restrictions would suggest illegitimate motivations. Consider a requirement of media attention to the problem of homelessness, or to the issue of national defense, or to the problem of AIDS. Requirements of this kind would suggest a governmental effort to focus public attention in its preferred fashion. Such efforts should not be permitted. 
At the policy level, there are serious risks of elitism and futility. Regulation should not be designed to cater to the interests of a selfappointed elite with, for example, special interest in classical music or British television shows. Moreover, any efforts must be monitored for efficacy. If public affairs programming is required, little will be gained if people simply change the channel. Aspirational efforts may not work at all. The possibility of failure is real, and if existing policies do not succeed, they should be changed. 
None of this, however, defeats the case for a New Deal for speech. At the very least, natural monopoly may be regulated on a viewpoint-neutral basis. Only slightly more ambitiously, government may control the power of advertisers over programming content. Slightly more ambitiously still, government may protect children, through incentives designed to require high-quality broadcasting and to diminish violence. My most controversial suggestions involve democratic goals-most notably the interest in attention to public issues and in exposure to diverse views. It is here that I think that common carrier obligations are least objectionable, because they conform so closely to some of the basic goals of the First Amendment itself. Viewpoint-neutral controls on broadcasters, designed to promote those goals, fit well with the purposes of the free speech guarantee, however much they might conflict with principles of neoclassical economics. It would be most ironic, and most unfortunate, if the First Amendment itself were to be invoked to prevent experimentation of this kind. 
Panel II: Public Versus Private 
Environmental Regulation 
I have to tell you I am a little discouraged with my topic, which is the defense of democratic approaches to environmental protection. In preparation for this, I really wanted to get a hold of the Vice President's report on reinventing the government.' So I called the Regulatory Affairs Office in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and they said the person to call was the Public Affairs Office at OMB. I called them and they said the person to call was the Vice President's office. I called them and they said the person to call was the Government Printing Office. It sounded very depressing. But I thought, well, maybe that will work. So I went ahead and called the Government Printing Office, and they said they could have it to me probably within the month. (Laughter.) 
I have heard subsequently that part of the Gore report says that the Government Printing Office will have to compete with private enterprise, and that may explain their reluctance to send it out. (Laughter.) Undaunted, I am going to try to defend the democratic approach to environmental problems. Much of what I have to say about private remedies and public remedies will be through a democratic lens. It might be more accurate to say that it is a republican approach, republican in the sense of what James Madison said in his theory of government, designed to limit factional power and to foster public deliberation. 2 
Let me begin with a bill of particulars indicting common law approaches to environmental protection. This is just an effort to abstract a bit from the familiar failures of private law. I guess this is a criticism, a partial criticism at least, of free market environmentalism. It is familiar that there are collective action problems with individually small but, on aggregate, very large injuries, which a common law or private market system will fail to address. So in cases in which there are lots of people injured a little bit, the environmental damage may be very high, but the common law will be unable to respond. Copyright © 1994 by ECOLOGY LAW QUARTERLY * Professor, University of Chicago Law School. 
WORKS BETTER & COSTS LESS: REPORT OF THE NATIONAL PERFORMANCE REVIEW (1993). 

In addition, it is very hard to get an adequately coordinated system by using the common law, and this is potentially disastrous in the environmental area. Litigation is focused on too few aspects of a problem. It lacks the comprehensive overview that one would need, for example, to come to terms with water pollution. Litigation is also fortuitous in its timing. It is random and ex post. If you like the current law of products liability, then you would love common law approaches to environmental protection, where the problems will probably be even worse. 
In addition to the collective action problems and the difficulty of getting adequate coordination, there is a lack of necessary expertise in the judiciary. Now, I see some judges in the room who actually know a lot about environmental problems, but they are exceptions. 
There is a concern about judges' lack of political accountability as well. The truth in the Chevron opinion is the perception that where there is a policy decision to be made, it ought to be made democratically and not judicially.3 Maybe a crisper way to make the point is to say that if you had a common law system working really terrifically well, kind of a Posner-Epstein heaven, what you would end up with is, at best, aggregating private willingness to pay. You would produce a system of wealth maximization in which you made policy choices by aggregating private willingness to pay. That is what the common law system and one idealized view of it is about. 
But there is a big difference between democratic judgments about social problems and aggregated willingness to pay. And in a democratic system, the democratic judgments ought to be preferred. This is especially the case if what ought to matter in environmental policy includes, as I think it should, the interests of future generations and, if they will suffer, the interests of creatures who are not human. This is not to say that those are decisive interests, but they are relevant interests, and they are not likely to be sufficiently included in the willingness-to-pay criterion. 
These various problems-collective action problems, lack of coordination, lack of expertise, and democratic failures-suggest that a common law system will be both inefficient and undemocratic. This was the basic insight that led to the substitution of regulatory machinery for the common law in the environmental area. 
The story we have seen in the past twenty years has not been a success, and, ironically, the dimensions along which it has failed are very similar to the dimensions along which the common law itself failed. As several of the previous panelists have suggested, the system we now have is extraordinarily inefficient. By some estimates we have spent $900 billion for pollution control since 1972. I think $1000 billion is actually a trillion, but I was not entirely sure of that, so I took a lower end of the estimate. $900 billion. (Laughter.) And many estimates suggest that we could have achieved the same environmental benefit at one-quarter of the cost. 4 
Not only is there great inefficiency in our command-and-control system, but there is also democratic failure, above all in the influence of well-organized factions over the regulatory machinery. It may be that ethanol is really, really great and that governmental specification of ethanol as the automobile motoring substance of choice would be a good idea. But there is no doubt that the power of the ethanol lobby-the farmer's lobby-has played a role in occasional governmental enthusiasm for ethanol. 
The democratic failure means that instead of democratic deliberation-Madison's aspiration-we often have government by faction. This problem is revealed, I think, by the cost-benefit charts published by OMB that are reprinted amusingly and depressingly in Judge Breyer's excellent new book on risk regulation. 5 These charts show that the cost-per-life-saved of environmental regulations varies so widely for different regulations that no sensible person could in the first instance have advocated such regulations. 6 
Now to make a very simple argument, this discussion suggests that the problems of the common law-lack of coordination, lack of economic efficiency, lack of real application of expertise, and lack of democratic deliberation-are just what we have now. I think it would be difficult to contend that we would be better off under the common law system. But certainly it would not be hard to argue that we are not tremendously better off under the system we now have than we would be under the common law system. 
I want to make some simple recommendations. These reflect an effort, principally from the democratic point of view, to synthesize the best of traditional private law remedies-with a bow in the direction of my colleagues, Epstein and Posner-with the aspirations of the regulatory state. I have tried to import some of the flexibility and potential efficiency of the common law, while at the same time recognizing the need for democracy to lie at the heart of whatever regulatory solutions we come up with. 
This approach is very simple. I want to argue first for information and second for economic incentives. The preferred remedy for envi4. See Cass R. Sunstein, DemocratizingAmerica Through Law, 25 SUFFOLK U. L. REV. 949, 955 (1991) (citing THOMAS TIETENBERG, EMISSIONS TRADING 41-45 (1985)). 
REGULATION 24-27 (1993). 
ronmental problems should be disclosure of information. Regulation should be the secondary remedy if there is a reason why information does not work. Information first, regulation second. What we have done over the past generation is the opposite. Centralized governmental regulation has been the first option, and information has been disclosed only if the regulatory option has been rebutted. 
Now let me just specify what I mean by information and economic incentives, emphasizing the democracy-reinforcing features of both of these remedies. By information, I mean that in areas such as environmental risks in the workplace or consumer products, with some risks that reasonable people might take, the preferred choice ought to be to let people know about the risk rather than to have government-mandated safety levels. We should have a decent floor so that risks that no reasonable person would take will not be available. But otherwise, we should allow for private flexibility. 
This ought to be efficiency promoting, and it also ought to be democracy promoting. One of the real pathologies of our current system is that people do not know about the levels of risk that they face. Hence, it is wrongly thought that nuclear power and toxic waste dumps are top priorities, while indoor air pollution and smoking are towards the bottom. Public assessments of risk levels are all over the map, and that is partly because information is lacking. 
We ought to move in the direction of something like a national warning system. This system would reveal risk levels in a way that would have an efficiency-promoting aspect, a democracy-promoting aspect, and a coordinating function. The system would show people what OMB has publicized a bit-that is, what the risk levels are in various sectors of the economy and various aspects of people's lives. 
By information, I do not mean just disclosure as a preferred remedy. I mean to endorse also a version of Judge Breyer's suggestion that somewhere in the Federal Government there ought to be an overview entity.7 This body would be charged with comparing risk levels, with ensuring that there are priorities, with exempting tiny risks, as in the Delaney clause,8 and with ensuring that we get the biggest bang for the buck. There is no reason that government regulation of the environment should be as uncoordinated as it now is. Currently, responsibility for environmental protection is broken up among a number of different federal agencies, and even offices within EPA have such different mandates that sensible priority setting is impossible. 


Thus, my suggestion is disclosure as the preferred remedy and an overview entity that collects information, dispenses information, and ensures sensible priority setting. That is what I mean by information. 
You have heard a bit about economic incentives. What I want to suggest right now is that economic incentives not only promote efficiency, but, equally importantly, have a democracy-reinforcing feature. From the democratic point of view, this makes economic incentives much better than the command-and-control system. 
Here is why. Economic incentives focus democratic attention on the question of ends: "How much clean-up at what price?" Incentives do not focus on the question of means: "Which technology is best?" So in thinking about acid rain or any pollutant, the economic incentive approach puts into Congress' hopper the issue not of which technology ought to be imposed, but instead what level of pollution makes best sense. 
The issue of ends forces elective representatives to make the tradeoff between environmental and other values explicitly and openly in a way that the current attention to means does not. Not only is there a democratic advantage in focusing on the right question, there also is a democratic advantage in eliminating the special interest deals that are likely when attention is placed on the issue of means. If the question is ethanol, methanol, nethanol, or thethanol, then it is especially likely that a group with a stake in the outcome will choose one of those. If the issue is instead how much reduction are we going to get, then the very generality of the question is likely to decrease the influence of factions. 
The attention to economic incentives eliminates the attention to means, reduces factional power, and puts the democratic attention where it ought to be; it also forces a kind of coordinating and comparative judgment that would be a great advantage. If we had economic incentives as our remedy of choice, then the question would be: "Well, we spend X amount for that, how much should we spend for this?" Thus, economic incentives have a built-in mechanism that is democracy reinforcing in the sense that incentives make it very likely that comparisons will be obtained. When comparisons are obtained, democratic judgments are less subject to factions or to sensationalism. Economic incentives also put a high premium on information. If the question is how much should we spend to reduce global warming, then people will obtain a lot of information about the cost to reduce greenhouse gases and about the benefits of doing it. That would be a big democratic advantage over our current system. 
The failures of private law and common law are economic, but also democratic. The promise of informational remedies and economic incentives is not only economic, but also, more fundamentally, democratic. 
Thank you. 
to state intervention throughout the history of Western civilization. Condemnation of those practices is firmly rooted in Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards .... Blackstone described "the infamous crime against nature" as an offense of "deeper malignity" than rape .... 
-Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, 196 (1986) (Burger, C.J., concurring). 
I'm going to make you my girlfriend. 
-Mike Downey, Fightingthe'War of Words, LA. Tnms, June 19, 1991, at C1, C9 (quoting then-heavyweight champion, Mike Tyson, to his challenger Razor Ruddock). 
INTRODUCTION 
Unexpectedly, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation has become one of the most important equality issues of the 1990's. The development is unexpected because Bowers v. Hardwick,' the Georgia sodomy case, had been thought to resolve most of the issues as a matter of constitutional law. But, a range of new questions has emerged. 
What if a state adopts a constitutional prohibition on laws forbidding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation? To say the least, this issue is not squarely covered by Bowers. Or suppose that homosexuals are excluded from federal employment, whether in the military or elsewhere. Bowers was decided under the Due Process Clause, not the Equal Protection Clause, and did not involve discrimination at all. Perhaps most discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is irrational in the constitutional sense; perhaps discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation should be subjected to special judicial scrutiny. 
My goal in this Article is to set out and evaluate a range of constitutional arguments involving discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. I devote special attention to what seems to me to be the most interesting and powerful argument, that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. At the same time, I suggest that the judicial role is properly limited in this context, especially because of a need to limit the clash between public judgments and judicial judgments in so * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. This Article consists of a revised version of the Harris Lecture, delivered in February, 1994 at the Indiana University School of Law-Bloomington. I am extremely grateful to the faculty and students of the law school for their graciousness and help on that occasion. Processes:The EqualProtectionConcernsofColoradoAmendment Two, 69 IND. LJ. 275 (1993). sensitive an area. I therefore argue for the narrowest and most incremental of the judicial possibilities. In all likelihood, laws against homosexual orientation and behavior will soon come to be seen as products of unfounded prejudice and hostility, and private prejudice and hostility will themselves recede. Courts should play a limited if perhaps catalytic role in this process. 
This Article consists of three parts. Part I discusses a wide range of constitutional claims in the context of homosexuality. Part II sets out an anticaste principle, designed to help explain why and when sex discrimination is constitutionally illegitimate. I spend a fair amount of space on the appropriate conception of sex discrimination. This subject is both of considerable interest in its own right and of great importance to an understanding of the issue of sexual orientation. Part III then connects the legal attack on gender caste with the issue of same-sex relations. Here, I explore the possibility that bans on same-sex relations are a form of sex discrimination and therefore constitutionally unacceptable. Part IV discusses the properly limited role of courts under the Constitution and indicates how judicial limitations might bear on the judicial role with respect to laws that disadvantage homosexuals. It also suggests that these limitations apply, though to a lesser degree, to the President and all others charged with constitutional interpretation. 
My conclusion is that it is important both to have a firm sense of the constitutional principle that dooms discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, and to insist on that principle. But in the implementation of the principle, it is necessary for courts to be cautious and selective. Caution about issues of implementation should not be taken to suggest ambivalence about the principle itself. Abraham Lincoln's approach to the issue of slavery provides a model in this regard. 
In applying the Constitution to issues involving homosexuality, there is a range of options. I discuss them briefly here. 
It is perhaps most tempting to apply the right of privacy-a form of "substantive due process"-to sexual autonomy in homosexual relations. As a practical matter, however, this route has been foreclosed by Bowers. Bowers is of course much maligned. But for at least two reasons, the outcome in that case has at least a degree of plausibility. 
First, any form of substantive due process has controversial foundations as a matter of text and history.3 It is unclear, to some reasonable people, that substantive due process deserves much life as a basis for invalidating legislation, except perhaps in egregious cases. Second, any constitutional "privacy" rights usually are rooted in Anglo-American traditions, which often have refused to recognize the legitimacy of homosexuality. If the Due Process Clause creates substantive rights largely because of tradition,4 the privacy claim in Bowers was highly vulnerable. 
Perhaps these are largely technical difficulties. Substantive due process is well-established in some privacy cases, and perhaps the relevant tradition should be read at a sufficient level of abstraction to include consensual relations between homosexuals. But there are other problems as well. The fundamental problem for homosexuals is not well-described as a simple absence of privacy. Homosexuals can disguise their sexual orientation. The "closet" can furnish a degree of privacy. But the possibility of disguise is hardly a full solution to current problems. For this reason the emphasis on privacy rights seems to misconceive the basic issue. The lack of privacy against public and private intrusion is certainly one problem, but it is a problem primarily because of deeper problems of discrimination. A resort to rights of privacy is therefore a misleading or, at least, an incomplete foundation for constitutional law in this area. 
B. Equality and Irrationality 
Because the Equal Protection Clause was designed as an attack on traditions, it is a far more promising source of new constitutional doctrine than the right to privacy. Most generally, the Due Process Clause is associated with the protection of traditionally respected rights from novel or short-term change.' It is largely Burkean and backward-looking. By contrast, the Equal Protection Clause is self-consciously directed against traditional practices. It was designed to counteract practices that were time-honored and expected to endure. It is based on a norm of equality that operates as a critique of past practices.6 Because opposition to homosexuality has deep historical roots, 7 the Equal Protection Clause is the more sensible source of constitutional doctrine. 
Between Due ProcessandEqual Protection,55 U. C. L. REv. 1161, 1170-74 (1988). 
BoswELL, CHRISrIANITY, SOCIAL TOLERANCE AND SExUALITY (1980); JOHN BOSWELT, SAME-SEX UNIONS IN PREMODERN EUROPE (1994); K.J. DOVER, GREEK HOMOSEXUALITY, (Harv. Univ. Press 1989) (1978). 
Under the Equal Protection Clause, the Supreme Court has invalidated certain forms of discrimination on the ground that they are irrational or unconnected with any legitimate public purpose. 8 This idea is connected with an interesting conception of democracy: the distribution of benefits or the imposition of burdens must reflect a conception of the public good. The Court has also disqualified, as justifications of legislation, certain ideas on the ground that they reflect "prejudice" or "hostility." A statute based on "prejudice" cannot qualify as rational.9 
We should think of the category of "prejudice" as a placeholder for a complex moral argument; the term is usually a conclusion masquerading as an analytic device. But in some important cases, lower federal courts have said that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation can indeed be irrational because it is a simple product of prejudice or irrational fear. Thus, for example, some courts have said that the exclusion from the military of people with homosexual "orientation"-unaccompanied by homosexual acts-is irrational and therefore unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause. ' 
In the important ruling in Steffan v. Aspin," the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit held that it was irrational to exclude from military service people of homosexual orientation, short of a demonstration of homosexual conduct. In the court's view, homosexual orientation alone was not a legitimate basis for discharge because it was unconnected with any plausible government interest. The court did not address the question whether homosexual conduct could be a basis for discharge. Two district courts reached the same conclusion, finding exclusion from the military to be unconnected with any legitimate public goal." 
These cases represent an unusual step in the law. The legislature is usually given the benefit of every doubt against claims of irrationality because judges lack factfinding capacity and a democratic pedigree."3 Moreover, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is based on widespread moral convictions and debated empirical claims. Some people think that homosexual conduct is immoral, though it is not clear what status this argument should have. Others think that sexual orientation is often chosen, not a product of genetics or early family influence, and that the state can therefore channel people toward heterosexuality. 
In part because of its modesty, the use of rationality review is quite promising, even if it is inventive. I cannot fully resolve the rationality issue here but must restrict myself to three notes. First, the Supreme Court has been 1994] highly reluctant to invalidate laws on grounds of irrationality, identifying that notion with a kind of legislative absurdity. The Court is understandably loathe to attribute absurdity to a legislature. 
Second, the idea of irrationality really depends on a judgment that the grounds lying behind legislation are objectionable or invidious. It is not easy to explain why the judgments that underlie discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation are invidious; to make that claim, we have to make a moral argument about liberty and equality, one that opposes other moral arguments. The claim of irrationality disguises the necessary moral argument. While the claim of irrationality seems modest, it depends at bottom on relatively adventurous claims. Probably it can be said that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation alone-unaccompanied by conduct-ought to be invalidated on rationality grounds. When conduct is at issue, the question is whether its punishment can be associated with legitimate social goals, unrelated to simple hostility or prejudice. 
Third, the irrationality argument cannot be assessed in the abstract. It requires a close encounter with the particular government action at issue in various settings. Different forms of discrimination might be treated differently. Consider, for example, a ban on grade-school teaching by homosexuals. The ban should probably be struck down as irrational. If it is defended as a means of preventing child abuse, the state should have to show, with at least minimal plausibility, that a wholesale ban on employment is a reasonable means of protecting against the abuse of children. Child abuse can be treated as a separate crime, and there appears to be no evidence that homosexuals abuse children more than heterosexuals. For this reason, such a ban would be a good occasion for mildly aggressive rationality review and should probably be invalidated. 
Compare various bans on military service by homosexuals or by "known" homosexuals. This is a harder case for a claim of irrationality, at least if courts stay with their usual posture of extreme deference. Perhaps homosexual relations would have adverse effects on military morale; perhaps the existence of known homosexual soldiers would undermine recruitment; perhaps the interest in privacy is sufficient to protect young soldiers from serving in such close quarters with people of the same sex who might have a sexual interest in them. To be sure, it is not easy to separate these interests from prejudice or hostility, and, in the military context, many of the grounds for discrimination are disturbingly close to those that have justified race segregation and the exclusion of women. But courts should undoubtedly be cautious in the military context in light of the high stakes, the possibility (even if slight) of disaster, and the complexity of the underlying facts, which are not well-suited to judicial resolution. One might therefore believe that the ban on homosexual service in the military should be presumed unconstitutional by Congress and the President, without also believing that federal courts should strike down the ban except perhaps in the most egregious cases. 4 
Consider finally the interests that justify constitutional bans on laws discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation, or more dramatically, bans on same-sex marriages. The ban on same-sex marriages is not easy to support, especially in light of the possibility that the ban contributes to the AIDS crisis. 5 Perhaps the ban could be justified as a means of restricting the benefits of marriage to relations that involve children. As stated, this justification is quite crude to say the least. Homosexuals can adopt children if the law permits, and, if the law permits, homosexuals may even have children with a biological connection to one parent. In any case, many heterosexual marriages do not involve children, because the couple cannot or does not want to have children. Moreover, the state does not prevent marriage by infertile couples, by fertile couples who choose not to have children, or by people too old to have children. The claim that marriage should be restricted to situations involving the potential to have biological offspring therefore seems weak. Nevertheless, it could survive rationality review. It is at least rational-in the technical sense-to say that marriage is reserved for cases in which children can potentially result from the married couple. 
Alternatively, the state might say that it does not want to "advertise" that same-sex relations can be happy, healthy, and successful, and the grant of a marriage license would be an endorsement of a practice deserving at best neutrality and not approval. This argument is fragile as well. Whether samesex relations are less happy and healthy than heterosexual relationsindependent of public and private discrimination-is most unclear. Much the same might be said about interracial relations, and the possibility of less happiness in that context is not a reason for discrimination. On the other hand, if rationality review applies, almost any argument is good enough, so perhaps this would be sufficient to validate the ban on same-sex relations. sexA rfeilnaatlioanrsg.umThenist awroguulmdernetlywoans tfhoeunwdidseusfpfriecaiedntmoinraBlodwisearpsprvo. vHalarodfwsaicmke,1-6 and perhaps it is sufficient here too. On the other hand, widespread moral disapproval is not always a legitimate basis for law; consider the bans on miscegenation or discrimination against the mentally retarded. The task for courts invoking irrationality in the context of same-sex marriages is to distinguish the contexts in which moral disapproval is legitimate from those in which it is not. But so long as ordinary rationality review applies, the state can almost certainly meet its burden at the present time. At least at the national level, the Supreme Court should be reluctant to invalidate the ban on same-sex relations on grounds of irrationality. 
On the other hand, it is not at all clear that the state can invoke these arguments to justify constitutional barriers to forbidding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. This issue is addressed below. 
(1993). 

HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 6 1994-1995 
C. Equality and Suspect Classes 
Perhaps it should be argued that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is analogous to discrimination on the basis of race or sex and therefore should be invalidated except in the rarest of circumstances. This is a highly plausible argument, though a great deal would have to be said in order to make it fully. The argument has also attracted some favorable attention from lower courts. In Jantz v. Muci," a district court held that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation "is inherently suspect," and a panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit agreed, though its opinion was vacated.' 8 
The Supreme Court has granted "heightened scrutiny" to laws that discriminate against certain identifiable groups likely to be at particular risk in the ordinary political process. 9 When the Court grants heightened scrutiny, it is highly skeptical of legislation, and the burden of every doubt therefore operates on behalf of groups challenging the relevant laws. 
In deciding whether to grant heightened scrutiny, the Supreme Court has not been altogether clear about its underlying rationale. The Court appears to have looked most carefully at the likelihood that the group in question will be subject to prejudice, the existence of past and present discrimination, and the group's lack of political power.20 In this way, it has moved well beyond the defining case of discrimination against blacks to include discrimination against women, illegitimate children, and, at times, aliens.2' The Court has not yet decided how discrimination against homosexuals should be treated. 
A brief overview of the traditional factors and of how they might apply in this context follows. It seems reasonable to think that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is especially likely to reflect prejudice (subject to the qualification above, noting that prejudice is a complex category, a placeholder for a moral argument). When government disadvantages homosexuals, it seems plausible to think that it will often do so because of an unreasoned or visceral belief in their sickness or inferiority, or because of sheer ignorance of relevant facts. In this way, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation seems closely akin to discrimination on the basis of race and sex. In all of these settings, prejudice-understood as stereotypical thinking based on factual falsehoods and often rooted in simple hostility-is likely to account for discrimination. 
It seems clear too, that homosexuals have been and continue to be subject to public and private discrimination. For most of American history, disclosure of a homosexual orientation was grounds for inflicting serious social harms. Even today, homosexuals must often keep their orientation secret in order to be free from discrimination and even violence. In many sectors of the economy, homosexuals cannot easily obtain jobs if their sexual orientation is disclosed.22 
Homosexuals may well be politically powerless in the constitutionally relevant sense. They often have difficulty in making alliances with other groups by virtue of the existence of widespread prejudice and hostility directed against them. Precisely because they are often anonymous (that is, not known to be homosexual) and diffuse (that is, not tightly organized), they face large barriers to exerting adequate political influence.23 For this reason, it is probably not decisive that homosexuality-unlike race and gender-can be concealed. The ability to conceal can actually make things worse from the standpoint of exercising political power. This problem, severe in itself, is heightened by the fact that people who challenge discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation are often "accused" of being homosexual themselves, which may have harmful consequences for their reputations.24 The existence of widespread hostility against homosexuals can thus make it difficult for homosexuals and heterosexuals alike to speak out against this form of discrimination. 
All of these arguments seem to fit both the facts and the law, but there are some real complexities here. One problem with the issue of "political powerlessness" is that relevant judgments are based not simply on facts about political influence, but also depend on some controversial and usually unarticulated claims about how much political power is appropriate for the group in question, and about the legitimacy of the usual bases for legislative judgments on matters affecting the group. The claim that a group is politically weak in the constitutional test is thus a product of some controversial, valueladen claims, which are not always brought to the surface. 
For example, it might be thought that homosexuals have a good deal of political power, for they can influence elections, even elections of the President. But the same is true of blacks and women, both of whom can influence elections a great deal. The potentially large electoral influence of both of these groups does not exclude them from the category of groups entitled to particular protection against discrimination. The reason is that even if political influence can be wielded, prejudice in the constitutionally relevant sense is likely to operate in the political process against both blacks and Consider the fact that there has been serious debate over whether "marching in a gay parade" should be taken as evidence of homosexuality. See 139 CoNG. REC. S6691, S6692 (daily ed. May 27, 1993) (remarks of Sen. Nunn) (regarding Representative Frank's proposal concerning gay men and women in the armed forces); id. at S11211 (daily ed. Sept. 9, 1993) (committee report). 
HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 8 1994-1995 1994] women. The category of political powerlessness looks like an inquiry into political science, but it really depends on some normative judgments about the legitimacy of the usual grounds for government action. To say that homosexuals are politically powerless, it is necessary to say that the usual grounds for discrimination are impermissible. This is not a claim about political power alone. The usual grounds may indeed be impermissible; my point here is only that this claim cannot be separated from the claim of insufficient political power. 
The Supreme Court has sometimes said that it disfavors discrimination based on "immutable" characteristics, but this is a confusing claim.25 In fact the emphasis on immutability has much obscured analysis. Homosexuality may or may not be immutable in the relevant sense; this is a sharply disputed issue as a simple matter of fact. Mutability, however, is not the decisive factor. For one thing, immutable characteristics are not an illegitimate basis for adverse governmental action. For example, blind people can be told not to drive. Even if there were a biological predisposition toward certain criminal behavior, we could surely punish that behavior so as to deter and stigmatize it. A biological predisposition to engage in certain conduct is thus not a basis for immunity from the criminal law if the underlying conduct can legitimately be punished. If homosexual conduct can legitimately be punished, it ought not to matter if it can be shown that homosexual orientation is produced by biology or early childhood experiences. So too, it should not matter, for Equal Protection purposes, if skin color or gender could be changed through new technology. After all, discrimination on the basis of race would not become acceptable if scientists developed a serum through which blacks could become white. 
Immutability is neither a necessary nor a sufficient basis for treatment as a "suspect class." The real question is whether legislation disadvantaging the relevant group is peculiarly likely to rest on illegitimate grounds; heightened scrutiny is a way of testing whether it does. I do not think that on this count, discrimination against homosexuals is less troublesome than discrimination against blacks and women. But here too, any judgments turn on complex arguments. 
From what I have said thus far, it seems reasonable to believe that discrimination against homosexuals should be subject to strict scrutiny. Despite its plausibility, however, the argument that homosexuals are entitled to special protection from discrimination is unlikely to be accepted by the Court that decided Bowers, and in any case perhaps we can build more narrowly on existing law. 

D. PoliticalRights and Equality Rights 
Some states have enacted or are considering constitutional amendments that would forbid laws prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Colorado's Amendment Two, for example, says that no state law may ban discrimination against homosexuals. 26 Are these measures constitutional? 
The constitutional challenge to such measures is quite different from the arguments described thus far. The challenge involves a claim about interference with protected rights, not merely about group status. In several cases, the Supreme Court has invalidated laws that seem to impose special political barriers to well-defined groups. Thus, in Hunter v. Erickson2,7 the Court invalidated an amendment to the Akron city charter barring the City Council from implementing any ordinance dealing with discrimination in housing without voter approval. This "explicitly racial classification treating racial housing matters differently from other racial and housing matters" involved the political process and could not survive strict scrutiny.28 Similarly, in Washington v. Seattle School DistrictNo. I,29 the Court struck down a law forbidding any school board from requiring a student to attend a school other than the school geographically nearest the student's place of residence. According to the Court, governments may not restructure political processes "by explicitly using the racialnature of a decision to determine the decisionmaking process."3° 
The Colorado Supreme Court built upon Hunterand Washington, suggesting that when a law imposes special barriers to political participation by "an identifiable group," there has been a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.3' But both of the United States Supreme Court precedents are distinguishable; they were written and understood as race cases. A statute that explicitly or implicitly allocates political benefits and burdens along racial lines should of course be presumed unconstitutional.32 By contrast, in the context of an amendment forbidding laws banning discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation, there is no racial issue. It could therefore be concluded that states may allocate their own internal authority as they like-imposing supermajority requirements in some cases or allowing state-level decisions or local autonomy in others-so long as race and sex discrimination are not involved. In general, this proposition seems unexceptionable. 
Hunter and Washington would therefore have to be extended to invalidate any law that imposes distinctive political barriers not just to blacks but to other groups defined in certain terms. This step would be an innovation, but Sup. CT. REv. 127, 141. it is not clear that it would be too broad. In fact, the Colorado Supreme Court relied on a United States Supreme Court case suggesting that special barriers are permissible when an "identifiable group" is not involved.33 Perhaps we can read "identifiable group" to include not simply blacks but any group defined in terms of some characteristic that is not ordinarily a legitimate basis for the allocation of political authority. Perhaps the Court could say that, without reaching the question of whether discrimination against homosexuals is suspect and without saying that such discrimination is generally irrational, it will require powerful justifications for any law that imposes special democratic barriers to legislation protecting homosexuals from discrimination.34 
This is not a simple test; it remains to say exactly what sorts of democratic barriers are constitutionally suspect. But the test would have the beneficial characteristic of narrowness. Without deciding that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is generally suspect, or generally irrational, courts might well conclude that no state may impose special barriers to democratic deliberation about this subject. I suggest that though the precedents do not require this result, the Equal Protection Clause should forbid special constitutional barriers to laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. 
To approach the possibility of a link between discrimination on the basis of sex and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, consider Chief Justice Burger's striking concurrence in Bowers. There, the Chief Justice offered an approving reference to Blackstone's suggestion that sodomy is "an offense of 'deeper malignity than rape,' a heinous act, 'the very mention of which is a disgrace to human nature,' and 'a crime not fit to be named."'' 35 It might be worthwhile to linger for a moment over the suggestion that consensual sexual relations among men are of "deeper malignity than rape." How could this possibly be so? Why did both Blackstone and the Chief Justice think it worthwhile to compare the two crimes, and to assert the comparatively greater malignity of consensual sodomy? 
I think that the answer closely links the problem of discrimination on the basis of sex with that of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Rape has often seemed far less violative of human nature than sodomy, and this says a good deal about the character of sex discrimination and sex differences. Chief Justice Burger's comment inadvertently helps explain why Loving v. Virginia36 is a good precedent for the subject under discussion. But 
were not substantial enough to sustain a law that would harm illegal aliens). 
BLAcKsToNE, CoMMENTAmiEs *215). 
to say this is to get a bit ahead of the story. Let me turn more generally, then, to the equality principle of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
A. In 
At the origin, the central target of the Fourteenth Amendment was not irrational distinctions on the basis of race, but the system of racial caste."7 For those who ratified the Civil War Amendments, the problem was that the law had contributed to a system of caste based on race, thought to be a morally irrelevant characteristic. Those who framed and ratified these amendments were aware that the system of racial hierarchy had often been attributed to nature. Thus, in the aftermath of the American Civil War, it was expressly urged, "God himself has set His seal of distinctive difference between the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree."3" In the same period, anti-discrimination law was thus challenged squarely on the ground that it put the two races in "unnaturalrelation ... to each other." 9 The Civil War Amendments were based on a wholesale rejection of the supposed naturalness of racial hierarchy. The hierarchy was thought to be a function not of natural difference but of law, most notably the law of slavery and the various measures that grew up in the aftermath of abolition. The animating purpose of the Civil War Amendments was an attack on racial caste. 
We might similarly understand the problem of sex discrimination, to the extent that it is troublesome, as amounting to the creation of something like a system of caste, based on gender and often operating through law. That system, like the racial caste system and others as well, is often attributed to "nature" and "natural differences." Consider here John Stuart Mill's remarks: 
possessed it? ... So true is it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that everything which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men being a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears unnatural.4" A principal feature of the caste system based on gender consists of law and social practices that translate women's sexual and reproductive capacities into a source of second-class citizenship. 
In these circumstances, I suggest that building on the racial analogue, the appropriate equality principle in the area of sex equality is an opposition to caste. The legal objection should be understood as an effort to eliminate, in places large and small, the caste system rooted in gender. A law is therefore objectionable on grounds of sex equality if it contributes to a caste system in this way. The controlling principle to be vindicated through law is not that women must be treated "the same" as men, but that women must not be second-class citizens. As discussed below, there are important differences between the two points. 
The concept of caste is by no means self-defining. I will have to offer a brief and inadequate account here, one that is designed to provide a preface to the discussion of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation." Of course, I do not suggest that the caste-like features of all societies containing sex inequality are the same. Certainly the American system of sex discrimination is far less oppressive than most systems of racial and gender caste. But I do claim that the caste-like features are what justify social and legal concern. 
The motivating idea behind an anticaste principle, broadly speaking Rawlsian in character, is that without very good reasons, social and legal structures ought not to turn differences that are irrelevant from the moral point of view into social disadvantages. They certainly should not be permitted to do so if the disadvantage is systemic. A difference is morally irrelevant if it has no relationship to individual entitlement or desert. Race and sex are certainly morally irrelevant characteristics in the sense that, in general, skin color and gender are not appropriate grounds for the distribution of social benefits and burdens. A systemic disadvantage is one that operates along standard and predictable lines in many important spheres of life and applies in realms that relate to basic participation as a citizen in a democracy. The anticaste principle means that, with respect to basic human capabilities and functionings, one group ought not to be systematically below another4.2 
of race and gender.43 An important aspect of a system of caste is that social practices produce a range of obstacles to the development of self-respect, SUNsTEN, PARTIAL CONSTITUTION]; Cass R. Sunstein, The AnticastePrinciple,92 MICH. L. REv. 24 (1994 
(1985); AMARTYA SEN, INEQUALITY REEXAMINED (1992); Martha Nussbaum, Aristotelian Social Democracy,in LIBERALISM AND THE GOOD 203 (R. Bruce Douglass et al. eds., 1990). I am adding to these discussions (1) a suggestion that in the context of gender, the problem lies in the particular fact that one group is systematically below another along the relevant dimensions, and (2) an explanation of how this situation is produced by social practices and law. 

HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 13 1994-1995 largely because of the presence of the morally irrelevant characteristic that gives rise to caste status. 
In the area of sex discrimination, the problem is usually this sort of systemic disadvantage. A social or biological difference has the effect of helping to subordinate members of the relevant group, not because of "nature," but because of social and legal practices. Prominent among these practices is the social and legal control of women's sexual and reproductive capacities. The resulting inequality occurs in multiple spheres and along multiple indices of social welfare: poverty, education, health, political power, employment, susceptibility to violence and crime, and many others." This is the caste system to which the legal system should be responding. 
Of course, courts face important limits in implementing the anticaste principle. Indeed, it may be because of these limits that judges have attempted not to attack caste itself, but mostly to eliminate race and sex distinctions-an attempt that overlaps with, but is not identical to, an effort to counteract caste-like features of current practice. In describing the anticaste principle, I am emphatically not describing what courts should do. Courts should be modest in assuming tasks for which they are poorly suited. There is a space between a constitutional principle and judicial activity; this space will be addressed below. 
B. Are Women Different? Does It Matter If They Are? 
We are now in a position to make some general observations about the important and vexing matter of sex "differences"; these will bear directly on the issues raised by homosexuality. It is often said that women and men are different and that the differences help both to explain and to justify existing social and legal inequality. 4 It is often claimed, for example, that women are different from men and that different treatment in law is therefore perfectly appropriate. Indeed, in many legal systems, including that in America, the basic social and legal question is: Are women different from men? If not, have they been treated similarly?" 
However widespread, this approach will not do. The question for decision is not whether there is a difference-often there certainly is-but whether the legal and social treatment of that difference can be adequately justified. Differences need not imply inequality and only some differences have that effect. When differences do produce inequality, it is a result of legal and social practices, not the result of differences alone. Since they are legal and (1986); DEBBIE TAYLOR ET AL., WOMEN: A WORLD REPORT (1985). 
MACKINNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987) [hereinafter MAcKiNNON, FEMINISM UNMODIFIED]; CATHARINE A. MAcKINNON, TOWARD A FEMINIST THEORY OF THE STATE (1989) [hereinafter MACKINNON, TOWARD A FEMINIST THEORY OF THE STATE]. social, these practices might be altered even if the differences remain. In any case, inequality is not justified by the brute fact of difference. 
An analogy may be helpful here. The problems faced by disabled people are not a function of disability "alone" (an almost impenetrable idea-what would current disabilities even mean in an entirely different world?) but instead result from the interaction between physical and mental capacities on the one hand and a set of human obstacles made by and for the able-bodied on the other. It is those obstacles, rather than the capacities taken as brute facts, that create a large part of what it means, socially speaking, to be disabled. "Nature" is quite irrelevant. It would be implausible, for example, to defend the construction of a building with stairs, and without means of access for those in wheelchairs, on the ground that those who need wheelchairs are "different." The question is whether it is acceptable, or just, to construct a building that excludes people who need another means of entry. That question may not be a simple one, but it cannot be answered simply by pointing to a difference. The same is true for sex. 
We can go further. Differences between men and women-especially those involving sexuality and reproduction-are often said to explain sex inequality, indeed to be the origin of inequality. But it might be better to think that at least some such differences are an outcome of inequality or its product.47 Certainly some and perhaps many of the relevant "real differences" between men and women exist only because of sex inequality. Differences in physical strength, for example, would certainly exist without inequality, but such differences as there now are undoubtedly have a good deal to do with differences in expectations, nutrition, and training. These differences cannot solely be attributed to women's sexual and reproductive capacities. Indeed, the degree of difference between men and women is notoriously variable across time and space. These variations are sufficient to show that what society attributes to nature is often a social product. 
Even differences in desires, preferences, aspirations, and values are in significant part a function of society and even law-in particular of what these institutions do with sexuality and reproduction. Preferences are often adaptive to the status quo, and a status quo containing caste-like features based on sex will predictably affect the preferences of men and women in different ways. It will lead to distinctive processes of preference formation, inclining men and women in different directions in both the public and private spheres. 
This point suggests that it is wrong to base sex discrimination policy only on what women currently "want."48 Existing preferences may well be at least because ultimately this is a historical question on which there is now insufficient evidence for firm judgments. 
VINDICAnON OF THE RIGHTS OF WOMAN, (Carol H. Poston ed., 1975). See generallyMartha Craven Nussbaum, Shame,Separateness,andPoliticalUnity,in ESSAYS ON ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS 395 (Am61ia Oksenberg Rorty ed., 1980); AmarHtyeainSOen,liRneat-io-n7a0lIFnodo.Lls.,J6. 1P5H1IL9.9&4-1P9U9B5. AFF. 317 (1977); Cass R. Sunstein, Preferences andPolitics,20 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 3 (1991). partly an artifact of a discriminatory status quo. Of course, current views of both men and women bear on what society and government should do. But many of the sex differences that are said to justify inequality-physical, psychological, and others-are really a product of inequality. This is, of course, an empirical claim. In light of current knowledge, we cannot say precisely how much of sex difference is a product of law and society. But we know enough to suggest that nature is not responsible for all of the inequality that we see. 
I now examine the relationship between sex discrimination and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. As I have noted, the ban on same-sex marriages is not now thought to raise a problem of sex inequality under the American Constitution. But might the legal ban (and the social taboo) not be a product of a desire to maintain a system of gender hierarchy, a system that same-sex marriages tends to undermine by complicating traditional and stillinfluential ideas about the "natural difference" between men and women? 
It is possible to argue that in terms of their purposes and effects, bans on same-sex marriage have very much the same connection to gender caste as bans on racial intermarriage have to racial caste.49 I am speaking here of the real-world motivations for these bans, and I am assuming, as does current law, that impermissible motivations are fatal to legislation. The claim of neutrality may be implausible in this context for exactly the same reason that it was implausible in Loving.5" To say this is not to say that the ban on same-sex marriages is necessarily unacceptable in all theoretically possible worlds. But here, the ban is like a literacy test motivated by a discriminatory purpose or a veteran's preference law designed to exclude women from employment. 
In 1958, Richard Loving, a white man, and Mildred Jeter, a black woman, were married in the District of Columbia.52 Soon thereafter, they returned to their home in Virginia and were promptly indicted. Their crime was to have married in violation of Virginia's prohibition on interracial marriage. They pleaded guilty to the charge and were sentenced to a year in jail. The trial judge suspended the sentence on the condition that the Lovings leave Virginia and not return for twenty-five years. The judge said: "Almighty God creates the races white, black, yellow, malay and red, and he placed them on separate 1994] continents. And but for the interference with his arrangement there would be no cause for such marriages. The fact th53at he separated the races shows that he did not intend for the races to mix. 
The Lovings challenged the anti-miscegenation law on constitutional grounds, claiming that the law deprived them of the "equal protection of the laws. 54 Thus was born the most aptly titled case in the entire history of American law, Loving v. Virginia. 
The legal issues before the United States Supreme Court in Loving were relatively straightforward. In 1954, the Court had decided Brown v. Board of Education." There, the Court emphasized that racial discrimination is constitutionally unacceptable and that "separate but equal" is not equal.56 The Brown Court held that under the Constitution, the government could not discriminate against blacks. This was the issue in Loving: Was the ban on racial intermarriage a form of discrimination in the relevant sense?57 On this question, there was sharp dispute. Virginia thought that the answer was "Clearly not." 
Virginia's lawyers argued that anti-miscegenation laws punished whites and blacks equally. They claimed that there was no discrimination against blacks. The only relevant discrimination was against people who sought to participate in mixed marriages, and such people were racially diverse. Unlike in Brown, where racial separation marked racial inequality, here separation was truly equal. Discrimination against people who seek to participate in mixed marriages is not "racial discrimination" at all. It does not draw a line between blacks and whites. It is a form of discrimination to be sure-but not the form that justifies special judicial skepticism under the Constitution. Because blacks and whites were treated exactly alike, that kind of skepticism was unwarranted. 
From the standpoint of the 1990's, the argument may seem odd, even otherworldly. But if we linger over it, we will see that its logic is straightforward and even plausible. It is true that in an important way, laws forbidding interracial marriages treat blacks and whites alike. How did the Supreme Court respond? The key sentence in Loving says that "the racial classifications [at issue] must stand on their own justification, as measures designed to maintain White Supremacy."5 8 This striking reference to White Supremacy-by a unanimous Court, capitalizing both words and speaking in these terms for the only time in the nation's history-was designed to get at the core of Virginia's argument that discrimination on the basis of participation in mixed marriages was not discrimination on the basis of race. 
The Supreme Court appeared to be making the following argument. Even though the ban on racial marriage treats blacks and whites alike-even though there is formal equality-the ban is transparently an effort to keep the races separate and, by so doing, to maintain the form and the conception of racial difference that are indispensable to White Supremacy. Viewed in context-in light of its actual motivations and its actual effects-the ban was thus part of a system of racial caste. Virginia really objected to racial intermixing because it would confound racial boundaries, thus defeating what the district judge saw as "natural" differences produced by God's plan. In a world with miscegenation, natural differences between blacks and whites would become unintelligible; the very word "miscegenation" would lose its meaning. 
Indeed, in a world with racial mixing, it would be unclear who was really black and who was really white. The categories themselves would be unsettled-revealed to be a matter of convention rather than nature. In such a world, White Supremacy could not maintain itself. Because this was the assumption behind Virginia's law, the law stood revealed as an unacceptable violation of the Equal Protection principle. 
Now let us imagine a hypothetical case. Two women seek to marry. They are prevented from doing so by a law forbidding same-sex marriage. They argue first that the relevant law violates their right to be free from sex discrimination. This seems to be a good strategic choice on their part. It is of course well-established that laws discriminating on the basis of sex will be subject to careful judicial scrutiny and will generally be invalidated.59 By contrast, it also seems clear-at least for the time being-that laws discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation will be subject to deferential judicial scrutiny and will generally be validated.60 
Our hypothetical couple would therefore do very well to argue that they are subject to discrimination on the basis of sex, not sexual orientation. They might try to establish this argument by saying what seems clearly true, that if one of them were a man, there would be no barrier to the marriage. The law therefore seems to contain explicit discrimination on the basis of sex. It treats one person differently from another simply because of gender. It is therefore a form of sex discrimination. 
This argument appears straightforward. Laws forbidding same-sex relations do involve an explicit gender classification. Under current law, however, the argument gets nowhere. 6' The prohibition on same-sex marriage, it is said, unanimously, apply "rational basis" review of laws discriminating on the basis of sexual orientation. 
level, see Baehr v. Lewin, 852 P.2d 144 (Haw. 1993). 
HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 18 1994-1995 discriminates on the basis of sexual orientation rather than on the basis of sex. There is no sex discrimination because women and men are treated exactly the same. If a man wants to marry a man, he is barred; a woman seeking to marry a woman is barred in precisely the same way. For this reason, women and men are not treated differently. From this we see that the complaint in our hypothetical case is really about discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, not about discrimination on the basis of sex. To the extent that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is subject to highly deferential "rational basis" review, resulting in the validation of most classifications, the barrier to same-sex marriages and relations is constitutionally acceptable. 
This is indeed the answer offered by current constitutional law. Thus concluded the Supreme Court of Missouri as against an argument of this kind. According to the court: 
The State concedes that the statute prohibits men from doing what women may do, namely, engage in sexual activity with men. However, the State argues that it likewise prohibits women from doing something which men can do: engage in sexual activity with women. We believe it applies equally to men and women because it prohibits both classes from engaging in sexual activity with members of their own sex. Thus, there is no denial of equal protection on that basis.62 
It will readily appear that this response is the same answer offered by the State of Virginia in the Loving case.63 To the extent that Loving is now believed inapposite, it is because a law forbidding racial intermarriage is now seen as an effort to promote White Supremacy. The separation of the races, especially in matters of sexuality and marriage, was part and parcel of the subordination of blacks to whites. Undoubtedly, this separation was part of the creation of a fixed category of racial differences. No one really denies this. It seems clear that if racial mixing were common, no one would know who is black and white; indeed the categories would lose much of their meaning. (It even seems reasonably clear that issues of sex discrimination are at work in this context, since the availability of black women to white men was common, and since the miscegenation laws seem especially inspired by the effort to prevent black men from having relations with white women.) The effort to promote "white purity" was conspicuously intended to prevent the various results that would come about from racial mixing. The Supreme Court's reference to "White Supremacy" was thus both necessary and sufficient to defeat Virginia's argument, and it was readily shown that the miscegenation laws were connected to that constitutionally unacceptable social institution." 
For participants in the current legal system, it is much harder to say that bans on same-sex relations are connected to a similarly unacceptable social institution.65 Exactly how is the prohibition on same-sex marriage an effort to promote sex inequality or even male supremacy? How can one have anything to do with the other? Racial intermarriage was objectionable because of its effects on racial differences (deemed natural and desirable), but thought (by the 1960's) to have social consequences only because of social institutions that produced a caste-like system based on race. Surely, it might be suggested, the question of same-sex relations raises no analogous issues. 
I believe that it is puzzlement about such matters that accounts for the failure to see that Loving is a relevant or perhaps even decisive precedent for the view that the prohibition on same-sex relations is impermissible sex discrimination. In the end, however, Loving may well be an important precedent for protecting same-sex relations. Very briefly: A ban on racial intermarriage may well be part of an effort to insist that with respect to race there are just "two kinds." The separation of humanity into two rigidly defined kinds, white and black, is part of what White Supremacy means. Even though some people have darker skin color than others and even though genes do diverge, this separation is, in important respects, a social artifact. People's genetic composition is very complex; most so-called blacks have many white ancestors; the division of humanity into "blacks" and "whites" is hardly determined by genetics. To say that there are just "two kinds" of people, black and white, is not a simple report on the facts; it is instead the construction of a distinctive and unnecessary way of thinking about human beings. That distinctive way of thinking about human beings, to the extent that it is converted into action based on law, raises serious problems under the Equal Protection Clause. 
It is tempting to think that the same cannot be said for the separation of humanity into two other kinds, women and men. Perhaps that separation is genuinely ordained by nature; perhaps it is not a social artifact at all, at least not in the same way. Certainly there are women and men, and certainly this fact, at least, is determined by genetics. Who would deny that the distinction between men and women is fundamental in this sense? 
But perhaps this argument goes by too quickly. It is indeed true that some people are black, in the sense that they have African-American ancestors, and others are white, in the sense that they do not. Very plausibly, this is no less true, or less "factual," than the division of humanity into men and women. The question is what society does with these facts. It is possible to think that the prohibition on same-sex marriages, as part of the social and legal insistence on "two kinds," is as deeply connected with male supremacy as the prohibition on racial intermarriage is connected with White Supremacy. Perhaps same-sex marriages are banned because of what they do to-because of how they unsettle-gender categories. Perhaps same-sex marriages are samesex relations attempt to keep men and women together. If the argument below iscorrect, however, this difference does not make a difference, since the effort to keep blacks and whites apart was an effort to maintain a caste system based on race, just as the effort to keep men and women together is-by preventing same-sex relations-part of a system of sex-role stereotyping. 
HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 20 1994-1995 1994] banned because they complicate traditional gender thinking, showing that the division of human beings into two simple kinds is part of sex-role stereotyping, however true it is that women and men are "different." 
This is not merely a philosophical or sociological observation. It is highly relevant to the legal argument. It suggests that, like the ban on racial intermarriage, the ban on same-sex marriages may well be doomed by a constitutionally illegitimate purpose. The ban has everything to do with constitutionally unacceptable stereotypes about the appropriate roles of men and women. 
Moreover, the ban may well have constitutionally unacceptable effects. It is part of a system of sex-role stereotyping that is damaging to men and women, heterosexual and homosexual alike, though in quite different ways. Indeed, one of the most interesting issues has to do with the distinctive ways in which the ban differentially harms heterosexual men, gay men, heterosexual women, and lesbians." 
In this space, I will not be able fully to defend this thesis, on which much work remains to be done. Certainly the thesis is not belied by the fact that some "macho" cultures do not stigmatize male homosexuality as much as (say) the United States.67 Even in such cultures, a sharp distinction is drawn between passivity and activity in sexual relations, and cultural understandings of passive and active operate in gendered terms." Thus, the passive role is both stigmatized and identified with femininity, whereas the active role is socially respectable and identified with masculinity. In such cultures, sex-role distinctions have somewhat different manifestations, but sex discrimination is fully operative in thinking both about men and women and about sexuality. 69 
My claim about the reasons behind the ban on same-sex marriages is in part an empirical one; and it has suggestive empirical support in psychological studies. For example, one social psychologist, capturing much of the general view, finds that "a major determinant of negative attitudes toward homosexuality is the need to keep males masculine and females feminine, that is, to avoid sex-role confusion. ' 7' The evidence taken as a whole suggests that the prohibition on homosexual relations is best seen as an effort to insist on and to rigidify so-called natural difference, in part by crisply separating gender roles.71 This occurs largely by ensuring that there are firm and clear lines, other homosexuals but harm heterosexual women as well). 

Characteristicsof Those Who Hold Positive and Negative Attitudes Toward Homosexuals, 1 J. HOMOSEXUALITY 9, 19 (1974)); see also Marc A. Fajer, Can Two Real Men Eat Quiche Together? Storytelling Gender-RoleStereotypes, and Legal Protectionfor Lesbians and Gay Men, 46 U. MIAMI L. REv. 511, 6 Heterosexuals'Attitudes Toward Homosexuals, 17 SEX ROLES 103 (1987) (examining the relationship between traditional sex-role beliefs, sex-role self-concept, and sex-role behavior pattern on the one hand and attitudes toward homosexuals on the other). 
defined in terms of gender and having what are believed to be necessary social consequences, about sexual (and social) activity, as opposed to sexual (and social) receptivity or passivity. The definition of men as essentially active in social and sexual arenas, and of women as essentially passive in both places, helps undergird sex inequality. I am speculating that it simultaneously helps account for the prohibition of same-sex relations. The social opprobrium directed against homosexuals may well be an outgrowth of the ways in which, for heterosexuals, the existence of homosexuality draws into question familiar ideas about the sex difference. 
There are important distinctions here between the reasons that underlie the stigmatization of, or the prohibition on, male homosexual relations on the one hand and those that account for bans on female homosexual relations on the other. The evidence suggests that the social opprobrium against male homosexuality comes largely from the perceived unnaturalness of male passivity in sex. 2 The male heterosexual opposition to male homosexuality stems largely from the desire to stigmatize male sexual passivity. We might speculate that subjection to sexual aggression of this kind is especially troublesome because, in a way, it turns men into women, 3 and in this way complicates ordinary views about the sex difference. 
Thus, it is a familiar part of violent male encounters that the victim will be feminized, as in the boxer Mike Tyson's remark to challenger Donovan "Razor" Ruddock: "I'm going to make you my girlfriend."7 4 I suggest that far from being an oddity, this comment says something deeply revealing about the relationship between same-sex relations and the system of caste based on gender. 
Again speaking speculatively, the ban on lesbian relations appears to stem from quite different concerns. 5 Part of the purpose of such bans may be to ensure that women are sexually available to men;7 6 the institution of lesbianism has been problematic partly for this reason. Another part of the concern may be the fact that lesbianism also complicates gender difference by creating a sexually active role for women, 7 one that also undermines existing conceptions of natural difference. It is for this reason familiar to see that socially active women are stigmatized as lesbians. Indeed, a charge of lesbianism is a standard delegitimating device operating against women who have assumed stereotypically male social roles.7 8 There is thus a close connection between sex inequality and the prohibition on lesbianism. 
I am inclined to think that considerations of this sort may help to maintain the legal and social taboo on homosexuality, in a way that might well be damaging to both men and women, heterosexual and homosexual alike, though 
routinely accused, explicitly or implicitly, of being lesbian."). of course in very different ways and to quite different degrees. The distinction between the rigid categories "male" and "female," with the accompanying social and sexual traits "active" and "passive," has especially conspicuous harmful effects for gay men and lesbians. But for all of us, the categories and the traits are much too crude to account for social and sexual life when both of these are going well. For heterosexual women as well, the distinction can be highly damaging because it is rigidly confining and untrue to the complexity of their experience, even when their sexual attraction is directed to men. The damage is closely connected to the castelike features of the current system of gender relations. For heterosexual men, very much the same is true since a degree of passivity in society and in sexual relations is both an inevitable and a desirable part of life, and since it is such an unnecessary burden to be embarrassed by or ashamed of this. 
These are speculative and brisk arguments. They might properly be questioned on the ground that they depend on social and psychological claims that are not obviously right, that they require far more support than provided here, or that they are too uncertain to warrant judicial endorsement. Certainly I have not provided the full defense that would be needed to translate this argument into constitutional law. But formal sex inequality is an explicit part of the ban on same-sex relations, and there is good reason to think that formal inequality stems from impermissible sex-role stereotyping. While judges should probably not accept this argument today, it may ultimately be concluded, outside if not inside the courtroom, that the prohibition on samesex relations is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex, just as the prohibition on miscegenation was a form of discrimination on the basis of race. Both prohibitions are invalid under the Equal Protection Clause. 
EXAMPLE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN7 9 
Abraham Lincoln always insisted that slavery was wrong. On the basic principle, Lincoln allowed no compromises. No justification was available for chattel slavery. But on the question of means, Lincoln was quite equivocal-flexible, strategic, open to compromise, aware of doubt. The fact that slavery was wrong did not mean that it had to be eliminated immediately, or that blacks and whites had to be placed immediately on a plane of equality. In Lincoln's view, the feeling of "the great mass of white people" would not permit this result.80 In his most striking formulation, he declared: "Whether this feeling accords with justice and sound judgment, is not the sole question, if indeed, it is any part of it. A universal feeling, whether well or ill-founded, can not be safely disregarded.""' 
V. JAFFA, CRISIS OF A HOUSE DIVIDED (1959). 
1854), in 2 THE COLLECTED WORKS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN 256 (Roy P. Basler ed., 1953)). 
INDIANA LAW JOURNVAL 
In Lincoln's view, efforts to create immediate social change in this especially sensitive area could have unintended consequences or backfire, even if those efforts were founded on entirely sound principle. It was necessary first to educate people about the reasons for the change. Passions had to be cooled. Important interests had to be accommodated or persuaded to join the cause. Issues of timing were crucial. Critics had to be heard and respected. For Lincoln, rigidity about the principle would always be combined with caution about introducing the means by which the just outcome would be achieved. For this reason, it is a mistake to see Lincoln's caution about abolition as indicating uncertainty about the underlying principle. But it is equally mistaken to think that Lincoln's certainty about the principle entailed immediate implementation of racial equality. 
As Alexander Bickel has emphasized, the point is highly relevant to constitutional law, especially in the area of social reform. 2 As it operates in the courts, constitutional law is a peculiar mixture of substantive theory and institutional constraint. The best substantive thinking might call, for example, for a vigorous and immediately vindicated anticaste principle, more aggressively counteracting race and sex inequality than has the Supreme Court. But because of institutional constraints, courts might be reluctant to vindicate that right or to enforce that principle. Constitutional rights might therefore be systematically underenforced by the judiciary for good institutional reasons." Those reasons have to do with the courts' limited factfinding capacity, their weak democratic pedigree, their limited legitimacy, and their likely futility as frequent instigators of social reform. 
To reach this conclusion in any particular area, we would of course have to spell out the substantive principle and the institutional constraints in some detail. But often there is plausibly a difference between the real extension of a constitutional principle and the judicial enforcement of that principle. There might therefore be some space or gap between what courts are (properly) willing to require and what the Constitution is (properly) interpreted to mean. 
For instance, in the area of welfare rights, the point seems readily visible. Let us suppose (to be sure, very controversially) that the Constitution should be interpreted to create such rights in the form of minimum guarantees of subsistence, on the theory that the equal protection of the laws so requires." Judicial enforcement of welfare rights might call for a difficult managerial role. Courts would have to oversee complex institutions in order to ensure vindication of the relevant rights. Because of the distinctive nature of the welfare problem, the creation of subsistence rights might have adverse effects on other programs with equally compelling claims to the public fisc. To say the least, courts are not well-positioned to see those adverse effects. The managerial role is one for which they are ill-suited. This point applies in many areas of social reform in which courts are asked to act. 
L. REV. 1212 (1978). 

In the area of sex discrimination, such managerial issues are not necessarily present. Suppose, for example, that the ban on same-sex marriage is challenged on equal protection grounds. Here, ongoing judicial supervision of complex institutions is not really at issue. Nonetheless, there is reason for great caution on the part of the courts. An immediate judicial vindication of the principle could well jeopardize important interests. It could galvanize opposition. It could weaken the anti-discrimination movement itself. It could provoke more hostility and even violence against gays and lesbians. It could jeopardize the authority of the judiciary. It could well produce calls for a constitutional amendment to overturn the Supreme Court's decision.85 
At a minimum, courts should generally use their discretion over their dockets in order to limit the nature and the timing of relevant intrusions into the political process. Courts should also be reluctant to vindicate even good principles when the vindication would clearly compromise other important interests, including ultimately the principles themselves. 
Consider, for example, the issue of abortion. Suppose we think that restrictions on abortion violate the right of privacy or (in an argument more congenial to that offered here) that such restrictions deny women the right to equal protection of the laws.86 Is it therefore clear that Roe v. Wade87 was rightly decided? Surely not. The precipitous vindication of the relevant principle might well have been a mistake.' Indeed, it is for this reason, and not because of any supposed abuse of interpretive authority, that Roe may have been wrong when initially decided. 
It seems at least reasonable to think that the Roe decision prematurely committed the nation to a principle toward which it was in any case steadily moving, and that the premature judicial decision had a range of harmful consequences. These included the creation of the Moral Majority, the death of the Equal Rights Amendment, the galvanizing of general opposition to the women's movement, the identification of that movement with the single issue of abortion, the dampening of desirable political activity by women, and the general transformation of the political landscape in a way deeply damaging to women's interests. 89 This result suggests that even if discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is often a violation of the Equal Protection Clause, courts should be cautious and selective in vindicating that principle. 
In the area of homosexuality, we might make some distinctions. Certain imaginable rulings would minimally stretch judicial capacities and authority; other imaginable rulings would pose problems of judicial prudence in their 1993). An advantage of a federal system is that it allows successful experiments in constitutional law at the state level. 

See Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Some Thoughts on Autonomy andEquality in Relation to Roe v. Wade, 63 N.C. L REV. 375 (1985). 
BRING ABOUT SOCIAL CHANGE? (1992). 
HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 25 1994-1995 most severe form. For example, the argument I have explored here-for the proposition that same-sex relations and even same-sex marriages may not be banned consistently with the Equal Protection Clause-is, to say the least, quite adventurous. If the Supreme Court of the United States accepted the argument in 1995, or even in 1996 or 1997, it might cause a constitutional crisis, a weakening of the legitimacy of the Court, an intensifying of homophobia, a constitutional amendment overturning the Court's decision, and much more. Any Court, even one committed to the basic principle, should hesitate in the face of such prospects. It would be far better for the Court to start cautiously and to proceed incrementally. 
The Supreme Court might, for example, accept the most narrow arguments, and reject or (better) avoid passing on the more general and intrusive ones. It might conclude that the Equal Protection Clause forbids state constitutional amendments that interfere with the attempts of ordinary democratic processes to outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The Court might say that such amendments do not merely discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation, but also disfavor a defined group in the political process in a way that involves issues of political equality. 
Alternatively, the Supreme Court might say-as some lower courts havethat government cannot rationally discriminate against people of homosexual orientation without showing that those people have engaged in acts that harm a legitimate government interest. Courts could recognize that discrimination on the basis of orientation alone has the basic characteristics of a "status offense" disfavored in American law.90 Despite its problems, "rationality" review might well be the best route here. Narrow rulings of this sort would allow room for public discussion and debate before obtaining a centralized national ruling that preempts ordinary political process over a moral issue about which society is in a state of evolution. 
We can go further. Constitutional law is not only for the courts; it is for all public officials. The original understanding was that deliberation about the Constitution's meaning would be part of the function of the President and legislators as well. There was not supposed to be a judicial monopoly on that process. 9' The post-Warren Court identification of the Constitution with the decisions of the Supreme Court has badly disserved the traditional American commitment to deliberative democracy. In that system, all officials, not only the judges, have a duty of fidelity to the founding document. And in that system, elected officials will have a degree of interpretive independence from the judiciary. They will sometimes fill the institutional gap created by the courts' lack of factfinding ability and policy-making competence.92 For this reason, they may conclude that practices are unconstitutional even if the Court would uphold them, or that practices are valid even if the Court would invalidate them. Lincoln is an important example here as well. Often, he 
broadly than courts). 
HOMOSEXUALIT AND THE CONSTITUTION invoked constitutional principles to challenge chattel slavery, even though the Supreme Court had rejected that reading of the Constitution. 
Whatever the Supreme Court may say or do, it is therefore crucial for elected officials and even ordinary citizens to contend that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is incompatible with constitutional ideals. For example, the President has far more room to reach such conclusions than does the Court. But even a President determined to end such discrimination would not fare well if he insisted on immediate vindication of the principle. Instead, the President should be pragmatic and strategic. Following Lincoln's example, a President might insist, in all contexts, that this form of discrimination is wrong because it violates the most basic ideals of the Constitution. Indeed, it is both right and good for the President to show the connection between discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and other forms of discrimination, most notably discrimination on the basis of sex. 
In implementing the relevant principles, however, there is room for caution and care. Like the Supreme Court, the President and other officials can be selective about putting relevant issues on the agenda. Public officials might use especially egregious cases-involving, for example, discharge of qualified soldiers from the military, or discrimination against people with AIDS-to give weight to the principle in contexts in which it seems most acceptable. They can start slowly with the easiest areas. One of their major goals should be education. A relatively radical attack on the prohibition of same-sex marriages might come many years down the road, when the basic principle has been vindicated in many other less controversial contexts. But even if the principle is held firmly in view, and even if it is seen as part of a constitutional mandate, its vindication in American law and life need not be immediate-largely because an immediate insistence on principle would compromise so many other social goals, including those that underlie the principle itself. 
In the 1990's, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation promises to be one of the most important issues in constitutional law. Most of this discrimination is constitutionally troublesome in its own right because it is based on simple prejudice and hostility. There is even a connection between discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and discrimination on the basis of sex. In the long run, I suspect, the ban on same-sex relations will be seen as having much the same relationship to male supremacy as did the ban on mixed marriages to White Supremacy. Loving is therefore a key case for those seeking to use the Constitution to counteract both sex discrimination and discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. 
This does not mean that current courts should require states to allow samesex marriages. Under contemporary conditions, a judicial holding of this sort would probably be a large mistake, even though the basic principle is sound. It would be far better for courts to proceed slowly and incrementally. I have suggested that they should build on "rationality review" in the most egregious 
HeinOnline -- 70 Ind. L.J. 27 1994-1995 cases and also invalidate measures that combine restrictions on the democratic process with discrimination. Broader rulings should be avoided. Elected officials, including the President, have somewhat more flexibility in carrying out their own independent constitutional responsibilities. 
There is good reason to think that before terribly long, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation will be seen as a product of unthinking prejudice and hostility, much like discrimination on the basis of race and gender. Courts can play a part in this process, requiring tangible justifications for the infliction of social harm, fortifying the process of democratic deliberation, and requiring genuine reason-giving in all cases of discrimination. But the judicial role, though important, is secondary. If discrimination against homosexuals is eventually to be seen-as I think that it should-to be inconsistent with constitutional principles, it will be the result of an extended process of deliberation, in which courts play an occasionally catalytic but far from decisive role. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Michigan Law Review. 
This content downloaded on Thu, 27 Dec 2012 21:04:53 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 780 782 782 785 790 * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence,University of Chicago. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. Participants in workshops at the Columbia, University of Chicago, Harvard, Hofstra, New York University, and Yale Law Schools provided extremely valuable help. Bruce Ackerman, Albert Alschuler, Anne-Marie Burley, Ruth Chang, Jon Elster, Richard Epstein, Stephen Gilles, Abner Greene, Charles Larmore, Larry Lessig, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, Richard Posner, Eric Rakowski, J. Mark Ramseyer, Joseph Raz, Henry Richardson, Stephen Schulhofer, David Strauss, Lloyd Weinreb, and Steven Winter provided helpful remarkson a previous draft. For financial support I am grateful to the Russell Baker Scholars Fund and the James H. Douglas, Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. 
779 
In this article I explore two claims and discuss their implications for law. The first claim is that human values are plural and diverse. 
By this I mean that we value things, events, and relationshipsin ways that are not reducible to some larger and more encompassing value. 
The second claim is that human goods are not commensurable. By this I mean that such goods are not assessed along a single metric. For reasonsto be explored, the two claims, though related,are importantly different. 
These claims are emphatically not meant to deny the existence of grounds for evaluating private and public choices, both among kinds of valuation and among incommensurablegoods. But efforts to insist on a single kind of valuationand to make goods commensurable,while designed to aid in human reasoning, actually make such reasoning inferior to what it is when it is working well. 
For the moment these claims must remain obscure; I will devote considerablespace to the effort to make them more clear. If they are plausible, views of this sort are likely to have important implications for law. To be sure, endorsement of the two claims need not lead to any particular view about legal problems. To say that law ought to value something in a certain way, we need to make a substantiveclaim about some issue of the good or the right, and a mere referenceto the diversity of values does not supply that claim. Nonetheless, I hope to show that debatesover ways of valuing things, and over issues of commensurability,help to reveal what is at stake in many areas of the law. 
A unifying claim involves the expressivefunction of law - the law's role in reflecting and communicating particular ways of valuing human goods. Many legal debates actually involve the appropriateness of differentkinds of valuation in differentareas of law. 
For example, a liberal society containing diverse social spheresfamilies, markets, politics, religious organizations - makes space for different kinds of valuation. With an understanding of these diverse kinds, we will be able to see why voluntary exchanges should usually be protected, and also why they should sometimes be blocked. Some otherwise puzzling anomalies in the theory of environmental protection will take on new aspects. An understanding of diverse kinds of valuation will help shed light on certain claims about the nature of sex discrimination. I suggest that a Kantian norm, having to do with appropriate ways of valuing human beings, accounts for widespread views about abortion, the distributionof labor within marriage,sexual harassment, prostitution, pornography, surrogacy, and much else besides. With an understandingof this sort, it will be possible as well to understand some features of practical reason in law, especially in the old area of analogical thinking, but also in new areas involving the theory and practice of the regulatory state. 
In pressing claims about incommensurabilityand diverse kinds of valuation, I have both a general target and a positive goal. The target consists of monistic theories of value, particularly as these appear in the study of law.' Monistic theories are pervasive;they have a strong philosophical pedigree;and, in various guises, they come up in many discussions of particularlegal issues. To be sure, it may seem that few people really subscribe to such theories. Surely most people do not deny that human values are plural. But there is a distinguished tradition of thought, found in such diverse thinkers as Plato and Bentham,2 that insists that values should be seen as unitary and that human goods should be seen as commensurable. In their most austere forms, these ideas are rarely endorsed explicitly in law; but more modest versions play a large role in the legal context - not simply in economic analysis,3but also in some aspects of rights-basedthinking insofar as it takes a unitary value as the basis for evaluating law.4 In any case, problems of commensurabilityhave yet to receive sustained attention in law; and it is importantto see exactly how goods are diverse, and in what ways goods are incommensurable,even if some version of these claims might turn out, upon reflection, to be widely shared. 
VALUEIN ETHICSANDECONOMIC1S17-40 (1993). 
KNOWLEDGE100, 106-24 (1990); David Wiggins, Weaknessof Will. Commensurability,and the Objectsof Deliberationand Desire, 79 PROCO.FTHEARISTOTELIASNOCY2.51 (1978-1979). The best discussion of Bentham remains JOHN STUART MILL, MILL ON BENTHAM AND COLERIDGE (F.R. Leavis ed., 1962) (1838). 

POSNERT,HEECONOMICOSFJUSTICE(1981). 
neo-Kantian value of "equal concern and respect" to various legal problems). 
I particularly want to show some distinctive ways in which economic analysis of law, and most forms of utilitarianismas well, miss important commitments of a well-functioning legal system. I hope also to establish that a surprisinglywide range of legal disputes can be illuminated by an understanding of incommensurability and diverse kinds of valuation. The value of this enterpriseconsists not in dictating particular conclusions, which depend on the details, but in enabling us to see an important basis for widespread concerns and convictions. I emphasize that to see values as incommensurable,and to say that people are really disputing appropriatekinds (not levels) of valuation, is not by itself to resolve legal disputes. It is necessary to say something about the right kind - to offer a substantivetheory and to investigatethe particularsin great detail, in order to make progress in hard cases in law. But an understandingof problems of incommensurabilitywill make it easier to see what is at stake. 
This article is organized into six Parts. The first three Parts explore some foundationalissues. Part I describesdiverse kinds of valuation and responds to the claim that we value different things in the same way. Part II offers a working definition of incommensurability. 
Part III discusses an important challenge to the claims in Parts I and II. It also offers some notes on the stakes, attempting to show why these issues matter. 
Part IV makes general remarksabout law, with particularemphasis on law's expressive function. The fifth and most detailed Part surveys areas in which an understandingof kinds of valuation and of incommensurabilitymay affectour understandingof law. In this Part, I discuss a wide range of issues, including social differentiation,the EstablishmentClause, political equality, cost-benefitanalysis, contract remedies, environmental regulation, and feminism. The sixth Part ventures some preliminary remarks on the important issue of choice - choice among differentkinds of valuation and choice among incommensurable goods. In the sixth Part, I also offer a few notes on the importance of the sense of tragedy in law. 
I. 
A. 
KINDS OF VALUATION5 
Human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of affairs in diverse ways.6 Begin with the distinction between instrumen5. I owe much help in the discussion here to ANDERSON, supra note 1, at 8-16. Anderson uses the term modes of valuationto refer to the same basic idea. 
tal and intrinsic goods. We value some things purely or principally for use; consider hammers, forks, or money. But we value other things at least in part for their own sake; consider knowledge or friendship. Because it is so pertinent to law, the distinction between instrumental and intrinsic value will play an important role here. But that distinction captures only a part of the picture. Intrinsically valued things produce a range of diverse responses. Some bring about wonder and awe; consider a mountain or certain artistic works. Toward some people, we feel respect; toward others, affection; toward others, love. People worship their deity. Some events produce gratitude; others produce joy; others are thrilling; others make us feel content; others bring about delight. Some things are valued if they meet certain standards, like a musical or athletic performance or perhaps a pun.7 
Negative valuations are similarly diverse. To lose money is to lose an instrumental good - though one that might be used for intrinsic goods, like the preservation of human life. To lose a friend is a different matter. So, too, our responses to intrinsic bads are diverse. We might be horrified by an act of cruelty, disgusted by an ugly scene, shocked by a betrayal of friendship or love, made indignant by a failure of respect, frightened by the prospect of loss, angered by the infliction of a wound, saddened by undeserved hardship, or frustrated by the failure of our plans. These various terms themselves include a variety of experiences that embody diverse ideas about evaluation. Not all forms of sadness - very much an umbrella term - are the same; so too with disgust - compare reactions to cruelty and reactions to ugliness - and so on. 
There are, then, different kinds of goods, and human beings experience their lives in ways that reflect a wide variety of kinds of valuation.8 The term is meant to draw attention to our diverse stances toward relationships or prospects, or to the disparate theories of valuation through which we conceive and evaluate relationships, events, or prospects. Every kind of valuation embodies a qualitatively distinctive judgment or response. People react to events, to things, and to one another in accordance with the nature and clarity of distinctions STOCKERP,LURALANDCONFLICTINVGALUES213 (1990); R.E. Chang, Irredeemabilitiesand Constitutive Incommensurabilitiesor Buying and Selling Friends (July 1993) (unpublishedmanuscript, on file with author). One could express the same general thought through a reference not to diverse kinds of valuation, but to diverse goods. For my purposes here, I do not believe that much is at stake between the two formulations. I refer to kinds of valuation because the term points explicitly to the interactive nature of valuation; goods are goods for reasons that human beings attribute to them. 
among possible kinds of valuation. Someone who does not make appropriate distinctions might be labeled odd or even weird.9 Someone who does not make enough distinctions might seem thick or obtuse. 
We could categorize kinds of valuation in many different ways. For purposes of law, it might make sense to focus on such things as love, affection, respect, wonder, worship, and use;10 these notions come up in many places of legal dispute. But each of these terms captures a range of qualitatively distinct kinds of valuation. Love for a parent is different from love for a child, which is in turn different from love for a friend, a spouse, a pet, or a house. We might feel wonder toward an act of selfless courage, and also toward a musical performance or a beautiful beach. We might feel awe toward an athletic performance and also toward a mountain. How, and how finely, we should categorize kinds of valuation depends on the uses to which the categories will be put. For law and politics, the number of useful categories is undoubtedly smaller than it is for literature or poetry, which may be especially concerned to offer fine-grained accounts. 
Distinctions among kinds of valuation are highly sensitive to the particular setting in which they operate. People do not value goods acontextually. In one setting - say, the workplace - the prevailing kinds of valuation might be quite different from what they are elsewhere - say, the home or the ballot box. Moreover, particular goods typically do not admit of a single kind of valuation. The prevailing kind has everything to do with the relationship among the various actors. Thus a cat might be valued in a certain way by its owner, but in a different way by a landlord, and in still a different way by a government agency. Much of social differentiation stems from this perception. 1 So, too, several kinds of valuation might be directed toward a single object. A person might, for example, both love and respect a friend or a lover. 
Different kinds of valuation cannot without significant loss be reduced to a single "superconcept," like happiness, utility, or pleasure.12 Any such reduction produces significant loss because it yields an inadequate description of our actual valuations when things are going well. 
(1985) (discussing evaluative depth). 

erases qualitative differences. Consider John Dewey's criticism of utilitarianism'scommitment to the idea of "a fixed, final and supreme end": 
Such a point of view treats concrete activities and specificinterestsnot as worth while in themselves, or as constituents of happiness,but as mere external means to getting pleasures. The upholdersof the old traditioncould thereforeeasily accuse utilitarianismof making not The inadequatedescriptionwill impair predictiveaccounts13 of human behavior. It will also impair normativejudgments about ethics, law, and politics. In making this latter point, I mean to reject relativist or purely conventionalist accounts of kinds of valuation'4 and to suggest that some kinds are more appropriatethan others. Judgments about what is appropriatedepend of course on theories of the good or the right; from the bare fact that kinds of valuation are diverse, we have no basis for evaluating any legal or social practice. But it is important to have diverse kinds of valuation - indeed we could not make sense of our lives without them - and no matter what current conventions may be, some kinds are poorly suited to some contexts because they produce inferior lives. I begin to defend these controversial claims in more detail below.15 
B. ConflictsAmong Kinds of Valuation, with Special Reference to 
Uses of Money 
Conflicts among diverse kinds of valuation permeate private and public choice. Suppose that Smith has arrangedto have lunch with a friend today, but that he has become very busy and perhapswould like to cancel. Suppose Smith thinks in this way: if he cancels, his friend will be disappointed,because he would like Smith's company, and also a bit insulted, because it is cavalier and disrespectfulto cancel lunch at the last minute. Maybe Smith should make it up to him, or provide compensation, by offeringa nontrivial cash payment. This would be a hopelessly inadequate response. A cash payment would be inconsistent with the way that someone values a friend. Even if the friend would prefer $1, or $10, or $100, or $1000 to lunch with Smith even though at some point the payment would in some sense be worth far more than the lunch and be readily accepted as an alternative the offer of cash would be perceived as an insult rather than as compensation. In this context, the differencein kinds of valuation means only virtue but art, poetry, religion and the state into mere servile means of attaining sensuous enjoyments.... 
... The idea of a fixedand single end lying beyond the diversityof human needs and acts renderedutilitarianismincapable of being an adequate representationof the modern spirit. JOHN DEWEY, RECONSTRUCTIONIN PHILOSOPHY180-81, 183 (1920). 
ranking, for example, would be possible even if the point in text is right. But the point may give us reason to question cost-benefitanalysis, see infra text accompanying notes 235-42, and also the Coase Theorem, see infra text accompanying notes 232-33 (discussing offer-askingdisparity), without necessarily questioning the use of indifference curves and utility functions to predict human behavior. 
within caste societies in MICHAEL WALZER, SPHERESOF JUSTICE312-16 (1987). that a financial exchange would be inappropriate. The kind of valuation of a friend blocks the use of otherwise acceptable grounds for action.16 As we will see, the law is pervadedby principlesof this kind - principles that forbid resort to reasons for action that are acceptable in other contexts. 
The case is not exotic. Similar issues permeate the exceptionally complex cluster of social norms regulating the appropriate use of money as an incentive for action. For example, if an employer tells you that, as an employee performinga certainjob, you must spend a month away from your home and family, you might well agree. But if someone tells you that he will pay you a monthly salary in order to persuade you to spend a month away from home and family, you will probably feel insulted and degraded, and you may well turn him down.17 This second offer reflects an inappropriatevaluation of you and your family - it suggests that your relationshipwith your family is simply up for sale. The employer's offer treats you as an object of contempt and perhaps ridicule. In the first case, the same cannot be said. Even though in the first case the relationship might be thought to have been "tradedfor" cash, the absence from family is a by-product of employment, rather than something brought about as an end in itself, desired for its own sake by one's boss. To see the two cases as the same - as instances of trade-offs between family and income - is to overlook an importantdistinction in the meanings of the two offers. 
Or suppose that we feel awe toward something. If we do, we will not believe that it should be valued in the same way as its cash equivalent. A simple or flat judgment that a mountain is "really worth" $10 million is inconsistent with the way that we (or most of us) value the mountain. This is because the mountain is valued through a differentkind of valuation from the $10 million; the former produces awe and wonder, whereas the latter is for human use - though admittedly $10 million may produce a (different)sort of awe and wonder as well. These points hold even if many people might be indifferentbetween $10 million and the mountain in the sense that they do not social norm requiringthat, in some circumstances,gifts should not take the form of cash, which is regardedas excessively impersonal. As compared with a gift of (say) $30, a gift of (say) a tie costing $30 establishes a distinctive and often preferablerelationshipbetween the recipient and the giver - even if in some contexts $30 in cash would be worth more to the recipient than the $30 tie, and even if in some contexts a gift of $30 would be less costly, to the giver, than the gift of a $30 tie. This point is interestinglymissed in Joel Waldfogel, TheDeadweightLoss of Christmas, 83 AM. ECON.REV. 1328, 1336 (1993), which finds four billion dollars in annual deadweight losses from noncash gifts and which assumes that cash gifts are always more efficientand therefore generally preferable. 
know which they would choose if both were offered;even if $10 million is in some sense the right amount to invest in protection of the mountain from degradation;and even if, as seems clear, infinite valuation of the mountain would be an irrationalallocation of scarce social resources. The point does not suggest that pristine areas cannot be degraded. But it does have a range of important and sometimes overlooked consequences for how people involved in the legal system might think about environmental protection.'8 It also suggests that indifferencecurves have quite limited purposes and that they may be misleading on some important matters. It may even suggest that we should question the whole notion of indifferencecurves. Some people may not be "indifferent"between two goods even though they do not think that one is better than another.19 
Attention to diverse kinds of valuation casts general light on the phenomenon of exchanges that are blocked by social norms. If someone offersto pay an adult neighbor to mow his lawn, the neighborwill often regardthe request as an insult, because it reflects an inappropriate valuation of the neighbor. The request embodies an improperconception of what the relationship is, or of the attitude with which neighbors render services for each other. The impropriety remains even if the offeree ordinarily would regard the offered wage as a fair price for an hour of mowing services. In an extreme case, if someone asks an attractiveperson (or a spouse) for sexual relations in returnfor cash, the same would be said even more vehemently. Because of the existence of diverse kinds of valuation, we may not be able to generalize acontextual preferencesfrom particulardecisions. The point bears on law as well. For example, decisions not to insure certain goodsfreedom from pain and suffering, the well-being of one's children need not suggest a global judgment about whether injuries to those goods deserve compensation.20 
There is often a connection between blocked exchanges and ideas about equal citizenship. The exchange may be barredby social norms or law because of a perception that, while there may be disparities in social wealth, the spheres in which people are very unequal ought not to invade realms of social life in which equality is a social goal.21 Often this idea comes from the existence of a kind of valuation based on equal respect. The legal prohibition on vote trading is an example. So too with certain complex social bans on the use of wealth to buy services or goods from other people, such as a shoveled walk or a body part.22 An intricate web of norms covers the exchange of money among both friends and strangers. Some of these norms are connected with the principle of civic equality. Monetary exchange would reflect forms of inequality that are not legitimate in certain spheres. In making these points, I am disregarding many complexities, and I have not tried to justify any particular set of outcomes in hard cases. I want to suggest only a general point: the refusal to allow economic exchanges is often based on familiar notions of equality that such exchanges would compromise. 
There is a further point. We should distinguish between cases in which a monetary offer is entirely inappropriate - say, a large check offered in exchange for an academic article endorsing the offeror's position - and cases in which the monetary sum, while appropriately offered, does not reflect a full or fully accurate valuation of the item in question. Artists, actors, and teachers might well believe that dollar sums cannot truly reflect the social value of what they produce certainly in the sense that money is not valued in the same way as art or education - without believing that monetary compensation itself is inappropriate. It is a pervasive and intriguing feature of markets that financial compensation is challenged as too low, rather than as inappropriate, or indeed willingly accepted, even in contexts in which the transaction involves a good that is not valued in the same way as money. But it is equally intriguing to note the occasional presence of norms and law that block exchanges on the grounds of an inappropriate kind of valuation. 
An understanding of diverse kinds of valuation thus helps explain the anticommodification position for law or social norms - the view that some things ought not to be traded on markets and that market exchanges should therefore be prohibited.23 The objection to commodification should be seen as a special case of the general problem of diverse kinds of valuation. The claim is that we ought not to trade (for the company town of Pullman, Illinois. Id. at 295-303. 
complex range of considerations. See infra section V.H. 
Market-Inalienability,100 HARV. L. REV. 1849 (1987). example) sexuality or reproductivecapacities on markets because economic valuation of these "things" is inconsistent with and may even undermine their appropriatekind (not level) of valuation.24 The objection is not that markets value sexuality "too much" or "too little"; it is that markets value these activities in the wrong way. Judge Posner's well-known writings on the "babymarket"25do not quite address this particularobjection. A judgment about the appropriateway of valuing babies must itself be defended on some basis, and such a judgment does not automatically lead to a particularview about legal rules for adoption or the sale of young children. But the question of appropriatekinds of valuation plays a major role in these debates.26 
Thus far I have dealt with cases that involve objectionsto the kind of valuation expressed through cash payments. But we can think of many cases not involving the issue of monetary equivalence. Imagine, for example, that John treats a beautiful diamond in the same way that most people treat friends, or that Jane values a plant in the same way that most people value their children, or that Sandy values her car like most people value art or literature. All of us know people with occasional tendencies of this sort. Indeed, all of us are people with occasional tendencies of this sort. But sometimes an improper kind of valuation seems odd, or disrespectful, or even pathological - and all these in part because it makes it impossible to sustain certain sorts of desirable social relationships. Disputes over law and social norms, which are related and sometimes mutually enforcing behavioral influences, often reflect disagreementsover proper kinds of valuation, with adjectives of this sort moving to the fore. 
Consider, for example, the animal rights movement. Some people think that animals should be treated with dignity and respect, and not as if they exist solely for human consumption and use.27 This view need not entail the further claim that animal life is infinitely valuable. It is best taken as a recommendation of a shift in the kind of valuation of animals, accompanied by a judgment that the new kind will have consequences for what human beings do. The recommendation may be based on the view that if we see animals (and nature) in this way, we will solve collective action problems faced by human beings in preserving animal life that is important for human lives; it may be based on a noninstrumental effort to extend ideals of basic dignity to all living things.28 I reiterate that substantive judgments of this sort must be defended; by itself, the reference to diverse kinds of valuation gets us nowhere. The important point is that such judgments are a frequent, though often overlooked, part of social and legal discussion. 
The existence of diverse kinds of valuation explains a good deal of private behavior. Norms governing address provide a familiar example. By using some part of a name - last name preceded by "Professor," "Doctor," "Mr.," "Ms.," "Mrs.," "Miss"; last name by itself; first name; nickname or diminutive; some term of endearment - a good deal of signaling takes place about prevailing kinds of valuation. Some of these signals connote respect and admiration; others show contempt; others show affection or love. Of course different cultures vary greatly on this score, and of course individual relationships change over time from one kind to another. Note in this regard that the Constitution forbids both the federal government and the states from conferring any "Title of Nobility."29 In this way, it commits itself to a certain view of equality among human beings. Though the provision may seem like a historical curiosity to current observers, to the Framers it crucially exemplified this view; as we will see,30 it is the forerunner of the Equal Protection Clause, with a close connection to judgments about appropriate kinds of valuation. 
C. 
Three major clarifications are necessary here. First, my claim about diverse kinds of valuation has largely been a claim about widespread current attitudes. I do believe that those attitudes go very deep and that it would be quite impossible to make sense of our experience RONALDDWORKINL,IFE'SDOMINION67101 (1993). Dworkin's claim that life is "sacred"or "inviolable"is best taken, I think, as a claim about the appropriatekind of valuation of life, and his descriptionof certain courses of action as showing "contempt" for life is highly compatible with the account I offer here. 
political thinking in the Revolutionary period, see GORDONS. WOOD,THE RADICALISMOFTHE AMERICANREVOI-UTIO1N45-68, 229-43, 271-86 ( 
without reference to diverse kinds of valuation.3' But I do not intend to offer anything like a transcendental or metaphysical claim about valuation; I am speaking about how we value, not about nature or about valuation of goods apart from human attitudes. 
Nor are existing kinds of valuation fixed and immutable. Norms change, and prevailing social conceptions about kinds of valuation change as well. Shifts from one kind of valuation to another are perfectly commonplace, both at the individual and social level. Respect can turn into love; love can turn into use; use can become love; love can become respect; love may or may not be accompanied by respect; respect can become affection; so too for love. Within societies, kinds of valuation change over time. The shift from feudalism to capitalism can hardly be described in a sentence, but one of its features involved changes in kinds of valuation of work and workers, and this was a prime area of contestation.32 Marriage may once have involved more use, and less love and affection, than it now does.33 The abolition of slavery represented a shift from use to a certain measure of respect; so too with the attack on racial hierarchy in the aftermath of Brown v. Board of Education.34 Much of the change in race relations in the South involved a shift from connections built on deference and what was believed to be a sort of affection to principles of civic equality and respect.35 
Some of the most heated disputes about law and policy actually turn on the appropriateness of a shift from one kind of valuation to another. In labor law, for example, many important controversies involve the appropriate kind of valuation of workers.36 The dispute over at-will employment seems to turn in part on this issue. Critics of the at-will rule claim that the rule reflects an inadequate kind of valuation of workers because it subjects them to the whim of employers.37 Here too notions of equality are at work in calling into question certain voluntary exchanges.38 
Much of the theory of environmental protection involves similar issues. It is not entirely accurate to say that environmentalistsvalue pristine areas "more"than do economists. It is also important to say that environmentalistsvalue pristineareasin a differentway. Whereas economists tend to think of the environment as something for human use and exploitation,39environmentaliststend to claim that we should view the environmentwith awe and wonder or value it for its own sake rather than as an instrumental good.40 The debates over pollution taxes and tradable emissions permits are partly debates over kinds of valuation.41 Of course it is unclear how these differentkinds of valuation will or should affect environmentalpolicy, a point to which I will return.42 
Second, the existence of diverse kinds of valuation does not by itself have any clear implications for law, policy, or even social attitudes. There is a differencebetween how people should value and how law should value. I do not claim that, because people now value relationships, events, objects, or each other in certain ways, it follows that law should adopt those diverse kinds of valuation. We need not be conventionalists. If a particularkind of valuation were really superior with respect to what is appropriatelyvalued in public or private life, the law might well adopt that kind of valuation notwithstanding its inconsistency with prevailing social norms. A good deal of constitutional law can be taken as an effort to constrain prevailing kinds of valuation; this is true both for principles of religious liberty and for antidiscriminationnorms.43 Or law might embody a certain kind of valuation precisely because it is law; we might think that cost-benefit analysis is appropriatefor law even if we think that it is inappropriate for spouses or parents. If we are to draw conclusions about appropriate law, policy, and norms, it is because our best account of the good or the right supports a particular constellation of kinds of valuation and because we are able to show that a particularconstellation makes Will, 51 U. CHI.L. REV.947 (1984). This dispute implicitly involves diverse kinds of valuation. Epstein's view rests on a monistic conception of value in which workers "tradeoff" goods along a single metric; Blades does not directly address this question but appearsto take a stand in the other direction. 
OATEST,HETHEORYOFENVIRONMENTALPOLICY(2d ed. 1988). 
wholly reducible to its value to God or to humanity."). 
sense for law.44 I return to this complex issue in Part IV. 
Third, those who believe that goods are valued in different ways need not reject the possibility of rational choice or even some form of trade-offamong them.45 On the contrary, believers in diverse kinds of valuation would do well to insist that choices occur and that they might well be judged rational or not. People choose among differently valued goods all the time, and these choices are not immune from evaluation on rational grounds. My affection for my dog and my desire for more cash reflect differentkinds of valuation, but it would be quite irrationalfor me to allow my dog to be sold for fifty dollars. (If I were desperately poor, and if my family were ill and suffering,it could also be irrational for me to refuse to trade my dog for one million dollars, notwithstandingthe presence of distinct kinds of valuation.) Someone might well sell for a price the products of her capacity to play Mozart - musical performances - or to write poetry, notwithstanding the fact that she values her capacity as something other than an incomeproducing asset. In some circumstances it would surely be irrational for a musician to refuse to perform for a fee. These claims about rationality need to be explained in some detail, but they should be sufficient to show that there may indeed be a point to deliberating about cases that involve goods that are valued in different ways.46 D. Social Science, Economics, and DiverseKinds of Valuation Is it useful to note that kinds of valuation are diverse and plural? Perhaps it is not. Perhaps we can make good predictions about social life simply by assuming that there is a single kind of valuation.47 On this view, a claim about diverse kinds of valuation may usefully describe people's internallives; it may have deeperpsychological truth;it may better account for how lives and choices are actually experienced. But it is fully dispensable for social scientists and lawyers, who can work with an assumption of "as if unitariness" - that is, who can assume that people act as if they value all things in the same way, and who can make accurate predictions with that assumption. So long as we can model choices - so long as ordinal rankings are possible social scientists need not worry about what I have said here. 
This conclusion seems partly right. If we assume that people want to maximize one thing utility, value, welfare, well-being we might well be able to make good predictions of various sorts.48 We might be able to say what sorts of legislation will be enacted in what circumstances. 
need not decide whether they value these goods in the same way. even with respect to nonmarket transactions. can make accurate predictions by assuming unitariness, we can indeed dispense with claims about diverse kinds of valuation.49 
But I believe that, with the assumption of a unitary kind of valuation, We will sometimes offer inadequate predictions, explanations, and recommendations for law. The idea of "revealed preferences" is a predictive failure; to make predictions from choices, we need to offer an account of what lies behind choices,50 and that account must take into consideration what I am discussing here. Behavior is often a product of judgments about what kinds of valuation are appropriate under what circumstances. 
As we will see, some of the "demand" for environmental regulation is best understood as a response to claims about the need to value things in different ways.51 Much of individual conduct is best understood in similar terms. We might, for example, puzzle a great deal over the existence of social norms without apparent "maximizing" explanations.52 Consider a few examples: the norm in favor of voting, norms of dress and etiquette, norms of vengeance, economics. On this view, we do not hypothesize any supervalue such as utility, but work instead with a rank ordering of individual preferences,based on actual choices (revealed preferences). This approach will not work. We cannot get a good sense of what people value simply from choices since choices are a function of context and since they are inarticulate- poor predictors of futurebehavior- without some account of what lies behind them. See Amartya Sen, Internal Consistencyof Choice, 61 ECONOMETRIC49A5 (1993). Sen shows that even the weakest axioms of revealedpreferencetheory can fail. For example, it is usually assumed that if someone prefers A to B in a situation of binary choice, he should also preferA to B if some third alternativeC is introduced. But this is wrong. Someone may preferA to B, but B to A and C, because the choice of A over B shows no global or acontextualjudgment. For example, the choice of A (a medium sized piece of cake) over B (a large piece of cake) may reflect a desire to be moderate, a desire that can alsojustify the choice of B overA and C (a huge piece of cake). Id. at 498- 503. Thus we cannot rank order individual preferenceson the basis of choices alone or without some account of what values underlie choices. See also RAZ, supra note 17, at 327; Richard H. Pildes & Elizabeth S. Anderson, Slinging Arrowsat Democracy: Social Choice Theory, Value Pluralism, and DemocraticPolitics, 90 COLUML.. REV. 2121 (1990). 
in his work on nonmarketbehavior, most notably in BECKERs,upra note 3. 

JUDGMENT3S2-35 (1989). norms against sale.53 Some anomalies in expected utility theory might result from diverse kinds of valuation.54 There is much more to say about these complex matters. Nothing said in this paragraphrefutes the possibility of complete ordinal rankings. But we can make some progress in thinking about human behavior by examining the role of diverse valuations. 
In this light, we can also make sense out of a familiardebate within the legal culture. In some subjects - contracts, torts, property people often propose that something important - like a risk to life or health - is in some deep sense equivalent to a certain amount of cash. At this point, some participantin the conversation (perhapsa student) rejects the proposal, whereupon the original speaker suggests that the resistancemust depend on a claim of infinite valuation, at which point it is clear that the original proposal was correct. But perhaps the resistancerests on a claim about appropriatekinds, not levels, of valuation.55 If so, the participant who is making this claim has a lot to explain. She has to explain how to make choices among goods that are valued in different ways. But at least we will be able to understand what she is saying. 
We might also begin to see why it might be jarring to conceive of the various harms imposed by law as simple "costs." This formulation begs important questions and ignores qualitative distinctions. It does so by assuming a unitary kind of valuation. In that way, this formulation loads the dice - that is, it prejudices analysis by pointing it in certain controversialdirections. As we will see, the point bears on the question of commensurability.56 
II. INCOMMENSURABILITY 
The subject of incommensurabilityraises many complexities, and I want to bracketat least some of the philosophical debate here, concentrating instead on what is particularlyrelevant to law.57 Begin with a or utilitariangrounds. See, e.g., RICHARDA. POSNER, LAW AND LITERATURE26-70 (discussing vengeance). 
infra note 219 and accompanying text. 
CALABRESI,THE COSTSOF ACCIDENTS 16-20 (1970) (discussing trade-offs between human fatalities and offsettingsocial benefits). It also helps explain the account of the "sacred"in DWORKIN, supra note 28, at 68-101. 
rough working definition,designed especially for the legal context: Incommensurabilityoccurs when the relevant goods cannot be aligned along a single metric without doing violence to our consideredjudgments about how thesegoods are best characterized. Let me brieflydescribe the four major elements of this definition. First, by "our consideredjudgments," I mean our reflective assessments of how certain relationshipsand events should be understood, evaluated, and experienced. Such reflectioninvolves identifying the nature and depth of various goods in our lives. 
Second, the notion of a "single metric" should be understoodquite literally.58 By this I mean a standard of valuation that (1) operates at a workable level of specificity;(2) involves no qualitative distinctions; and (3) allows comparison of different goods along the same dimentant for present purposes sion. One example of a real-world metric is money. Ten dollars and $100 can be indeed the most imporconfidently measuredby such a standard, so that ten dollars is simply a small quantity of the same thing of which $100 is a substantial amount. If two goods are fungible, they are also commensurable. Other metrics include feet, yards, pounds, and of course meters. The difference between lengths of ten yards and 100 yards, or between 1000 pounds and 400 pounds, involves no qualitative distinctions. 
furnishes a single metric along which goods can be evaluated. Some utilitarians believe that a single metric is indeed available for ordering valuations. The great utilitarian John Stuart Mill, of course, was unwilling to commit himself fully to this view.59 I use the term metric GRIFFINW,ELL-BEING75-92 (1986); NUSSBAUMs,upra note 2, at 106-24; RAZ,supra note 17, at 321-66; STOCKER, supra note 6, at 130-207; CHARLES TAYLOR, The Diversityof Goods, in PHILOSOPHAYNDTHEHUMANSCIENCE2S30, 243 (1985); Elizabeth Anderson, Values, Risks, and MarketsNorms, 17 PHIL.& PUB.AFF.54, 57-59 (1987); Pildes & Anderson, supra note 48, at 2145-66; Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, in 81 PROC.OFTHEARISTOTELIASNOCY.193, 197-89 (1981); Richard Warner,Incommensurabilityas a JurisprudentialPuzzle, 68 CHI.-KENTL. REV. 147 ( ( "integratedpersonality" in Frank Hahn, Benevolence,in THOUGHTFUELCONOMIMCAN7, 8 (J. Gay T. Meeds ed., 1991) (asserting intrapersonalcomparability of options grounded in self- and other-regarding motives) with the response in Amartya Sen, Beneconfusion,in THOUGHTFUELCONOMIMCAN, supra, at 12, 12-14 (denying this thesis). 
denominatorof value,"an understandingthat parallelsthe notion of a metric, but is not identical to it. Charles Larmore,Pluralism and ReasonableDisagreement, 11Soc. PHIL. & POLICY(forthcoming 1994) (manuscriptat 65, on file with author). At least for purposesof law, I think that the notion of a single metric is more useful than that of a common denominator of value. We could identify common denominatorsof value at a high level of generality- excellence, generosity, and so forth - but because such common denominators, including qualitatively different features, can be found for most legal problems, the term may lead to confusion. criteria, but not as metrics. Kinds of valuation der, worship 
embody no metric at all.61 largely because of the special importance of the metric of dollars to law. As we will see,60the use of a single metric is often unhelpful for law, and this point has a wide range of consequences for particular legal disputes. Under this general definition of metric, many possible standards excellence, well-being, affective allegiance 
count as love, respect, wonthis form 
Third, with the phrase "doing violence," I mean to suggest that the use of a single metric is inconsistent with the way certain goods are actually experienced,or tend to be experiencedwhen people's lives are going well. The phrase is intended to show that a single metric, nominally descriptive of experience, would actually transform it, in a way that would make a great deal of difference. It would make a great deal of differencebecause it would elide certain qualitative differencesthat are important in both life and law. We might label many choices involving commensurablegoods investmentdecisions. The decision how to invest so as to maximize expected return does indeed involve commensurable goods. Some people write as if all or most decisions have as if all or most decisions are investment decisions. Some people write as if life is full of investment decisions, so that a decision made in one context will show a global, acontextual judgment about valuation.62 It is these points that I am rejecting here. If we saw all human decisions as investment decisions, we would make human exIt is quite compatible with the principle of utility to recognize the fact that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more valuable than others. It would be absurd that, while in estimating all other things quality is considered as well as quantity, the estimation of pleasure should be supposed to depend on quantity alone. 
Id. at 12. See also Mill's criticism of Bentham: 
Nothing is more curious than the absence of recognition in any of his writings of the existence of conscience, as a thing distinct from philanthropy, from affection for God or man, and from self-interest in this world or in the next .... 
Nor is it only the moral part of man's nature . . .that he overlooks; he but faintly recognises, as a fact in human nature, the pursuit of any other ideal end for its own sake. The sense of honour,and personaldignity ... the love of beauty,the passion of the artist;the love of order ... the love of power ... the love of action . . . the love of ease: - None of these powerful constituents of human nature are thought worthy of a place among the "Springs of Action;" .... 
MILL, supra note 2, at 66-68. 
Other general meditations on this theme appear in JOHN STUART MILL, AUTOBIOGRAPHY (1873); for an illuminating discussion see Elizabeth Anderson, John Stuart Mill on Experiments in Living, 102 ETHICS4 (1991). 
Compare Viscusi's analysis with Amartya Sen, Freedom and Needs, NEW REPUBL.ICJa,n. 10 & 17, 1994, at 31, 32-33 ("There are deep and fundamentaland intuitively understood grounds for rejecting the view that confines itself merely to checking the parity of outcomes, the view that matches death for death, happiness for happiness, fulfillment for fulfillment, irrespectiveof how all this death, happiness, and fulfillment comes about."). answer to the two questions: "How much would you have to be paid to allow degradation?" and "How much would you pay to avoid degradation?" People are perfectly willing to answer the second question with numbers that are systematically lower than those produced by the first. In the environmental area, the asymmetry is especially large, and it creates a considerable puzzle for conventional views about rationality. But it would be wrong to think that the answers to the second question are in some deep sense more revealing of "true" preferences, while the responses to the first question are mistaken. 
The asymmetry may have a good deal to do with diverse kinds of valuation. In particular, people may believe that a species or a pristine area has intrinsic rather than instrumental value. When this is so, they do not want to assume the sort of responsibility that is entailed by allowing its elimination for cash.233 The asymmetry reflects a belief that an answer to the first question above entails a different sort of act from an answer to the second. This may not be irrational at all. In the first case, the reference state or status quo is nondegradation, and the respondent is asked to interfere with that state of affairs. In the second case, the reference state is degradation, which the respondent is asked to help alleviate. The asymmetry reflects a judgment that these are answers to two very different questions. 
The asymmetry thus suggests that people think that the loss, through their deliberate action, of a pristine area or an endangered species is incommensurably bad, and that this thought should be expressed through regulatory proscriptions. To say the least, this view raises many complexities. It is by no means clear that the relevant judgments about responsibility can be defended. I mean to suggest only that the idea is both common and intelligible. 
E. 
Cost-Benefit Analysis234 
One of the most hotly disputed issues in law and policy involves the role of cost-benefit analysis (CBA). In the most dramatic victory for CBA, the Reagan administration adopted two important executive Bias in DecisionMaking, 1 J. RISK& UNCERTAINT7Y(1988); W. Kip Viscusi et al.. An Investigation of the Rationalityof Consumer Valuationsof Multiple Health Risks. 18 RAND J. ECON. 465 (1987). 
Source of the WTA-WTPDisparity. 82 AM. ECON.REV. 1366, 1366-67 ( discussion of responsibilityand the action-omissiondistinction in Williams,supra note 88, at 
orders calling for the applicationof CBA to all regulatorydecisions.235 These orders were withdrawn by President Clinton and replaced by a new executive order, which also places a high premium on cost-benefit analysis.236 
There is of course much to be said in favor of CBA. Federal regulation is notoriously and pervasively chaotic and irrational.237Who could object to the idea that we should systematize costs and benefits and compare them? The question seems especially powerful when combined with the plausible claim that some opponents of CBA are confused about their real objection. In fact, it is sometimes said,238the opponents' real complaint is that some of the relevant variables have been insufficientlyvalued. Would it not be a sufficientresponse to say to the critics of this form of analysis that perhaps we should place a higher premium on, for example, human health, or the environment, and then proceed with CBA? 
It would be difficult to challenge the view that law and policy should be assessed on the basis of an inquiry into the advantages and disadvantagesof differentcourses of action, and CBA often appearsto be a way of systematizing that sort of approach. But at least for some purposes, I do not think this response would be sufficient. Nor is it entirely adequate to say, as critics of CBA typically do, that this sort of approach fails to address distributional issues or is biased against the poor.239 
The real problem with any form of conventional CBA is that it is obtuse. CBA is obtuse because it tries to measure diverse social goods along the same metric.240Suppose, for example, that we are told that the "cost" of a certain occupational safety regulationis $1 million, and that the "benefit"is $1.2 million. To make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. To what do these numbersrefer? Do they include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaledback production of important goods? Do they mean more poverty? At least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disaggregated system for assessing the qualitativelydifferenteffects of regulatory impositions. People should be allowed to see those diverse effects for themselves and to makejudgments based on an understanding of the qualitative differences. If all of the relevant goods are aligned along a single metric, they become less visible, or perhaps invisible. 
Through considerations of this sort, we might be able to make some progress toward assessment of the Reagan and Clinton administrations' executive orders on regulation. Instead of conventional costbenefit analysis, what is necessary is a full accounting of the various social consequences of regulation. Those consequences should be described in a way that allows a detailed view of what the costs and benefits specifically are. Once greater specificity is added, we will not be thinking in terms of simple costs and benefits at all. President Clinton's order241makes some modest steps in this direction, but the steps are erratic and unconnected with any clear theory of how to assess regulation.242 
The best response to this claim is pragmatic and institutional. It would be that at least for law and public policy, it makes sense to act as if diverse goods were commensurable,because this way of proceeding makes decisions tractable where they would otherwise be ad hoc, and because ad hoc decisions lead to a systematic misallocation of resources and a perversesystem of priorities. CBA may offera less than full description of what is really at stake, but perhaps it counteracts the forms of inconsistency and ultimate irrationalitythat result in the public sector if we proceed without quantitative help. 
This is a plausible defense of CBA in the real world. Whether it is right depends on pragmaticjudgments that cannot be resolved in the 
of decision. It says "qualitative"costs and benefits will be included as part of the analysis: "Costs and benefits shall be understood to include both quantifiable measures (to the fullest extent that these can be usefullyestimated)and qualitativemeasuresof costs and benefitsthat are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider." Exec. Order No. 12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735, at 51,735 (1993). The order furtherstates: "Each agency shall assess both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing that some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify, propose or adopt a regulationonly upon a reasoneddeterminationthat the benefits of the intended regulationjustify its costs." Id. at 51,736. The order also contains a vague referenceto the relevance of "equity" and "distributiveimpacts." Id. 
But these are odd and in some ways not entirely coherent formulations. If quantificationis impossible or misleading, we are not weighing costs and benefits at all, but instead assessing advantagesand disadvantages. "Qualitative"costs and benefitsare not easy to conceive. In any case, some of the advantagesand disadvantagesof regulatoryaction are not adequatelydescribed as costs and benefitsat all. The Clinton order should be seen as a halfway house between CBA and a more differentiatedanalysis that draws close attention to the diverse goods at stake. Of course it remainspossible that this halfway house is the best way of combining good theory with administrativeconcerns and sensible priority setting, but the current theory seems confused. abstract. My point is that if goods are diverse and valued in different ways, there will be considerablecrudeness in this approach to regulation. Much will be lost even if much is also gained. We should therefore have a presumption in favor of a much more disaggregated accounting of the effects of regulation, one that exposes to public view the full set of effects. 
F. Specific Performance,Damages, PrivateLaw Remedies: Another 
Viewof the Cathedral 
The legal system usually insists on an award of damages for the infliction of harm; a damages award appears to reflect a judgment in favor of commensurability. But sometimes damages are insufficient. We can approach a large subject- the relationshipbetween compensation and commensurability243- by examining a pervasive issue in the law of contract: whether to award a damages remedy or instead to requirespecific performance.244From an exploration of this issue, we may be able to offer a few tentative generalizations. 
It is typically said that specific performancewill be awarded when damages are "inadequate." But what could this possibly mean? Suppose that Jones has contracted to buy a painting, and that the seller defaults on the agreement. It is far from clear why a court should order the seller to hand over the painting, rather than to pay damages to Jones. If the damages seem inadequate, we might think that they have been set too low, and that the right solution is simply to require the seller to pay more. Surely there is some level at which the court will set the proper amount. Why, then, is specific performance ever available? 
A conventional answer is that damages remedies are inadequate when the good at issue is unique.245But the notion of uniqueness is itself a puzzle. At least for economists, the term points at most to "questionsof degree."246All goods have substitutes of some sort; this is part of the usual understanding of choice amidst scarcity. In explaining the notion of uniqueness, some people have stressed that a damages remedy might well be inaccurate for certain goods. Subjective value is peculiarly hard to ascertain in some cases, and the goods may involve high search costs that judges cannot easily determine. 
56 (1993). 
Performance,45 U. CHI. L. REV. 351 (1978). 
The subjective value of Jones's painting is nearly impossible to know and may well substantiallyexceed the market value, if a market exists. The particularcosts incurredby Jones in finding that particularpainting are hard to establish. In these circumstances, the existence of a specific performanceremedy can be seen as a natural response to information costs faced by the legal system in ascertaining the appropriate damages remedy. 
We might conclude that, when it is especially expensive to determine damages, courts will order specific performance. In a brief but notable description of the doctrine, Judge Posner says that the doctrine representsan exception to the usual damages decree for cases in which "damages are difficult to compute because of a lack of good market substitutes for the performance of the contract breaker."247 This is a notable description because it suggests that behind the specific performance remedy lies the simple problem of cost of computation. 
There is undoubtedly a good deal of truth to this; but another factor may be at work. The specific performance remedy can be understood to stem from a resistance to commensurability. Specific performance must be awarded because the good in question is not commensurable with cash. This is not to say that it is more valuable than cash. Indeed, it is less valuable, often, than a great deal of cash. The claim is instead that the good is valued in a way that is inconsistent with cash valuation. What the plaintiff wants, and what she is entitled to get, is a good that she values in the way that she values the object for which she has contracted. A good that she values "equally," in market terms, is not a perfect substitute.248Hence one would expect the specific performance remedy to reflect a stand in favor of diverse kinds of valuation. 
There is no simple way to test this hypothesis against its economic competitor. The two would suggest parallel results. But both the rhetoric and the outcomes of some of the cases suggest that specific performance is awarded at least in part because cash does not reflect the way in which the promisee values the good in question.249 
1993) (granting specific performance when franchisee's very existence as business was threatened);Semmes Motors, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 429 F.2d 1197, 1205 (2d Cir. 1970) (granting temporary injunction when plaintiff sought right to continue 20-year-old business); City Stores Co. v. Ammerman, 266 F. Supp. 766, 776 (D.D.C. 1967) (granting specific performance when there was a disputed lease critical to future expansion of business);Forman v. Benson. 446 N.E.2d 535, 541 (111.App. Ct. 1983) (granting specific performance for breach of contract for sale of land); Kitchen v. Herring, 42 N.C. 137, 138 (1851) (same); see also David Cohen, The 
This point suggests the need to supplement Guido Calabresi and Douglas Melamed's well-known discussion of the choice between liability and property rules.250In their terminology, a right is protected by a liability rule if it can be taken upon a payment of compensation. A right is protected by a property rule if it can be taken only through voluntary exchange, and if market compensation is thereforean inadequate justification for the taking. Calabresiand Melamed's important discussion rightly emphasizes the relevance of transactions costs, including information costs, to the choice between the two methods of legal protection.251 But this account provides only part of the picture. As the discussion above suggests, property rules are also appropriate when the relevant right or good is valued in a different way from money. In such cases, courts hesitate to use liability rules, not only because courts doubt their ability to calculate a proper cost for the forgone good, but also because a dollar amount will reflect the wrong kind of valuation of the good at issue. The litigant is entitled to the good and its existing kind of valuation, ratherthan to a substitute valued in a differentway, even if in some aggregativesense "equally."252 
The point bears on damage remedies generally, most obviously for emotional distress or pain and suffering.253As Margaret Jane Radin Relationshipof ContractualRemedies to Political and Social Status: A PreliminaryInquiry, 32 U. TORONTOL.J. 31 (1982). 

government may undertakeeven a compensated taking of private property. See U.S. CONSTa.mend. V ("nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation"). [C]ompensatorydamages [for pecuniary loss] are designed to place [the damaged party] in a position substantially equivalent in a pecuniary way to that which he would have occupied had no tort been committed. When[,] however, the tort causes bodily harm or emotional distress, the law cannot restore the injured person to his previous position. The sensations caused by harm to the body or by pain or humiliation are not in any way analogous to a pecuniary loss, and a sum of money is not the equivalent of peace of mind .... There is no scale by which the detriment caused by sufferingcan be measured and hence there can only be a very rough correspondencebetween the amount awarded as damages and the extent of the suffering. 
See generally Radin, supra note 243, at 269-83. 
Consider in this regard the debate on whether people's failure to insure for nonpecuniary harms reflectsa social judgment against mandating insurance through the tort system. See supra note 20 and accompanying text. It is possible to think that the failure to insure has no such implications. Perhaps there is a norm against purchasing insurance for certain risks. Perhaps commodifying - in the form of insuring against - those risks would reflect a strange kind (not amount) of valuation of the underlying good. People do not ordinarily insure against death of their children, or their own physical pain, in part because their attitudes make the decision to insure seem peculiar, as if one viewed one's children or freedom from pain as a sort of asset or commodity. On this view, the failure to insure reflects a quite particularjudgment, and it does not mean that these events are not harms deserving compensation when they occur. Hence the inferencedrawn in Priest, supra note 20, at 1546-47, 1553, and Shavell, supra note 20. at 228- 35. has argued, we might think of financialcompensation not as commensurablewith many injuriesat issue in tort law, and thus not as a means of truly restoring the status quo ante, but less ambitiously as an effort to establish and recognize that a wrong has been done and to deter wrongdoing while ensuring that some redresshas been paid. Even if a legal system can do no better, that redress does not fully rectify the wrong, because monetary sums are not commensurablewith the relevant injury.254 
The same ideas underlie an important debate in environmental law, having to do with the appropriatemeasure of damages for injury to natural resources. The "restorationcost" for, say, a portion of the Alaska seashore may diverge from its "use value," understood as aggregated private willingness to purchase the area in question. Through an importantregulation,the Department of the Interiorindicated its preference for use value if it was lower than restoration cost.255 The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit invalidatedthe regulationon the theory that Congresshad expresseda preferencefor restoration.256The decision of the court reflects an understandingthat those who injurenaturalresourcesshould be required to restore the status quo ante, not because it is more valuable, but because the public is entitled to have a good that it values in the way that it values natural resources, rather than the so-called cash equivalent.257 may be unwarranted. See Croley & Hanson, supra note 20, at 59-67. The unwarrantedinference is a version of that committed in Viscusi, supra note 222, at 362-65 - seeing particular choices as reflecting global or acontextual judgments. See also Sen, supra note 57, at 206 (rejecting such an inference). Alan Schwartz illuminates this puzzle by describing financial remedies for nonpecuniary losses as involving "substitutes rather than replacements": "Nonpecuniaryharms are not replaceableby insurance payments or damagejudgments; rather. these transfers are used to purchase substitutes that make up for or assuage the pain of accidents." Alan Schwartz, Proposalsfor Products Liability Reform: A TheoreticalSynthesis. 97 YALE L.J. 353, 408 (1988). 

The fatal flawof [the Departmentof the] Interior'sapproach.however, is that it assumes that natural resources are fungible goods, just like any other .... [But] Congress was skeptical of the ability of human beings to measure the true "value" of a natural resource. Indeed, even the common law recognizes that restorationis the proper remedy for injuryto propertywhere measurementof damagesby some other method will fail to compensate fully for the injury .... [N]atural resourceshave value that is not readily measuredby traditional means. 880 F.2d at 456-57 (footnotes omitted). There are complex relationsamong restorationcost. use value, option value (the amount people would pay to have an option to see a naturalasset). and existence value (the amount that people would pay to ensurecontinued existence of a good). The latter two measures help respond to people's concerns about the need to replicate the original kind of valuation. The Departmentof the Interioris now wrestling with these issues. For example, see the proposal in 56 Fed. Reg. 19,756 (1991), using the term compensablevalue to include G. 
Feminism in Law 
An understanding of issues of commensurability, and of diverse kinds of valuation, should help explain a number of claims by and debates among feminists, both inside law and elsewhere. Some of these claims and debates have been inadequately understood in the legal culture, in part because of the importanceof kinds of valuation258 and because of the infrequencywith which such kinds are understood to be part of legal theory and practice. 
To offer a brief summary: In a statement that has now been frequently quoted (by, among others, MacKinnon herself259),Richard Rorty takes Catharine MacKinnon to have claimed that "being a woman is not yet a way of being a human being."260 What does this mean? It may well mean that women are often not valued in the way that a human being is entitled to be valued. More concretely, we might understandsome feminist thought to be insisting that, as human beings, women are entitled to be treated with dignity and respect,26' and that frequentlythey are not so treated. Instead women are treated with affection or love, or, much worse, as objects for the use and control of others. 
former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, but also by an astonishing number of other people - to claims of sex discriminationor even sexual assault: "I love women."262 It is interesting to think about the nature of this response and the reason that it is inadequate. It is tempting, but not sufficient,to say that such responses are insincere or false. Instead the response connotes a high level of valuation or a sort of intense and real appreciation. But the response is obtuse when the "all of the public economic values associated with an injured resource, including use values and nonuse values such as option, existence, and bequest values." 56 Fed. Reg. at 19,760. A leading textbook, interestingly, comments that: "the concept of 'compensable value' recognizes that resources are valued for many differentreasons, not all of which are reflectedaccurately in market prices." ROBERTV. PERCIVALETAL.,ENVIRONMENTARLEGULATIONL:AW,SCIENCEA,ND POLICY362 ( regulation, see 58 Fed. Reg. 39,328 (1993). 
811, 117-40. 
1281, 1299 & n.85 (1991). 
supra note 168; Tronto, supra note 168. 
LEXIS search discovered 124 entries containing the phrase"I love women," many of which were responsive to charges of sexism, sexual discrimination, or sexual assault. Search of LEXIS, Nexis library, Major Papers file (Dec. 27, 1993). claim is that women have not been treated with basic dignity and respect. The invocation of love or affection, even if sincerely and intensely felt, is unresponsive to the relevant concern, which is about the appropriate kind and not the appropriate level of valuation. 
In fact many claims about issues related to sex equality - including the distribution of labor within marriage, pornography, sexual harassment, and abortion 
might be taken to be claims that law and social norms should treat women in a certain way, one that involves dignity and respect, or a principle of civic equality. On this account, a distinctive norm underlies the objection to certain forms of sex inequality, and the norm is connected with a claim about proper kinds of valuation.263 Hence the objection to sexual harassment is that this practice treats women as objects for the enjoyment and use of men. Hence the objection to legal proscriptions on abortion is that the law ought not to use women's reproductive capacities against women's will and for the protection of third parties, at least when it does not similarly use men's capacities. Similarly, the objection to pornography has a good deal to do with the way in which certain forms of sexually explicit material treat women's sexual capacities as objects for the use of others, especially through sexual violence.264 Thus pornography is challenged not as offensive, but as embodying an improper means of valuing human beings.265 Similar issues are raised by the sale of sexual and reproductive capacities through markets, as in the practices of prostitution and surrogacy.266 
A good deal would have to be said in order to support the view that these claims entail any particular legal reform. All I mean to say is that an important strand in recent writing about sex discrimination cannot be supposed any such Subordination among us, that may Authorize us to destroy one another, as if we were made for one another's uses." JOHNLOCKET,wo TREATISEOSFGOVERNMENT271 (Peter Laslett ed., student ed. 1988) (3d ed. 1698). This is an essentially liberal idea. It shows the deep continuity between certain strands of feminism and the liberal tradition, notwithstanding the purported antiliberalism of some feminist thought. See, e.g., CATHARINE MACKINNONF, EMINISM UNMODIFIED (1987); cf OKIN, supranote 33, at 61 ("[A] number of the basic tenets of liberalism .. have been basic tenets in the development of feminism, too."); Susan M. Okin, Reason and Feeling in ThinkingAbout Justice, 99 ETHICS229 (1989) (drawing connections between Rawls's work and feminist thought). 
139, ch. 9. 
offensive'furthermisconstrues its harm.... [P]ornography,in a feminist view, furthersthe idea of the sexual inferiority of women . . ."). 
(1990) (arguing that commercial surrogacy improperlycommodifies reproductivecapacity). But see Debra Satz, Markets in Women'sReproductiveLabor. 21 PHIL.& PUB. AFF. 107 ( (questioning the view that reproductive labor is not a commodity). should be taken to argue that an improper kind of valuation has pervaded norms and law relating to women, and that changes are required that would embody a different kind. 
An understandingof diverse kinds of valuation helps explain why liberal regimes generally respect voluntary agreements. If people value things in different ways, the state should allow them to sort things out as they choose. If values were commensurable,perhaps we could seek to block certain voluntary exchanges simply because we had better information about relevant costs and benefits than the parties themselves. But, in the face of diverse kinds of valuation, it is best to permit people to value as they like.267 
But even a system that generally respects freedom of contract may block exchanges on several grounds. Typically such grounds involve some form of market failure: a party may lack relevant information,a collective action problem may exist, third parties may be affected, a party may be myopic. But an additional and distinct reason is that some exchanges involve and encourage improper kinds of valuation. 
I think that more common argumentsstressingdistributiveconsiderations or unequal bargaining power often depend, upon reflection, on an unarticulatedclaim about inappropriatevaluation. The claim is that to allow purchase and sale of a good will mean that the good will be wrongly valued in a qualitativesense.268Consider, for example, the right to vote. Vote trading is objectionable in part because it would allow inappropriateconcentration of political power in the hands of a few. The prohibition therefore overcomes a collective action problem.269But perhapsthe ban on vote tradingalso stems from a concern about kinds of valuation. If votes were freely tradable,we would have a differentconception of what voting is for - about the values that it embodies - and this changed conception would have corrosive effects on politics. 
57-59 (1944): 
The welfare and the happiness of millions cannot be measuredon a single scale of less and more. The welfare of people . . . cannot be adequately expressed as a single end .... [N]othing but partial scales of value exist - scales which are inevitably differentand often inconsistent with each other. From this the individualist concludes that the individuals should be allowed, within defined limits, to follow their own values and preferencesrather than somebody else's. 
note 23, at 77-84. 
(1985). 
Some reactions to Judge Posner's argument on behalf of a form of "babyselling" stem from a similar concern.270Judge Posner contends that a market for babies would serve most of the relevant policies better than does the current system. In some ways his argument is persuasive. Certainly the desire of infertile couples for children would be better satisfied through a market system. But part of the objection to free markets in babies is not quite engaged by Judge Posner. Instead the objection is that a system of purchase and sale would value children in the wrong way. This system would treat human beings as commodities, a view that is itself wrong, and a practice with possible harmfulconsequencesfor social valuation in general. This is at most a summary of a complex argument,based partly on uncertain empirical judgments, and it is hardly by itself decisive. But we cannot get an adequate grasp on the problem without seeing this concern. 
Or consider a possible application of the widely held view that market incentives are preferableto command-and-controlregulation. Might it not be preferable,for example, to allocate tradableracial discrimination rights, so that discriminators,or people who refuse to act affirmatively,can purchase rights from people who do not discriminate or who engage in affirmative action?271 Suppose it could be shown that an approach of this sort would be more efficient than the approach in the current civil rights laws, and also that it would produce equal or better outcomes in terms of aggregatehiring of minority group members. Even if this were so, it might be thought unacceptable to permit employers to discriminate for a fee, because the way that we do or should value nondiscrimination is inconsistent with granting that permission. This argument might be educative: if discriminators could buy the right to discriminate, perhaps discrimination would not be stigmatized in the way we want. Or it might be expressive: perhaps society would like to condemn discrimination quite apart from consequential arguments.272 
In coming to terms with the issue of blocked exchanges, some further points are important. As noted, the recognition of diverse kinds of valuationmight well be made part of a conception of law that places a high premiumon individual liberty and choice. At least as a general rule, the state should not say that one kind of valuation will be required. Within broad outlines, people ought to be permitted to value 
1994). The idea is proposedas satire in DERRICKBELI.,FACESATTHEBOTTOMOFTHEWELI. ch. 5. (1993). 
as they wish, though we should recognize that any kind of valuation will inevitably be affected by social norms and by law. 
Moreover,there is an importantdifferencebetween urging changes in social norms and urging changes in law. There may be a justified norm against asking a neighbor to mow one's lawn without a law to that effect. Similarly, one might speak on behalf of a powerful norm against certain attitudes toward animals without also recommending laws that, for example, forbid people to eat meat. It is possible to urge people to value animals in a certain way without thinking that the law should require that kind of valuation. 
We might understand the distinction between norms and laws in two differentways. First, the distinction might be largely pragmatic. A law imposed on people who do not share the relevant norm may breed frustrationand resentment. It may be counterproductiveor futile. Second, the difference might be rooted in a principle of liberty, one that calls for a strong presumption in favor of governmental respect for diverse kinds of valuation. A legal mandate may be simply too sectarian or intrusive for a heterogeneous society. Both pragmatism and principle seem to argue in favor of a sharp distinction between norms and law. 
There is a final point. Markets are filled with agreementsto transfer goods that are not valued simply for use. People purchase music, even if they regard the performances as deserving awe and wonder. They buy human care for their children.273They trade the right to see beautiful areas. They purchase pets for whom they feel affection or even love, and whom they hardly regardas solely for human exploitation and use. The objectionto the use of marketsin certain areasmust depend on the view that markets will have adverse effects on existing kinds of valuation, and it is not a simple matter to show when and why this will be the case. For all these reasons, opposition to commensurability, and insistence on diverse kinds of valuation, do not by themselves amount to opposition to market exchange, which is pervadedby choice among goods that participants value in diverse ways. 
A belief in diverse kinds of valuation has consequences for current debates about the actual and appropriatenature of legal reasoning. If it can be shown that a well-functioning system of law is alert to these of norms. It would be odd to tell a babysitterthat she will get a premiumfor being loving, or a reduced rate for being merely affectionate. Implicit deals on this front undoubtedlyoccur, but the fact that they areonly implicit is itself important. Sec supratext accompanyingnotes 130-31. diverse kinds of valuation, theories of legislation, administration, and adjudication may be affected. 
Consider, for example, economic analysis of law. It is clear that this form of analysis has produced enormous gains in the positive and normative study of law. Nonetheless, the approach has been criticized on many grounds, most familiarly that it is insufficiently attuned to distributive arguments.274 But perhaps the resistance to economic analysis stems from something quite different and less noticed. In its normative form, economic analysis depends on too thin, flat, and sectarian a conception of value, captured in the notion that legal rules should be designed so as to maximize wealth. The problem with this idea is that the word wealth elides qualitative distinctions among the different goods typically at stake in legal disputes. Instead of maximizing wealth, it is desirable to have a highly disaggregated picture of the consequences of legal rules, a picture that enables the judge to see the various goods at stake. This is true not only of the law of free speech and religious liberty, but also of the law of contract and tort. At least under ideal circumstances, it would be good to have a full sense of the qualitatively distinct interests at stake before reaching a decision. 
We still lack an account of practical reason in law. But what I have said here offers some considerations in support of analogical reasoning, the conventional method of Anglo-American law. Analogical reasoning, unlike economic analysis, need not insist on assessing plural and diverse social goods according to a single metric. The analogical thinker is alert to the manifold dimensions of social situations and to the many relevant similarities and differences. In picking out relevant similarities, the analogizer does not engage in an act of deduction. Instead she identifies common features in a way that helps constitute both legal and cultural categories, rather than being constrained by some particular theory of value given in advance. Unequipped with or unburdened by a unitary theory of the good or the right, she is in a position to see clearly and for herself the diverse and plural goods that are involved and to make choices among them without reducing them to a single metric.275 This is one description of the characteristic style REV. 905 (1980). 
106 HARV.L. REV.741 (1993). The distinction between incommensurabilityand incomparability, see supra text accompanyingnotes 64- 65, may well suggest that the absenceof commensurability (as I understandit here) does not endangerthe claim that there are right answers in law. I cannot, however, discuss that complex issue here. See John Mackie, The Third Theoryof Law, in RONALD DWORKIN AND CONTEMPORARYJURISPRUDENCE 161, 165 (Marshall Cohen ed.. of Anglo-American law in its idealized form. 
A distinctive feature of analogical thinking is that it is a "bottomup" approach, building principles of a low or intermediate level of generality from engagement with particular cases. In this respect, it is quite different from "top-down" theories, which test particular judgments by reference to general theory.276 Because analogy works from particular judgments, it is likely to reflect the plural and diverse goods that people really value. Of course there are nonanalogical approaches that insist on the plurality of goods,277 and those approaches also have a "top-down" character. 
Of course this approach has disadvantages as well. The use of a single metric makes things simple and orderly where they would otherwise be chaotic. In certain areas of the law, this may be a decisive advantage, all things considered. Certainly it has been taken as an important advantage in many areas of contemporary law, in which the displacement of common law courts by legislation has been designed to promote rule-of-law virtues inaccessible to ordinary adjudication.278 
CHOICES 
I have not yet dealt with two major questions. The first involves the choice among different kinds of valuation and, more particularly, the decision whether or not to make things commensurable. The second involves the issue of how to make choices among incommensurable goods. The two questions are obviously related. They are also large and complex; to answer them, we would need to answer many of the major questions in ethical and political theory. As I have emphasized, most answers must be developed in the context of particular problems. I offer only a few notations here. 1984) (questioning Dworkin's right-answerthesis on the grounds that strengths are not always commensurableon a linear scale). 
In science general principles must be tested by reference to particularfacts of observation. In ethics we may well take the opposite attitude, and test our particularmoral attitudes by referenceto more general ones. The utilitariancan contend that since his principle[] rests on something so simple and natural as generalized benevolence it is more securely founded than our particularfeelings, which may be subtly distorted by analogies with similar looking (but in reality totally different) types of case[s], and by all sorts of hangovers from traditional and uncritical ethical thinking. 
For discussion of related issues, see Sunstein, supra note 275, at 767-90. 
INEQUALITYREEXAMINED 39-55, 73-87 ( goods has similar characteristics. See RAWLS, supra note 81, at 181. 
N.Y. L. SCH.L. REV. 5 (1991). A. 
To come to terms with the question of appropriatekinds of valuation, we should begin by asking whether diversity in kinds is desirable at all. Perhapswe should adopt a unitary kind of valuation, or seek to obtain some sort of commensurability. In many ways this project unites such diverse thinkers as Plato, Bentham, and, in law, Richard Posner.279It seems clear that this approach would have many advantages. It would simplify and order decisions by placing the various goods along a single metric. According to one familiar conception of rationality, this step would increase rationality. Would it not be a large improvement if commensurabilitycould be obtained? 
Let us put law to one side for the moment and think about claims for unitariness and commensurability in human life generally. It seems obvious that an answer to this question should turn on what leads to a better conception of the human good. There is no transcendental or external standpoint from which to offer this answer. Our evaluation will inevitably be a reflection of what we think. But this should hardly be thought disabling.280We might make some progress by considering what the world would be like if kinds of valuation really were unitary or if commensurabilityreally did obtain. In such a world, for example, a loss of friendshipor the death of a parent would really be like a loss of money, though undoubtedly a lot of it.281 An achievement in something that one prizes - like art or musicwould be valued in the same way as an increase in net worth, or the birth of a new child, or falling in love, or the relief of human suffering, or the victory of a favorite sports team. Offersof cash exchange would really be evaluatedsolely on the basis of their amount. The distinction between instrumentaland intrinsic goods would collapse, in the sense that many intrinsic goods would become both fungible and instrumental. 
A great deal would be lost in such a world.282A life with genuine commensurabilitywould be flat and dehumanized. It would eliminate 
evaluations have no basis at all; they are ultimately grounded in human experience, and none the worse for that. See generally HILARYPUTNAM, RENEWINGPHILOSOPH(Y1992). 
superBenthamites,whose understandingof experiencewould not be readilyaccessibleto us. See supra note 65. 
has] too few thoughts and feelings to match the world as it really is." Williams,supranote 88, at 149;cf RAZ,supra note 17, at 344 ("There is no need, nor any way, to justify pervasivefeatures of human thought. But there is a need for an explanation which make them intelligible."). delight, bewilderment,and surprise. It would be inconsistent with an appropriately diversified approach to a good human life. It would eliminate desirable relationships and attitudes. In fact it would be barely recognizable.283 
On the other hand, nothing in this brief account is fatal to the view that law and public policy sometimes ought to rest on unitary kinds of valuation or on assumptions of commensurability. It is possible to think that under ideal conditions, the best system of valuation is diverse and plural, but that in light of the weaknesses of human institutions and the constant prospect of bias and arbitrariness, public choices should assume a single kind or a unitarymetric as the best way of promoting all of the relevant goods.284This question cannot be answered a priori or in the abstract. But those who favor legal approaches based on unitary kinds of valuation and commensurability should understandthat their approach is best defended as a means of overcoming certain institutional obstacles, and not as reflectinga fully adequate understandingof the relevant problems. I have suggested as well that even if, say, government officials align the diverse effects of regulation along a single metric, they should also provide a disaggregated picture, so that citizens can be aware of qualitative differences and of the various goods at stake. 
All this leaves much uncertainty. But it does suggest that, institutional issues aside, we should approve of a large degree of diversity in kinds of valuation. From this it does not follow that any particular kind of valuation is appropriatefor any particularsphere. To evaluate kinds of valuation, we also have to think very concretely about what kinds in what places are parts of a good life or a good political system. To come to terms with this question, it would be necessary to say a great deal. For present purposes, a few observations may suffice to give a sense of the sorts of things that might emerge. 
Some families exist in which people are valued solely for their use, and this is a pervasivesource of deprivationand injustice.285A family Some philosophers(or whatever you like to call them) sufferfrom what may be called "loss of problems." Then everythingseems quite simple to them, no deep problemsseem to exist any more, the world becomes broad and flat and loses all depth, and what they write becomes immeasurablyshallow and trivial. 
LUDWIGWITTGENSTEINZ,ETTELpara. 456 (G.E.M. Anscombe & G.H. von Wright eds. & G.E.M. Anscombe trans., 1967). For Mill's related critique of Bentham, see supra note 59. 
common terms, and it allows different risk reduction options to be evaluated from a common basis." RELATIVERISK REDUCTIONSTRATEGICCOMMITTEES,CIENCEADVISORYBD., REDUCING RISK: SETTING PRIORITIESAND STRATEGIESFOR ENVIRONMENAI. PROTECTION 2 (1990). 
in which reason-givingis the sole or pervasivekind of valuation would have differentproblems;but it seems clear that it would have problems as well. The bonds that unite people in a family are not adequately captured by the exchange of reasons. But this is not to say that injustice within families cannot be exposed through that exchange. A measure of respect is a condition for a well-functioning relationship between spouses.286 
So, too, a political system dominated not by reasonsbut instead by self-interestedbargainingmay well produce inferiorlaw, and precisely because the absence of reason-giving will fail to uncover difficulties with some of the various proposals.287Such a political system will also violate principles of political equality to the extent that it allows the translation of economic disparities into law. A political system that depended on bonds of affection or love would probablyprove unworkable, certainly in a large, heterogeneous society. 
These various observationsare no more than assertions. They are meant simply to point toward the sorts of concrete inquiries that are requiredfor an evaluation of what kinds of valuation are appropriate in what contexts. 
How are choices made among incommensurablegoods? How can those choices be assessed? The first point is that there is no algorithm or formula by which to answer this question. If we are looking for a certain sort of answer - the sort characteristic of some believers in commensurability- we will be unable to find it. Relatively little can be said in the abstract. Instead we need to offer detailed descriptions of how such choices are made, and how to tell whether such choices turn out well. Here there are many possible criteria for public and privateaction, and a mere referenceto the existence of incommensurabilities will be unhelpful standing by itself. 
The search for criteria may well emphasize the need to secure a form of narrative continuity within a life or within a society. When someone chooses one option over another, it may be because the chosen option makes for coherence over the course of time, whereas the disregardedoption, even if attractive, would ensure that things make little or no sense. There is also a connection between different selfunderstandings and the choice between incommensurable options A 
THEORY 75 (Jon Elster & Aanund Hylland eds., 1986). and B. The selected option may conform to the agent's preferredselfunderstanding. To achieve that self-understanding, we need to be clear about what we value most deeply and to make choices that properly express the deepest valuations.288Thus, for example, it may be irrational to value a certain amount of cash over spending time with one's family, because this would lead to a self-understandingthat is either inconsistent with what has gone before or otherwise indefensible for those asking what a good life contains. Individual and social ideals play a large role in this assessment.289These are inadequate and abstract remarks, but they may help explain how choices are made among incommensurables,and how choices tend to go right or wrong. 
Some of the same things can be said of law and the public sphere. Suppose that a society is deciding whether to sacrificea numberof jobs in return for protecting an endangeredspecies. No unitary metric can be helpful here. But perhaps the people entrusted with the power of decision will ask, as part of the inquiry, about the society's prevailing ideals, about ways minimally to damage relevant goods, and about what decision best fits with the community's self-understandingas this has been established over time. This is not merely a descriptive inquiry. It involves asking what choice puts that self-understandingin its best or most attractive light. On this view, choice among incommensurablesis an act of interpretation,one that involves a dimension of fidelity to the past, but that is also constructive.290 
In law and politics, a diverse set of standards - liberty, equality, prosperity,excellence, all of these umbrellaterms - will be brought to bear on hard cases. A particular goal is to find solutions that will minimally damage the relevant goods. Perhaps an approach that promotes a recognizableform of liberty will only modestly compromise a recognizableconception of equality. Here too there is no escape from close examination of particular cases. Taylor, Responsibilityfor Self in FREEWILL111 (Gary Watson ed., 1982). I am suggestingthat this point applies to legal and political choice as well. See also the discussion of commitment in Amartya Sen, Rational Fools, reprinted in BEYONDSFI.F-INTIEREST25, 31-43 (Jane J. Mansbridgeed., 1991). 

terms). after birth.291 Criminalization would entail difficult enforcement problemsand might also discouragearrangementsthat do much good and little harm. We can understand why surrogacy arrangements might be thought to be connected with sex inequality, but the contribution to discriminationis probablytoo attenuatedto justify criminalization. On the other hand, it may be damagingto the birth mother to force her to hand over a child against her will, especially because before the fact it may be quite difficult for her to know exactly what this action entails. The failure of the legal system to order specific performanceis unlikely to have serious adverse consequences on prospective participantsin such arrangements. This is of course an inadequate treatmentof a complex problem. All I mean to do is to suggest some of the lines along which the inquiry might occur. (Compare an approach that would insist on commensurability. Such an approach would be laughably inadequate;it would prevent us from seeing what is really at stake.) 
Much of the relevant work here is done in two ways: through analogies and through understandingconsequences, mediated as these are through expressive norms. When incommensurablegoods are at stake, it is typically asked: What was the resolution of a previous case with similar features? Through this process, people seek to produce vertical and horizontal consistency among their various judgments. This system of testing is designed not to line goods up along a single metric, but to producethe sort of consistency and rigor that characterizes the successful operationof practicalreason. The inquiryinto consequences avoids monism while still examining the real-world effects of differentcourses of action. How, for example, will a particularresult compromiseor promote the relevantgoods? This is a characteristic part of practical reasoning in law. 
In the context of emissions trading in environmental law, for example, it seems hard to support the empiricalclaim that the shift from command-and-controlgovernmentto financialincentives will have serious adverse effects on people's thinking about pollution. Many claims about the educative function of law are actually claims about real-world consequences, understood through expressive norms on which there is no dispute. It is possible to think well about those consequences, and sometimes we can see that the feared effects will not materialize. In this way it is possible to explore whether there will be damage to some of the goods that are allegedly threatenedby certain GIlOVERREPORTTOTHEEUROPEANCOMMISSIO7N7-78, 151 (1989). initiatives. Of course it is true that, on some issues, we will lack relevant data. 
There is a final point. A recognition of incommensurabilityis necessary to keep alive the sense of tragedy, and in certain ways this is an individual and collective good, perhaps especially in law.292 Recognition that all outcomes "impose costs" is not quite the same thing as a sense of tragedy. Though I can hardly discuss this complex matter here, the very notion of tragedy seems to embody a commitment to an understandingof the uniquenessof certain goods, or the irreversibility and irreplaceabilityof certain losses.293If tragedy were understood to mean instead high costs, or the existence of losses that accompany benefits (Kaldor-Hicks rather than Pareto improvements, for example), the sense of tragedy would be dramaticallychanged. Here too we would not have a simple redescriptionof the problem. 
A sense of tragedy is an individual good because it accompanies certain relationshipsand attitudes that are an importantpart of a good life. It is a collective good for this reason and also because it focuses attention on the fact that, even when the law is doing the right thing, all things considered, much may be lost as well. This is valuable in, for example, currentthinking about the environmentand occupational safety. In the presence of tragedy, there is a large incentive to create social arrangementsso that people do not face that prospect. 
This is so with respect to pervasiveconflicts among valuablethings - employment versus environment, diminishing poverty versus national security, attention to family versus attention to work. Such conflicts themselves may be an artifact of legal and social arrangements. On monistic theories of value, it is easy to believe that nothing is really lost - or at least nothing that is unique, intrinsicallyvaluable, or irretrievable. This understandingdiminishes the incentive to find a solution that will not create tragic choices. When tragedy is understoodto be present, there is a constant and conspicuous social interest in seeking solutions that simultaneously promote all of the relevant goods. 
At its best, the Anglo-American legal system is alert to the fact that diverse goods are at stake in many disputes. Judges know that not all of these goods can simultaneously be preserved. This awareness is itself desirablebecause of the pressurethat it tends to exert on NUSSBAUMT, HEFRAGILITYOFGOODNES2S3-84 (1986) (discussing the role of conflict amolng ethical claims in Greek tragedy). judges and legislatorsas well. A redescriptionof tragedyin terms that assume a monistic theory of value would not create the same sort of pressure. 
CONCLUSION 
Human beings value goods, events, and relationships in diverse and plural ways. Sometimeswe face serious problemsof commensurability. This problem does not entail paralysis, indeterminacy,or arbitrariness. Decisions are made all the time among incommensurable goods, at the personal,social, and legal levels, and these decisions may well be rational or irrational. It might even be possible to convert our kinds of valuation for use on a unitary metric, or to make goods, events, and relationshipscommensurable. But if what I have said here is correct, this would be a sort of tragedy, not least because it would make the very fact of tragedy puzzling or even incomprehensible. 
The fact of diverse kinds of valuation, and the existence of incommensurable goods, have not yet played a major role in legal theory. But these issues underlie a surprisingly wide range of legal disputes. No unitary "top-down" theory can account for the complexities of most controversiesin law. Perhaps most dramatically, the liberal insistence on social differentiation- markets, families, religious groups, politics, and more - is best justified as an attempt to make a space for distinct kinds of valuation and to give each of them its appropriate place in human life. The Establishmentand Equal Protection Clauses are centrally concerned with regulating kinds of valuation. In environmentallaw, the majorissue of contestation is frequentlythe appropriate kind of valuation of environmental amenities; if beaches, species, and mountains were valued solely for their use, we would not be able to understandthem in the way that we now do. 
The same issue arisesin the law of contract, especially in the award of specificperformanceremedies. It also plays a role in thinking about the point of damage remedies in tort. In both settings, it is wrong to ignore the highly contextual nature of choice and to act as if a particular decision - not to take out insurancefor a certain danger, to accept a job at a certain risk premium- reflects some global judgment simply adaptablefor policy use. No globaljudgment need underlieparticular choices. Many blocked exchanges, moreover, attest to social resistanceto commensurability. I have also suggestedthat attention to these issues shows that cost-benefitanalysis is obtuse, because it aligns qualitativelydistinct goods along a single metric. Instead of cost-benefit analysis - which might of course be helpful in our at most secondbest world - what is desirableis a disaggregatedpicture of the effects of differentcourses of action, so that officialsand citizens can see those effects for themselves. 
Panel II: Public Versus Private 
Environmental Regulation 
I have to tell you I am a little discouraged with my topic, which is the defense of democratic approaches to environmental protection. In preparation for this, I really wanted to get a hold of the Vice President's report on reinventing the government.' So I called the Regulatory Affairs Office in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and they said the person to call was the Public Affairs Office at OMB. I called them and they said the person to call was the Vice President's office. I called them and they said the person to call was the Government Printing Office. It sounded very depressing. But I thought, well, maybe that will work. So I went ahead and called the Government Printing Office, and they said they could have it to me probably within the month. (Laughter.) 
I have heard subsequently that part of the Gore report says that the Government Printing Office will have to compete with private enterprise, and that may explain their reluctance to send it out. (Laughter.) Undaunted, I am going to try to defend the democratic approach to environmental problems. Much of what I have to say about private remedies and public remedies will be through a democratic lens. It might be more accurate to say that it is a republican approach, republican in the sense of what James Madison said in his theory of government, designed to limit factional power and to foster public deliberation. 2 
Let me begin with a bill of particulars indicting common law approaches to environmental protection. This is just an effort to abstract a bit from the familiar failures of private law. I guess this is a criticism, a partial criticism at least, of free market environmentalism. It is familiar that there are collective action problems with individually small but, on aggregate, very large injuries, which a common law or private market system will fail to address. So in cases in which there are lots of people injured a little bit, the environmental damage may be very high, but the common law will be unable to respond. Copyright © 1994 by ECOLOGY LAW QUARTERLY * Professor, University of Chicago Law School. 
WORKS BETTER & COSTS LESS: REPORT OF THE NATIONAL PERFORMANCE REVIEW (1993). 

In addition, it is very hard to get an adequately coordinated system by using the common law, and this is potentially disastrous in the environmental area. Litigation is focused on too few aspects of a problem. It lacks the comprehensive overview that one would need, for example, to come to terms with water pollution. Litigation is also fortuitous in its timing. It is random and ex post. If you like the current law of products liability, then you would love common law approaches to environmental protection, where the problems will probably be even worse. 
In addition to the collective action problems and the difficulty of getting adequate coordination, there is a lack of necessary expertise in the judiciary. Now, I see some judges in the room who actually know a lot about environmental problems, but they are exceptions. 
There is a concern about judges' lack of political accountability as well. The truth in the Chevron opinion is the perception that where there is a policy decision to be made, it ought to be made democratically and not judicially.3 Maybe a crisper way to make the point is to say that if you had a common law system working really terrifically well, kind of a Posner-Epstein heaven, what you would end up with is, at best, aggregating private willingness to pay. You would produce a system of wealth maximization in which you made policy choices by aggregating private willingness to pay. That is what the common law system and one idealized view of it is about. 
But there is a big difference between democratic judgments about social problems and aggregated willingness to pay. And in a democratic system, the democratic judgments ought to be preferred. This is especially the case if what ought to matter in environmental policy includes, as I think it should, the interests of future generations and, if they will suffer, the interests of creatures who are not human. This is not to say that those are decisive interests, but they are relevant interests, and they are not likely to be sufficiently included in the willingness-to-pay criterion. 
These various problems-collective action problems, lack of coordination, lack of expertise, and democratic failures-suggest that a common law system will be both inefficient and undemocratic. This was the basic insight that led to the substitution of regulatory machinery for the common law in the environmental area. 
The story we have seen in the past twenty years has not been a success, and, ironically, the dimensions along which it has failed are very similar to the dimensions along which the common law itself failed. As several of the previous panelists have suggested, the system we now have is extraordinarily inefficient. By some estimates we have spent $900 billion for pollution control since 1972. I think $1000 billion is actually a trillion, but I was not entirely sure of that, so I took a lower end of the estimate. $900 billion. (Laughter.) And many estimates suggest that we could have achieved the same environmental benefit at one-quarter of the cost. 4 
Not only is there great inefficiency in our command-and-control system, but there is also democratic failure, above all in the influence of well-organized factions over the regulatory machinery. It may be that ethanol is really, really great and that governmental specification of ethanol as the automobile motoring substance of choice would be a good idea. But there is no doubt that the power of the ethanol lobby-the farmer's lobby-has played a role in occasional governmental enthusiasm for ethanol. 
The democratic failure means that instead of democratic deliberation-Madison's aspiration-we often have government by faction. This problem is revealed, I think, by the cost-benefit charts published by OMB that are reprinted amusingly and depressingly in Judge Breyer's excellent new book on risk regulation. 5 These charts show that the cost-per-life-saved of environmental regulations varies so widely for different regulations that no sensible person could in the first instance have advocated such regulations. 6 
Now to make a very simple argument, this discussion suggests that the problems of the common law-lack of coordination, lack of economic efficiency, lack of real application of expertise, and lack of democratic deliberation-are just what we have now. I think it would be difficult to contend that we would be better off under the common law system. But certainly it would not be hard to argue that we are not tremendously better off under the system we now have than we would be under the common law system. 
I want to make some simple recommendations. These reflect an effort, principally from the democratic point of view, to synthesize the best of traditional private law remedies-with a bow in the direction of my colleagues, Epstein and Posner-with the aspirations of the regulatory state. I have tried to import some of the flexibility and potential efficiency of the common law, while at the same time recognizing the need for democracy to lie at the heart of whatever regulatory solutions we come up with. 
This approach is very simple. I want to argue first for information and second for economic incentives. The preferred remedy for envi4. See Cass R. Sunstein, DemocratizingAmerica Through Law, 25 SUFFOLK U. L. REV. 949, 955 (1991) (citing THOMAS TIETENBERG, EMISSIONS TRADING 41-45 (1985)). 
REGULATION 24-27 (1993). 
ronmental problems should be disclosure of information. Regulation should be the secondary remedy if there is a reason why information does not work. Information first, regulation second. What we have done over the past generation is the opposite. Centralized governmental regulation has been the first option, and information has been disclosed only if the regulatory option has been rebutted. 
Now let me just specify what I mean by information and economic incentives, emphasizing the democracy-reinforcing features of both of these remedies. By information, I mean that in areas such as environmental risks in the workplace or consumer products, with some risks that reasonable people might take, the preferred choice ought to be to let people know about the risk rather than to have government-mandated safety levels. We should have a decent floor so that risks that no reasonable person would take will not be available. But otherwise, we should allow for private flexibility. 
This ought to be efficiency promoting, and it also ought to be democracy promoting. One of the real pathologies of our current system is that people do not know about the levels of risk that they face. Hence, it is wrongly thought that nuclear power and toxic waste dumps are top priorities, while indoor air pollution and smoking are towards the bottom. Public assessments of risk levels are all over the map, and that is partly because information is lacking. 
We ought to move in the direction of something like a national warning system. This system would reveal risk levels in a way that would have an efficiency-promoting aspect, a democracy-promoting aspect, and a coordinating function. The system would show people what OMB has publicized a bit-that is, what the risk levels are in various sectors of the economy and various aspects of people's lives. 
By information, I do not mean just disclosure as a preferred remedy. I mean to endorse also a version of Judge Breyer's suggestion that somewhere in the Federal Government there ought to be an overview entity.7 This body would be charged with comparing risk levels, with ensuring that there are priorities, with exempting tiny risks, as in the Delaney clause,8 and with ensuring that we get the biggest bang for the buck. There is no reason that government regulation of the environment should be as uncoordinated as it now is. Currently, responsibility for environmental protection is broken up among a number of different federal agencies, and even offices within EPA have such different mandates that sensible priority setting is impossible. 

HeinOnline -- 21 Ecology L.Q. 458 1994 
Thus, my suggestion is disclosure as the preferred remedy and an overview entity that collects information, dispenses information, and ensures sensible priority setting. That is what I mean by information. 
You have heard a bit about economic incentives. What I want to suggest right now is that economic incentives not only promote efficiency, but, equally importantly, have a democracy-reinforcing feature. From the democratic point of view, this makes economic incentives much better than the command-and-control system. 
Here is why. Economic incentives focus democratic attention on the question of ends: "How much clean-up at what price?" Incentives do not focus on the question of means: "Which technology is best?" So in thinking about acid rain or any pollutant, the economic incentive approach puts into Congress' hopper the issue not of which technology ought to be imposed, but instead what level of pollution makes best sense. 
The issue of ends forces elective representatives to make the tradeoff between environmental and other values explicitly and openly in a way that the current attention to means does not. Not only is there a democratic advantage in focusing on the right question, there also is a democratic advantage in eliminating the special interest deals that are likely when attention is placed on the issue of means. If the question is ethanol, methanol, nethanol, or thethanol, then it is especially likely that a group with a stake in the outcome will choose one of those. If the issue is instead how much reduction are we going to get, then the very generality of the question is likely to decrease the influence of factions. 
The attention to economic incentives eliminates the attention to means, reduces factional power, and puts the democratic attention where it ought to be; it also forces a kind of coordinating and comparative judgment that would be a great advantage. If we had economic incentives as our remedy of choice, then the question would be: "Well, we spend X amount for that, how much should we spend for this?" Thus, economic incentives have a built-in mechanism that is democracy reinforcing in the sense that incentives make it very likely that comparisons will be obtained. When comparisons are obtained, democratic judgments are less subject to factions or to sensationalism. Economic incentives also put a high premium on information. If the question is how much should we spend to reduce global warming, then people will obtain a lot of information about the cost to reduce greenhouse gases and about the benefits of doing it. That would be a big democratic advantage over our current system. 
The failures of private law and common law are economic, but also democratic. The promise of informational remedies and eco 
HeinOnline -- 21 Ecology L.Q. 459 1994 nomic incentives is not only economic, but also, more fundamentally, democratic. 
Thank you. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
POLITICAL EQUALITY AND UNINTENDED 
CONSEQUENCES 
It is a familiar point that government regulation that is amply justified in principle may go terribly wrong in practice. Minimum wage laws, for example, appear to reduce employment.1 Stringent regulation of new sources of air pollution may aggravate pollution problems, by perpetuating the life of old, especially dirty sources. 2 If government closely monitors the release of information, there may be less information. 3 Unintended consequences of this kind can make regulation futile or even self-defeating. 4 By futile regulation, I mean measures that do not bring about the desired consequences. By self-defeating regulation, I mean measures that actually make things worse from the standpoint of their strongest and most public-spirited advocates. We do not lack examples of both of these phenomena. It is unfortunate but true that current campaign finance laws may well provide more illustrations. 
Some campaign finance regulation is amply justified in principle. As we will see, there is no good reason to allow disparities in wealth to be translated into disparities in political power. A well-functioning democracy distinguishes between market processes of purchase and sale on the one hand and political processes of voting and reason-giving on the other. Government has a legitimate interest in ensuring not only that political liberties exist as a formal and technical matter, but also that those liberties have real value to the people who have them.5 The achievement of political equality is an important constitutional goal. Nonetheless, many imaginable campaign finance restrictions would be fu* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Richard Posner and David Strauss for helpful comments and to Thomas Brown for excellent research assistance. 
Stephen Machin & Alan Manning, The Effects of Minimum Wages on Wage Dispersion and Employment: Evidence from the U.K. Wages Councils, 47 Indus. & Lab. Rel. Rev. 319 (1994) (concluding that the minimum wage has either no effect or a positive effect on employment). 
Conceptual Framework, 69 Cal. L. Rev. 1256, 1281-84 (1981). 
(1985). 
11-12, 43-45 (1991) (citing two arguments: the perversity thesis, which asserts that "the attempt to push society in a certain direction will result in its moving.., in the opposite direction," and the futility thesis which asserts that "[any] attempt at change... will be largely surface, facade, cosmetic, [and] hence illusory"). 
justice [should include] the guarantee.., that the worth of the political liberties to all citizens, whatever their social or economic position, [is] approximately equal."). 
& UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES 1391 tile or self-defeating. To take a familiar example, it is now well-known that restrictions on individual expenditures-designed to reduce influence-peddling-can help fuel the use of political action committees (PACs), and thus increase the phenomenon of influence-peddling. 6 This is merely one of a number of possible illustrations. 
I can venture no exhaustive account here, and I attempt to describe possibilities rather than certainties. But one of my principal goals is to outline some of the harmful but unintended 7 consequences of campaign finance restrictions. I conclude with some brief notes on what strategies might be most likely to avoid the risk of unintended (or intended but unarticulated) bad consequences. My basic claim here is that we might attempt to avoid rigid command-and-control strategies for restricting expenditures, and experiment with more flexible, incentive-based approaches. In this way the regulation of campaign expenditures might be brought in line with recent innovations in regulatory practice generally.8 
In principle, the case for campaign finance regulation is very strong. We can identify at least three central grounds for such regulation.9 First and most obvious, perhaps, is the need to protect the electoral process from both the appearance and the reality of "quid pro quo" exchanges between contributors and candidates. Such exchanges occur whenever contributors offer dollars in return for political favors. The purchase of votes or of political favors is a form of corruption-a large issue in recent campaigns. 10 Corruption is inconsistent with the view that public officials should act on the basis of the merits of proposals, and not on the basis of their personal economic interest, or even the interest in increasing their 

alternatives to classical regulation); Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market Incentives, 13 Colum. J. Envtl. L. 171,182-83 (1988) (arguing that a reform of environmental regulation relying on market incentives will improve both meaningful democratic debate and regulatory efficiency). For a popular treatment of regulatory innovation, see David Osborne & Ted Gaebler, Reinventing Government 15, 301-05 (1992) (suggesting that governments employ a market-based regulatory policy which would operate by incentives rather than by commands). 
money are devoted to something other than political advertising. This interest is legitimate, of course, especially if regulation is seen as a means of eliminating the prisoner's dilemma faced by all candidates, each of whom must decide whether or not to advertise without knowing what other candidates will do. 
Reform 67-69 (4th ed. 1992) (describing the Keating Five Affair). campaign finances. Of course consideration of the merits will often involve people's preferences, and of course a willingness to pay cash may reflect preferences. But the link between particular cash payments and any responsible judgment about the merits is extremely weak. Laws should not be purchased and sold; the spectre of quid pro quo exchanges violates this principle. 
The second interest, independent of corruption, involves political equality. This is a time-honored goal in American constitutional thought." People who are able to organize themselves in such a way as to spend large amounts of cash should not be able to influence politics more than people who are not similarly able. Certainly economic equality is not required in a democracy; but it is most troublesome if people with a good deal of money are allowed to translate their wealth into political influence. It is equally troublesome if the electoral process translates poverty into an absence of political influence. Of course economic inequalities cannot be made altogether irrelevant for politics. But the link can be diminished between wealth or poverty on the one hand and political influence on the other. The "one person-one vote" rule exemplifies the commitment to political equality. Limits on campaign expenditures are continuous with that rule. 
The third interest is in some ways a generalization of the first two. Campaign finance laws might promote the goal of ensuring political deliberation and reason-giving. Politics should not simply register existing preferences and their intensities, especially as these are measured by private willingness to pay. In the American constitutional tradition, politics has an important deliberative function. The constitutional system aspires to a form of "government by discussion." 12 Grants of cash to candidates might compromise that goal by, for example, encouraging legislatures to vote in accordance with private interest rather than reasons. 
The goals of political equality and political deliberation are related to the project of distinguishing between the appropriate spheres of economic markets and politics.' 3 In democratic politics, a norm of equality 'establishing a political equality among all." James Madison, 14 The Papers of James Madison 197 (Robert A. Rutland et al. eds., 1983). It should be noted, however, that for much of our history the principle of political equality was construed much more narrowly, for the franchise itself was not given to all. 
74-77 (1993). 
Walzer, Spheres of Justice 95-123 (1983); see also Cass R Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 93 Mich. L. Rev. 849-51 (1994) (considering economic and political values may entail blocking some marketplace exchanges despite our general respect for voluntary contractual agreements when such exchanges involve or encourage improper kinds of valuation). For discussion of the relationship between corruption and political equality, see David A. Strauss, Corruption, Equality, and Campaign Finance Reform, 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1369, 1371-75 (1994). is important: disparities in wealth ought not lead to disparities in power over government. Similarly, democracy requires adherence to the norm of reason-giving. Political outcomes should not be based only on intensities of preferences as these are reflected in the criterion of private willingness to pay. Taken together, the notions of equality and reason-giving embody a distinctive conception of political respect. Markets are operated on the basis of quite different understandings. People can purchase things because they want them, and they need not offer or even have reasons for their wants. Markets embody their own conception of equality insofar as they entail a principle of "one dollar-one 'vote'"; but this is not the conception of equality appropriate to the political sphere. 
To distinguish between the market and politics is not to deny that an expenditure of money on behalf of a candidate or a cause qualifies as "speech" for first amendment purposes. Such an expenditure might well be intended and received as a contribution to social deliberation. Many people give money in order to promote discussion of a position that they favor. Indeed, we might see the ability to accumulate large sums of money as at least a rough indicator that large numbers of people are intensely interested in a candidate's success. If a candidate can accumulate a lot of money, it is probable that many people like what she has to say, or that even if the number of supporters is not so great, their level of enthusiasm is high indeed. In this way we might take the ability to attract a large amount of money to reveal something important-if not decisive-in a deliberative democracy. If and because political dissenters are able to attract funds, they might be able to do especially well in the political "marketplace." This possibility should hardly be disparaged. 
In this regard, it is perhaps insufficiently appreciated that a system without limits on financial contributionsfavors people who can attract money without, however, simply favoring the rich over the poor. In theory, at least, some poor people may be able to attract a lot of money if their political commitments find broad support-from, say, a lot of relatively poor people, or from a smaller but intensely interested number of rich ones. Of course it is hardly unusual for a rich candidate to find it impossible to obtain sufficient funds, because other people are not at all interested in providing support. Many candidates with large personal fortunes have failed for just this reason. 
These points are not decisive in favor of a system of laissez-faire for political expenditures and contributions. The correlation between public enthusiasm and the capacity to attract money is crude. There is a large disparity between donations and intensity of interest in a candidate. Candidate A might, for example, attract large sums of money from wealthy people; but A's supporters may be less interested in her success than Candidate B's poorer supporters are interested in B's success, even though B's supporters donate less money.' 4 Moreover, as I have emphasized, a democracy is concerned with much more than numbers and intensities of preferences. 
At the very least, however, an expenditure of money is an important means by which people communicate ideas, and the First Amendment requires a strong justification for any government regulation of an important means of communication. We might therefore think of campaign finance laws as viewpoint-neutral and even content-neutral restrictions on political speech. 15 At least if the laws are fair, the particular content of the speech-the message that is being urged-is irrelevant to whether the campaign finance restriction attaches. The area is especially difficult because while these restrictions can be severe, the government can point to strong reasons in their support. 
B. 
The Law 
By far the most important campaign finance case is of course Buckley v. Valeo,16 which must now be counted as one of the most vilified Supreme Court decisions of the post-World War II era. I offer a brief summary. In Buckley, the Court invalidated all restrictions on campaign expenditures. According to the Court, such restrictions are a kind of First Amendment "taking" from some speakers, perhaps rich ones, for the benefit of others, perhaps poor ones. In the key sentence, the Court declared that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment." 17 If the purpose of such laws were to increase political equality, they would be constitutionally unacceptable. The goal of political equality could not be invoked to stop people from spending money on themselves or on candidates of their choice. According to the Court, redistributive arguments for campaign finance laws are therefore impermissible; they amount to a silencing of some for the benefit of others.'8 
is a special case of the disparity between aggregated willingness to pay and utility. See Ronald Dworkin, Is Wealth a Value?, in Ronald Dworkin, A Matter of Principle 237, 242-46 (1985). 
to campaigns is being singled out for special treatment. But this should not affect the analysis. Content-based regulations-like a ban on advertising on buses-are disfavored in part because we rightly suspect that illegitimate motivations lie behind them. See Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech 168-77 (1993). The content discrimination in campaign finance laws-singling out campaign-related speech-is not similarly a basis for suspicion. On the other hand, the institutional interest of incumbent legislators does justify a large measure ofjudicial and public skepticism about any reforms that legislators favor. See infra notes 44-48 and accompanying text. 

into a democratic system. Some people may not be able to speak well because of an 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1394 1994 
The Court did not say that the First Amendment would forbid all campaign finance laws. Limits on campaign contributionsare acceptable. Those limits could be justified not on the objectionable ground of political equality (restricting the speech of some to enhance the relative voice of others), but as an entirely legitimate attempt to combat both the appearance and reality of corruption in the form of political favors in return for cash. Government may therefore restrict the amount of money that people can give to candidates for elective office. 19 
By contrast, limits on campaign expenditures are indeed impermissible, since those limits are not easilyjustified by the anti-corruption rationale. The central point is that someone who is spending money on her own campaign, or advertising explicitly on her own for a candidate, is not giving money to a candidate. The reality and appearance of corruption are therefore minimized. 20 According to the Court, limits on expenditures are really an effort to prevent spending by people having or able to attract a substantial amount of money. Since corruption is not at issue, these limits are illegitimate. 
In addition, limits on expenditures are far more intrusive than limits on contributions, since expenditure limits do not leave people free to express their views through other means. The Buckley Court rejected the view that limits on expenditures were necessary to prevent evasion of the limits on contributions. It did not believe that people would form tacit but mutually understood arrangements with candidates to spend money in excess of allowable contributions. 21 
So much for Buckley, which sets out the broad contours of constitutional law. The decision leaves many uncertainties. The post-Buckley cases reveal that there are enormous complexities in holding the line between regulation of contributions and regulation of expenditures. 22 First, it is not clear that this distinction is relevant, since expenditures on behalf of a candidate can create some of the dangers of contributions. Candidates often know who spends money on their behalf,23 and for this reason, an expenditure may in some contexts give rise to the same reality and appearance of corruption. A limit on expenditures may be necessary to preabsence of education, and inequalities of this kind may also undermine the commitment to political equality. But short of improving education, it is hard to see how regulatory tools might helpfully respond to this kind of inequality. 

(holding that a ban on independent expenditures by corporations using general treasury funds was constitutional as applied to nonprofit Chamber of Commerce) with FEC v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, 479 U.S. 238, 241 (1986) (holding that federal ban on general treasury expenditures was unconstitutional as applied to a nonprofit corporation formed to advance pro-life position). 
Influence 75-79 (1992). vent evasion of the limit on contributions. Second, the distinction is not crisp even if it is relevant. Suppose thatJones purchases an advertisement in the newspaper for candidate Smith. Might this not be thought a contribution? The slipperiness of the distinction has increased in light of the dramatic rise of political action committees (PACs), a development that, as we will soon see, was stimulated by Buckley itself. 
PACs are created precisely in order to exert political influence as a result of financial contributions. This raises an obvious question: Is a grant of money to a PAC a contribution or is it an expenditure? It might be thought to be an expenditure if it does not involve the award of money to a particular, identified candidate; many PACs are devoted to numerous candidates and to general causes. The grant of money to a PAC may thus not involve the risk of "corruption" in the simple sense of an exchange of money for political favors. On the other hand, the PAC could spend a great deal of money on behalf of one candidate; it could be organized by a close friend or ally of the candidate; it could be closely identified with one or a few candidates. Indeed, in practice a PAC could be nearly indistinguishable from the candidate herself. It is easy for candidates to find out who has given money to PACs, and to reward contributors accordingly. In addition, PACs often have unusual access to candidates. If we are concerned about disproportionate access and political influence based on financial contributions, we might well be concerned about PACs. In this light, concern about corruption, as well as political equality and political deliberation, would support treating grants of money to PACs as contributions.2 4 
Moreover, people usually know that contributions to PACs will go to certain candidates and not to others, and there is thus some risk of corruption here as well. A limit on contributions to PACs is far less intrusive than a limit on all expenditures; it does leave the individual with the option of making ordinary expenditures on his own. Finally, PACs are often said to have unusual political influence and for this reason to be a distinctive threat to political equality and political deliberation 25 -basic constitutional goals in a Madisonian system. For all these reasons, a limit on contributions to PACs should probably be thought very different from a limit on an expenditure by a candidate on her own behalf,or by an ordinary citizen purchasing an advertisement on her own behalf to help someone she likes. Related issues are of course raised by limits on contributions by PACs. 
The Court has not clearly resolved the resulting conundrums. In the two key cases, it gave conflicting signals. First, it invalidated a $1000 limit on the amount of money that a PAC can give to promote the election of a candidate. 26 In the Court's view, the PAC expenditure is core political 
(1985). speech, and because the money does not go directly to the candidate, the risk and reality of corruption are not at stake. After all, PAC expenditures are not coordinated with the campaign and are in that sense independent. 
On the other hand, in the second case the Court upheld a $5000 limit on the amount of money an individual or group can give to any PAC.27 The Court said that this limit does not affect a wide range of other possible expenditures designed to advocate political views, and that Congress could reasonably decide that the limit was necessary to prevent evasion of the limits on direct contributions. 28 The two cases are in obvious tension, and it is therefore unclear whether and how Congress may constitutionally limit contributions to or by PACs. This is an especially important question in light of the large and sometimes corrosive effects of PACs on the political process. 
C. 
Lochner, Redistribution,and Buckley 
Let us put these various complexities to one side and return to the basic issue of political equality. In rejecting the claim that controls on financial expenditures could be justified as a means of promoting political equality, Buckley seems highly reminiscent of the pre-New Deal period. Indeed Buckley might well be seen as the modern-day analogue of the infamous and discredited case of Lochner v. New York,29 in which the Court invalidated maximum hour laws.30 
A principal problem with the pre-New Deal Court was that it treated existing distributions of resources as if they were prepolitical and just, and therefore invalidated democratic efforts at reform.3 1 In a key Lochner era case, Adkins v. Children'sHospital,for example, the Court invalidated minimum wage legislation.3 2 In so doing, it said: 
To the extent that the sum fixed by [the minimum wage statute] exceeds the fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person, for whose condition there rests upon him no peculiar responsibility, and therefore, in effect, arbitrarbody, belongs to society as a whole.3w3 hich, if it belongs to anyily shifts to his shoulders a burden The language of compulsory subsidy-of taking from some for the benefit of others-was central in the Lochner period.3 4 Regulatory adjustment of market arrangements was seen as interference with an otherwise law27. See California Medical Ass'n v. FEC, 453 U.S. 182, 184-85 (1981). 
40-67 (1993). 
free and unobjectionable status quo. It was a state-mandated transfer of funds from one group for another, and this kind of mandate was constitutionally illegitimate. 
To compress a long and complex story: This whole approach became unsustainable in 1937, when the legal culture came to think that existing distributions were a product of law, were not sacrosanct, and could legitimately be subject to governmental correction. Throughout the legal system, it was urged that property rights were a function of law rather than nature, and ought not to be immunized from legal change.3 5 Such changes would not be banned in principle, but would be evaluated on the basis of the particular reasons brought forward on their behalf. In President Roosevelt's words: "We must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human beings."3 6 And the Supreme Court, overruling Lochner itself, offered an uncanny reversal of the Adkins dictum, arguing that "[t] he community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers. "3T 
In its essential premises, Buckley is quite similar to the pre-1937 cases. Recall that the Court announced that "the concept that government may restrict the speech of some elements of our society in order to enhance the relative voice of others is wholly foreign to the First Amendment."3 8 It added that the "First Amendment's protection against governmental abridgement of free expression cannot properly be made to depend on a person's financial ability to engage in public discussion."3 9 The Buckley Court therefore saw campaign expenditure limits as a kind of "taking," or compulsory exaction, from some for the benefit of others. The limits were unconstitutional for this very reason. Just as the due process clause once forbade government "interference" with the outcomes of the economic marketplace, so too the First Amendment now bans government "interference" with the political marketplace, with the term "marketplace" understood quite literally. In this way Buckley replicates Lochner. 
On the view reflected in both Buckley and Lochner, reliance on free markets is government neutrality and government inaction. But in the New Deal period, it became clear that reliance on markets simply entailed another-if in many ways good-regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. We cannot have a system of market ordering without an elaborate body of law.40 For all their beneficial qualities, L. Hale, Coercion and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-Coercive State, 38 Pol. Sci. Q. 470 (1923). 

twentiethcentury: "The functioning ofa competition... depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system.... In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and markets are legitimately subject to democratic restructuring-at least within certain limits-if the restructuring promises to deliver sufficient benefits. This is a constitutional truism in the post-New Deal era. What is perhaps not sufficiently appreciated, but what is equally true, is that elections based on existing distributions of wealth and entitlements also embody a regulatory system, made possible and constituted through law. Here as elsewhere, law defines property interests; it specifies who owns what, and who may do what with what is owned. The regulatory system that we now have for elections is not obviously neutral or just. On the contrary, it seems to be neither insofar as it permits high levels of political influence to follow from large accumulations of wealth. 
Because it involves speech, Buckley is in one sense even more striking than Lochner. As I have noted, the goal of political equality is timehonored in the American constitutional tradition, as the goal of economic equality is not. Efforts to redress economic inequalities, or to ensure that they are not turned into political inequalities, should not be seen as impermissible redistribution, or as the introduction of government regulation into a place where it did not exist before. A system of unlimited campaign expenditures should be seen as a regulatory decision to allow disparities in resources to be turned into disparities in political influence. That may be the best decision, all things considered; but why is it unconstitutional for government to attempt to replace this system with an alternative? The Court offered no answer. Its analysis was startlingly cavalier. Campaign finance laws should b6 evaluated not through axioms, but pragmatically in terms of their consequences for the system of free expression.4 1 continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other." Friedrich A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom 38-39 (1944). Compare Arnartya Sen, Ingredients of Famine Analysis: Availability and Entitlements, in Resources, Values and Development 452, 458 (1984): In fact, in guarding ownership rights against the demands of the hungry, the legal forces uphold entitlements, e.g. in the Bengal famine in 1943 the people who died in front of well-stocked food shops protected by the state were denied food because of lack of legal entitlement and not because of their entitlements being violated. The Court fails to recognize the essential point that the fair-value of the political liberties is required for ajust political procedure, and that to insure their fairvalue it is necessary to prevent those with greater property and wealth, and the greater skills of organization which accompany them, from controlling the electoral process to their advantage.... On [the Court's] view, democracy is a kind of regulated rivalry between economic classes and interest groups in which the outcome should properly depend on the ability and willingness of each to use its financial resources and skills, admittedly very unequal, to make its desires felt. John Rawis, The Basic Liberties and Their Priority, in Liberty, Equality, and Law: Selected Tanner Lectures on Moral Philosophy 1, 76 (Sterling M. McMurrin ed., 1987); see also Rawls, supra note 5, at 324-31, 356-68; T.M. Scanlon, Jr., Content Regulation Reconsidered, in Democracy and the Mass Media 331, 349-50 (Judith Lichtenberg ed., 1990) ("It seems clearly mistaken to say that freedom of expression never licenses 
In principle, then, there are good arguments for campaign finance restrictions. Insofar as Buckley rejects political equality as a legitimate constitutional goal, it should be overruled. Indeed, the decision probably ranks among the strongest candidates for overruling of the post-World War II period. But there are real limits on how much we can learn from abstract principles alone. Many of the key questions are insistently ones of policy and fact. Was the system at issue in Buckley well-designed? How might it be improved? What will be the real-world consequences of different plans? Will they fulfill their intended purposes? Will they be selfdefeating? Might they impair democratic processes under the guise of promoting them? 
My goal here is to offer a brief catalogue of ways in which campaign finance legislation may prove unhelpful or counterproductive. My particular interest lies in the possibility that campaign finance legislation may have perverse or unintended consequences. The catalogue bears directly on a number of proposals now receiving attention in Congress and in the executive branch. Of course it would be necessary to look at the details in order to make a final assessment. I am describing possibilities, not certainties, and a good deal of empirical work would be necessary to come to terms with any of them. 
A general point runs throughout the discussion. Although I have criticized what the Court said in Buckley, considerable judicial suspicion of campaign finance limits is justified by a simple point: Congressionalsupport for such limits is especially likely to reflect congressionalself-dealing. Any system of campaign finance limits raises the special spectre of governmental efforts to promote the interests of existing legislators. Indeed, it is hard to imagine other kinds of legislation posing similarly severe risks. In these circumstances, we might try to avoid rigid, command-and-control regulation, which poses special dangers, and move instead toward more flexible, incentive-based strategies. under the rubric of democratic equality, campaign finance measures may make it hard for challengers to overcome the effects of incumbency. The problem is all the more severe in a period in which it is extremely difficult for challengers to unseat incumbents. Consider the following tables: government to restrict the speech of some in order to allow others a better chance to be heard."). 
POLITICAL EQUALITY & 
UNiNTFDED CONSEQUENCES The risk of incumbent self-dealing becomes even more troublesome in light of the fact that dissidents or challengers may be able to overcome the advantages of incumbency only by amassing enormous sums of money, either from their own pockets or from numerous or wealthy supporters.4" 
Consider in this regard the candidacy of Ross Perot. The Perot campaign raises many questions, but it is at least notable that large sums of money proved an indispensable mechanism for enabling an outsider to challenge the mainstream candidates. One lesson seems clear. Campaign finance limits threaten to eliminate one of the few means by which incumbents can be seriously challenged. 
There is particular reason to fear self-dealing in some of the proposals now attracting considerable enthusiasm in Congress. For example, incumbent senators tend to have less difficulty in raising money than do members of the House of Representatives. Members of the House are therefore more dependent on PAC contributions. It should be unsurprising that while Senate bills propose a complete ban on multi-candidate PACs, 45 the leading House bill proposes a much less draconian contribution limit of $2,500 per candidate. 46 More generally, the current proposals do nothing to decrease the benefits of incumbency, and they may well increase those benefits. 47 
Whether campaign finance limits in general do entrench incumbents is an empirical question. There is some evidence to the contrary. Usually the largest amounts are spent by incumbents themselves; usually incumbents have an advantage in accumulating enormous sums, often from people who think that they have something to gain from a financial relationship with an officeholder. 48 In these circumstances, one of the particular problems for challengers is that they face special financial barriers by virtue of the ability of incumbents to raise large sums of money. Probably the fairest generalization is that campaign finance limits in general do not entrench incumbents, but that there are important individual cases in which such limits prevent challengers from mounting serious efforts. In any case, any campaign finance reforms should be designed so as to promote more electoral competition. 
(andMoreInfluential)PACs. - The early regulation of individual contributions had an important unintended consequence: It led directly to the rise of the political action committee. When individuals were banned from contributing to campaigns, there was tremendous pressure to provide a mechanism for aggregating individual contributions. The modern PAC is the result. Consider the following tables: 
E 10 r001 . 
040V Co Co ll: 0 (i ccC. Co0 1*4 C) Co L- iqc mco 
o 0 
0 Co Co! 0 
C Co9 CIE C) 00 Co 
Co1 . 
Total .................. 
Corporate ............... 
Labor ................... 
Trade/membership/health Nonconnected ........... 
Cooperative .............. 
Corporation without stock Cu S C 0 v0 
C4'L.-' G' r ! -q 
-t 04 04 C)(Dr-C'C 
Com C m " Q -. C11 m 
m :0 Lm:-~c0o~0co : : :.: •*C • -uo*S 
0000-,10 C) 0C 0C ~0 04Q.0 0u 0 uO 
The post-Buckley rise of PACs has a general implication. If individual contributions are controlled while PACs face little or no effective regulation, there could be a large shift of resources in the direction of PACs. Of course a combination of PAC limits and individual contribution limits could counteract this problem. But limits of this kind create difficulties of their own. 52 
1980s, the tightening of individual contribution limits-"hard money"helped increase the amount of "soft money,"5 3 consisting of gifts to political parties. It should not be surprising to see that in recent years there has been an enormous increase in fund-raising by political parties, which dispense contributions to various candidates. In 1980, the two parties raised and spent about $19 million; in 1984, the amount rose to $19.6 million; in 1988, it increased to $45 million. 54 Consider the following table: 
grass roots campaign materials-from regulation. Funds for these activities are subject only to state law, which often permits corporate and labor union political contributions. See Alexander, supra note 10, at 66-67. 
Os o 
Rq -! o1"1W1'04 ol "I I 'CIoo"t*ot- oq c . .U 0 M 
4oo00C4tCC & • 00 '!-Lq •. 
I" 400"C> .N m ow 0 0 '- • 
-4"0; o . 
* (3 l 0C1 
t. . .L 
E4CO0C-CC, •~.-.,.*" O~ 'IC) E !o nC' )0 U)t 00 DO r.~ "t iz oq _ _i. u oO.R r, o4 04-) CD 0 6 o 'Ruo _t-I g_ -q oO 0 CD C> 
C~C) ~ 
O~ 10,C~ . ~ l 0 r. 
In some ways the shift from hard to soft money has been a salutary development. It is more difficult for soft money contributors to target particular beneficiaries, and perhaps this reduces the risk of the quid pro quo donation. Reasonable people could believe that soft money poses lower risks to the integrity of the political process while also exemplifying a legitimate form of freedom of speech and association. But the substitution, if it occurs, means that any contribution limits are easily evaded. Candidates know, moreover, the identity of the large contributors to the party, and for this reason soft money can produce risks of corruption as well. 
the next few years, Congress may well impose limits on PACs, or even eliminate them altogether.56 If it does so, there will be pressure for more in the way of both individual contributions and individual expenditures. 57 Limits or bans on PAC expenditures will increase the forms of financial help that Congress' original efforts in 1971 were specifically designed to limit It is ironic but true that new legislation designed to counteract PACs will spur the very activity against which Congress initially sought to guard. 
For reasons suggested above, 58 this development, even if ironic, may improve things overall. There is a good argument that PAC contributions are especially harmful to democratic processes, because they are particularly likely to be given with the specific purpose of influencing lawmakers. It is also the case that candidates who receive individual contributions are often unaware of the particular reason for the money, whereas PAC beneficiaries know exactly what reasons underlie any donation. For all these reasons, a shift from PACs to individual expenditures may be desirable. 
On the other hand, PACs have some distinctive benefits as well. They provide a method by which individuals may band together in order to exercise political influence. Sometimes they offer a helpful aggregative mechanism of the kind that is plausibly salutary in a democracy. A shift from PACs to individual expenditures may be unfortunate insofar as it diminishes the power of politically concerned people to organize and pool their resources on behalf of their favored causes. 
On balance, individual expenditures do seem preferable to PACs, because the most severe threats to the "quid pro quo" and public deliberation come from PAC money. Restrictions on PACs that move people in the direction of individual expenditures and contributions are therefore desirable. My point is only that there is a trade-off between the two. 
Sometimes minority candidates can succeed only with the help of PACs specifically organized for their particular benefit. For this reason, on PACs and individual contributions. 
PAC limits will in some circumstances diminish the power of minority candidates. The Congressional Black Caucus has expressed concerns over campaign finance regulation on this ground.5 9 Similar results are possible for PACs organized to benefit women. PAC restrictions may also hurt organized labor. Currently labor PACs spend most of their money on individual candidates, especially incumbent Democrats. 60 By contrast, corporate PACs contribute about equally to Democrats and Republicans, 6 1 and give substantial sums to the parties rather than to individual candidates. A ban on PACs may therefore diminish the influence of labor unions without materially affecting corporate PACs. 62 Perhaps these effects are good or justified on balance. But many people who favor campaign finance regulation might be disturbed to see this effect. 
groups appear unconcerned about PAC limits, even though their interests would appear to be jeopardized by the proposed limits. 63 Perhaps it will be easy for them to evade any such limits, especially by offering "soft money" and also by assembling large amounts as a result of contributions from unidentifiable sources. We lack detailed evidence on this issue, but there is reason to think that the concern is legitimate. It is possible that limits on PACs will make it harder to identify sources of money without materially decreasing special interest funding. The current proposals do not respond to this risk. 
ContributionsCouldHinderCampaignActivity. - Most of the discussion thus far has been based on the assumption that campaign finance reform proposals would limit either PACs or individual contributions. In either case, limitations on one could lead to increased spending through the other. A third option might be to limit both PACs and individual contributions. But this option could quite possibly lead to a number of negative effects. If the limits were successful, campaign activity might be sharply limited as a whole.64 Any such limit would raise First Amendment problems and perhaps compromise democratic government.65 Alternatively, resources could be funneled into Democratic Factions, Roll Call, May 17, 1993, at 1, 20. 
Contributions 93 (1991). 
61, 66. 
contributions could drastically reduce campaign activity). 
competitive elections are an essential element of democracy-and it would be odd to argue that they are not-the extent of democratic competition depends on candidates' financial resources."). campaigns through "soft money," secret gifts, or other loopholes in the reforms. 
PossibleStrategies 
What I have said thus far suggests considerable reason for caution about campaign finance proposals. It also suggests that those who design such proposals should be attentive to the risks of futile or self-defeating reform. I do not attempt here to describe a fully adequate regulatory system. But I will outline two possibilities that appear especially promising. Both of them respond to the largely unfortunate American experience with command-and-control regulation in the last generation. Such regulation-consisting of rigid mandates and flat bans-is peculiarly likely to be futile or self-defeating. 66 Mandates and bans invite efforts at circumvention. Because of their rigidity, they tend to have unintended adverse consequences; creative members of regulated classes are likely to come up with substitutes posing equal or greater risks.6 7 To say this is not to say that mandates and bans are necessarily inferior to alternatives. But it is to say that we ought to explore approaches that make self-interested adaptation less likely. 
to accept a flat ban on expenditures. But it was quite hospitable to federal financing accompanied by viewpoint-neutral conditions-most notably a promise not to accept private money as a condition for receiving federal dollars.68 This model of incentives rather than bans has a number of attractions. For one, it survives even the rigid constitutional scrutiny of Buckley itself. 
The system of incentives-in the form of federal financing accompanied by a promise not to accept private money-responds to the deepest concerns of people who are skeptical of flat bans. Some people argue that the acquisition of private sums can be at least a crude way to register public enthusiasm for a candidate, and to enable dissidents and outsiders to overcome the advantages of incumbency. A system of incentives leaves the private remedy intact. At the same time, such a system can help counteract the distortions built into exclusive reliance on private contributions. It does so by allowing electoral competition from people who are not well-financed. 69 
To be sure, some people think that full federal funding is the best route for the future.70 But a system of incentives promoting public financing is more likely to be constitutional. Full federal funding would apparently foreclose private expenditures, in violation of Buckley; a system of incentives does not eliminate private expenditures. Such a system allows the private check to continue to exist, a strategy that poses certain risks, but that has benefits as well. Finally, a system of incentives accomplishes many (if not all) of the goals of full public funding. It does this by encouraging candidates not to rely on private funds and by ensuring that people unable to attract money are not placed at a special disadvantage. 
A system of incentives could take various forms. Adapting the model upheld in Buckley, the government might adopt a system of optional public financing, accompanied by (1) a promise not to accept or to use private money as a condition for receiving public funds and (2) a regime in which public subsidies are provided to help candidates to match all or a stated percentage of the expenditures of their privately financed opponents. Under (2), a candidate could elect to use private resources, but the government would ensure that her opponent would not be at a substantial disadvantage. Of course any such system would raise many questions. We would, for example, have to decide which candidates would qualify for support, and there is a risk that people would be unfairly excluded. We would also have to decide what sorts of disparities would be tolerable between candidates raising substantial private funds and candidates relying on government. I suggest only that it is worthwhile to explore a system in which candidates are encouraged but not required to accept only public funds, on the theory that such a system would be less vulnerable to the various risks that I have described in this essay. 
Bruce Ackerman. 71 Ackerman argues for an innovative voucher system, in which voters would be given a special card-citizen vouchers in the form of red, white, and blue money-to be used to finance political campaigns. Under this system, regular money could not be used at all. Candidates could attract citizen vouchers, but they could not use cash. The goal would be to split the political and economic spheres sharply, so as to ensure that resources accumulated in the economic sphere could not be used for political advantage. Ackerman's approach is therefore closely connected to the goal of preventing economic inequalities-fully acceptable in the American tradition-from becoming political in nature. 
Obviously a system of this kind could not be implemented simply. But it might have many advantages. Like any voucher system, such an approach would reduce some of the problems posed by centralized, bureaucratic control of finances and elections. The requirement that candidates use a special kind of "money" could much simplify administration 
Finance, Am. Prospect, Spring 1993, at 71. and to some extent make it self-implementing. At the same time, the system would be ideally suited to promoting political equality, and it could do this without threatening to diminish aggregate levels of political discussion. 7 2 Compared to the approach in Buckley, a voucher system would leave candidates and citizens quite free to take and give as they choose; but what would be taken and given would not be ordinary money, and would be understood to have limited functions. 
The voucher system would not be perfect. There would be a risk of evasion here as well. It would not be simple to police the boundary between vouchers and ordinary money. Moreover, the line between campaign expenditures and usual political speech-which would be unaffected by the proposal-is not crisp and simple. The flat ban on the use of ordinary money could raise constitutional and policy objections. Perhaps the ban would run afoul of Buckley, though I do not think that it should.73 A voucher system could also create distinctive implementation problems. A bureaucratic apparatus would be necessary to provide the vouchers, to decide on their aggregate amount, and to dispense them in the first instance. A voucher system might not sufficiently promote the goal of political deliberation, for candidates would be highly dependent on private support. But no system is perfect. Because a voucher system would so sharply separate the economic and political spheres, and allow intensities of interest to be reflected in campaigns, it certainly warrants serious consideration. 
CONCLUSION 
In principle, there are strong arguments for campaign finance limits, especially if these are taken as part of a general effort to renew the old aspiration of deliberative democracy. In some respects, the Supreme Court's decision in Buckley is the modem analogue to Lochner v. New York, offering an adventurous interpretation of the Constitution so as to invalidate a redistributive measure having and deserving broad democratic support. The special problem with Buckley is that it permits economic inequalities to be translated into political inequalities, and this is hardly a goal of the constitutional structure. 74 Properly designed campaign finance measures ought to be seen as fully compatible with the system of free expression, insofar as those measures promote the goal of ensuring a deliberative democracy among political (though not economic) equals. 
designed with high levels of aggregate speech in mind. 
77-78. 
inequalities to become political inequalities; assessment of such matters is generally beyond judicial competence. I suggest only that well-designed campaign finance regulations are highly compatible with some defining constitutional commitments. 
There is, however, good reason for the Court and for citizens in general to distrust any campaign finance system enacted by Congress, whose institutional self-interest makes this an especially worrisome area for national legislation. Moreover, the argument from principle does not suggest that any particular system will make things better rather than worse. A number of imaginable systems would be futile or self-defeating, largely because of unintended (or perhaps intended) bad consequences. In this essay, I have tried to identify some of the most important risks. 
My general conclusion is that dissatisfaction with Buckley, and enthusiasm for the goals of political equality and political deliberation, ought not to deflect attention from some insistently empirical questions about the real-world effects of campaign finance legislation. Any policy reforms will have unanticipated consequences, some of them counter-productive. Private adaptation to public-spirited reform is inevitable. In this context, our task is not merely to debate the theoretical issues, but also to identify the practical risks as systematically as possible, and to favor initiatives that seem most likely to promote their salutary goals 75 
to overcome the predictable problems of implementation. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 27 (2D SERIES) Rules and Rulelessness 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
Cass R. Sunstein* [T]he establishment of broadly applicable general principles is an essential component of the judicial process. 
—Justice Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law is A Law of Rules [T]he highest ethical life of the mind consists at all times in the breaking of rules which have grown too narrow for the actual case —William James, Principles of Psychology 
There are two stylized conceptions of legal judgment. The first, associated with Jeremy Bentham and more recently with Justices Hugo Black and Antonin Scalia, places a high premium on the creation and application of general rules. On this view, public authorities should avoid “balancing tests” or close attention to individual circumstances. They should attempt instead to give guidance to lower courts, future legislators, and citizens through clear, abstract rules laid down in advance of actual applications. The second conception, associated with Blackstone and more recently with Justices Felix Frankfurter and John Marshall Harlan, places a high premium on law-making at the point of application through case-by-case decisions, narrowly tailored to the particulars of individual circumstances. On this view, public authorities should stay close to the details of the controversy before them, and avoid broader principles altogether. The problem with broad principles is that they tend to overreach; they may be erroneous or unreasonable as applied to cases not before the court. 
*Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This text consists of a very preliminary version of the second of the 1994 Tanner Lectures in Human Values, to be delivered at Harvard University in November 1994. All rights reserved. It would not be easy to overstate the importance of the controversy between the two views. Such issues arise in every area of law; they often involve fundamental liberties. Of course familiar understandings of the rule of law prize, as a safeguard of freedom, broad rules laid down in advance; but the American legal system also values close attention to the details of each case. In every area of regulation—the environment, occupational safety and health, energy policy, communications, control of monopoly power—it is necessary to choose between general rules and case-by-case decisions. 
In its purest form, enthusiasm for genuinely case-specific decisions is incoherent. Few if any judgments about a particular case are entirely particular. Almost any judgment about a particular case depends on the use of principles, or reasons. Any principles or reasons are, by their very nature, broader than the case for which they are designed. Case-by-case particularism is not a promising foundation for law. 
In many circumstances, however, enthusiasm for rules seems senseless. Sometimes public authorities cannot design general rules, because they lack relevant information. Sometimes general rules will fail, because the legal system seeks subtle judgments about a range of particulars. Often general rules will be poorly suited to the new circumstances that will be turned up by unanticipated developments. Often rulemakers cannot foresee the circumstances to which their rules will be applied. Often rules will be too crude, since they run up against intransigent beliefs about how particular cases should be resolved. In short, the costs of making rules, and of adhering to rules, are often extremely high. 
One of my principal goals in this essay is to respond to a pervasive social phenomenon: extravagant enthusiasm for rules and the rule of law. Case-by-case decisions are an important part of legal justice. At the same time, we should keep in mind the characteristic vices of rulelessness, which include bias, unequal treatment, and high costs. Particularism is even worse than a mixed blessing for law; it is an invitation to error and abuse. 
As a way of reducing the risks of both rules and case-by-case judgments, I suggest two principal alternatives. The first is pragmatic. It involves a highly contextualized inquiry into the levels and kinds of error and injustice via rules or via rulelessness. Surprising progress can be made through such inquiries. Rules cannot be favored or disfavored in the abstract; everything depends on whether, in context, rules are superior to the alternatives. The second involves a presumption in favor of what I will call privately adaptable rules—rules that allocate initial entitlements but do not specify endstates, and that harness private forces to determine outcomes. Privately adaptable rules are typically invoked in support of economic markets. I argue here that they also deserve an honored place in a legal system committed to a wide range of corrections to the operation of economic markets. 
Law has a toolbox, containing many devices. Lawyers have customarily opposed rules (“do not go over 60 miles per hour”) to standards (“do not drive unreasonably fast”), with rules seeming hard and fast, and standards seeming open-ended. There is indeed a difference between rules and standards. But the rules-standards debate captures only a part of what is at stake, and it is important to have a fuller sense of the repertoire of available devices. In this section I outline a number of them; my goal is only to clarify some terms that will come up throughout. 
First, however, a cautionary note. It will be apparent that whether a legal provision is a rule, a presumption, a principle, a standard, a set of factors—or something else—cannot be decided in the abstract. Everything depends on the understandings and practices of the people who interpret the provision. The American Constitution, for example, says that “Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech.” This provision might operate as a rule if people take it as a flat ban on certain sorts of regulations. It could operate as a presumption if people see it as saying that Congress can regulate speech only if it makes a demonstration of harm of certain kinds and degrees. Or it could be a set of factors; once we parse notions like “abridging” and “the freedom of speech,” perhaps we will decide cases on the basis of an inquiry into two, three, or more relevant considerations. The content and nature of a legal provision cannot be read off the provision. It is necessary to see what people take it to be. 
For this reason we should distinguish among three kinds of actors. The first is the person or institution that issues the relevant legal provision. The second is the person or institution that is subject to the provision. The third is the person or institution charged with the power to interpret the provision. If we take a rule to be a provision that minimizes law-making power in particular cases (see below), a lawmaker may intend to issue a rule, but the interpretive practices of the interpreting institution may turn the provision into something very different. Whether a provision is a rule or not is a function of interpretive practices, and the lawmaker has limited power over those practices. 
By “untrammeled discretion,” I mean the capacity to exercise official power as one chooses, by reference to such considerations as one wants to consider, weighted as one wants to weight them. A legal system cannot avoid some degree of discretion, in the form of power to choose according to one’s moral or political lights. As we will see, the interpretation of seemingly rigid rules itself allows for discretion. But a legal system can certainly make choices about how much discretion it wants various people to have. 
A system of untrammeled discretion exists when there are no limits on what officials may consider in reaching a decision and on how much weight various considerations deserve; hence there are no limits on the officials’ power to decide what to do. Both inputs and outputs are unconstrained. In the real world, untrammeled discretion is quite rare. But perhaps some police officers come very close to this sort of authority, in light of the practical unavailability of review. 
As we will soon see, it is too simple to oppose rules to discretion. The basic problem with this opposition is that interpretation of rules involves discretion, and that so-called discretion is rarely untrammeled in the legal context. 
Often a system of rules is thought to be the polar opposite of a system of untrammeled discretion. In fact there is no such polar opposition. Rules do not eliminate discretion. There is a continuum from rules to untrammeled discretion, with factors and standards (see below) falling in between. 
The key characteristic of rules is that they specify outcomes before particular cases arise. Rules are defined by the ex ante character of law. By a system of rules, I therefore mean to refer to something very simple: approaches to law that make most or nearly all legal judgments under the governing legal provision in advance of actual cases.1 We have rules, or (better) rule-ness, to the extent that the content of the law has been set down in advance of applications of the law. In the extreme case, all of the content of the law is given before cases arise. This is an ambitious goal—impossibly ambitious. As we will see, no approach to law is likely to avoid allowing at least some legal judgments to be made in the context of deciding actual cases. Rules do not and indeed cannot contain all of the necessary instructions for their own interpretation. Nonetheless, it is possible to ensure that a wide range of judgments about particular cases will occur in advance. 
On this view, a system of rules exists to the extent that most or all of the real work of deciding cases and giving content to the law has been done before the actual applications. We have a rule, or ruleness, to the extent that decisions about cases have been made ex ante rather than ex post. If a key function of law is to assign entitlements, a rule can thus be defined as the full or nearly full ex ante assignment of legal entitlements, or the complete or nearly complete ex ante specification of legal outcomes. 
When a rule is in play, the decision of cases does not depend on ex post assignments—as it does when, for example, a judge decides whether someone is liable for nuisance by seeing whether his conduct was “unreasonable” (assuming this term has not been given precise content in advance) or when a judge decides whether a restriction on abortion imposes an “undue burden” (making the same assumption). In the purest case, the responsibility of the decisionmaker is to find only the facts; the law need not be found. When rules are operating, an assessment of facts, combined with an ordinary understanding of grammar, semantics, and diction—and with more substantive understandings on which there is no dispute—is usually sufficient to decide the case. 
that no one under eighteen may drive. It could be somewhat more complex, saying that people under eighteen may not drive unless 1This understanding is close to that in Louis Kaplow, Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke LJ 469 ( they pass certain special tests. Or it could be quite complex, creating a formula for deciding who may drive. It might look, for example, to age; performance on a written examination; and performance on a driving test. Each of these three variables might be given a specified numerical weight. 
Rules can also be specific or abstract. Specific rules apply to a narrow class of cases; abstract rules apply to a broad class of cases. An abstract rule might say, for example, that no one may drive over 60 miles per hour, or that all cars must be equipped with catalytic converters. A specific rule might say that President Nixon’s papers are public property; that the first amendment allows government to ban advertisements for casino gambling when gambling has been unlawful in the recent past; or that sixth-grade students may be suspended without a hearing for a period of less than two weeks, if there has been a serious allegation of criminal activity. All rules are defined in terms of classes, but sometimes the rule is narrowly tailored so as to pick up only a few cases, or perhaps only one. 
It is familiar to find rules that have explicit or implicit exceptions for cases of necessity or emergency. It is unfamiliar, indeed nearly impossible, to find rules without any such exceptions. For example, a person may be banned from taking the life of another; this is a rule; but self-defense is a valid excuse. Many constitutions allow abridgements of individual rights in case of emergency. The American Constitution allows the President to suspend the writ of habeas corpus in time of war. Other constitutions say that certain rights can be abridged under unusual circumstances. We might go so far as to say that almost all rules have at least some implicit exceptions. 
The consequences of making exceptions depend on the details. An exception could be narrow but vague, as in the idea that reasonable limits on free speech can be made under conditions of war. The conditions are rare and the exception therefore narrow; but the meaning of the exception is vague (what are “reasonable limits?”). Or the exception could be narrow and specific, as in the idea that under conditions of war, members of the Communist party may not work for the government in any capacity. An exception might be broad and vague or broad and specific. A specific exception might well convert the rule with exceptions into a complex rule, or a formula. 
A legal system may contain presumptions or presumptive rules. The law may presume, for example, that when the government regulates speech on the basis of its content, the regulation is unconstitutional. But the presumption might be rebutted by claims of a certain kind and strength, as when government can show a clear and present danger. The law might presume that an employer may not discriminate on the basis of race; but the presumption might be rebutted by a showing that, for example, a black actor is necessary to play the part of Othello. 
The legal system is pervaded by rules that operate as presumptions and that can be countered by showings of a particular kind and a particular degree. The line between presumptions and rules with emergency exceptions is thin. A rule with necessity or emergency exceptions might be described, somewhat imprecisely, as a strong presumption. With presumptions, it is necessary to know what counts as a rebuttal, and whether the presumption and the rebuttal are specific or vague, broad or narrow. 
We might contrast both untrammeled discretion and rulebound ways of proceeding with approaches that allow particular judgments to emerge through the decisionmaker’s assessment and weighing of a number of relevant factors, whose precise content has not been specified in advance. The key point is that several factors are pertinent to the decision, but there is no rule, simple or complex, to apply. There is no rule because the factors are not described exhaustively and precisely in advance, and because their weight has not been fully specified. Hence the decisionmaker cannot rely simply on “finding the facts” and “applying the law.” The content of the law is not given; part of it must be found. There is a degree of ex post allocation of legal entitlements. 
On this score, the difference between rules and factors is one of degree rather than kind. As we will see, those who interpret rules must determine at least some of their content. In a system of factors, moreover, the decisionmaker cannot do whatever she wants. But the content of the law is created in large part by those who must apply it to particular cases, and not by people who laid it down in advance. To a considerable extent, we do not know what the law is until the assessment of particular cases. 
which regulated pricing and allocation of petroleum products from 1973 to 1981. The statute required the agency to “provide for” nine factors, “to the maximum extent practicable.” These factors were “protection of public health, safety, and welfare; ( all public services; ( preservation of an economically sound and competitive petroleum industry; ( distribution of crude oil and petroleum products; (7) maintenance of exploration and production of fuels; (8) economic efficiency; and (9) minimization of interference with market mechanisms.”2 Congress added that each of the nine factors is equally important. There is much to be said about this quite bizarre list. What is important here is that an explicit enumeration of factors may be possible. 
In most contexts, however, any given list of relevant factors is not exhaustive. Life may turn up other relevant factors that are hard or impossible to identify in advance. In most areas of law governed by factors rather than rules, it is understood that the identified factors, if described at a level of specificity, are not complete—or that if they are intended to be complete, they are stated in a sufficiently general way, so as to allow unanticipated, additional considerations to apply. 
Rules are often compared with standards.3 A ban on “excessive” speeds on the highway is familiarly thought to involve a standard; so too with a requirement that pilots be “competent,” or that behavior in the classroom be “reasonable.” As standards, these might be compared with a 55 miles per hour speed limit, or a ban on pilots who are over the age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in particular, assigned seats. 
The contrast between rules and standards is very useful. It identifies the fact that with some legal provisions, interpreters have to do a great deal of work in order to generate the necessary content. With a standard, it is not possible to know what we have in advance. The meaning of a standard depends on what happens with its applications. The important feature of standards is that they share with factors a refusal to specify outcomes in advance. Standards depart from factors in refusing to specify the sorts of considerations that are relevant in particular applications. It would not be right, however, to say that standards offer more discretion than factors. The amount of discretion depends on the context. 
Here too, moreover, the nature of the provision cannot be read off its text, and everything will depend on interpretive practices. Once we define the term “excessive,” we may well end up with a rule. Perhaps officials will decide that a speed is excessive whenever it is over 60 miles per hour. If a standard is transparent, in the sense that there is a clear ex ante understanding of its meaning, it is a rule. Or we may instead end up with a set of factors or a presumption. Perhaps anyone who goes over 60 miles per hour will be presumed to have gone excessively fast, unless special circumstances can be shown. Or perhaps the judgment about excessive speed will be based on need, weather conditions, traffic, time of day, and so forth. The principal distinction between rules and standards turns on the fact that we do not know what a standard is, or means, until it is applied.4 Something of the same kind can be said of rules (see below), but it cannot be said nearly so bluntly. 
In law, principles are often said to be both deeper and more general than rules. We might say that rules are justified by principles. The justification of the rule could be used to interpret its meaning; hence courts will resort to the principle in trying to understood the rule. For example, there is a principle to the effect that it is wrong to take human life without sufficient cause; the law implements this principle with a range of rules governing homicide. There is a prin 
ciple to the effect that it is wrong not to keep your promises; hence the law contains a range of rules for enforcement of contractual obligations. A common use of the term “principle” in law involves the justifications behind rules. 
There is another and quite different understanding of the notion of principle in law. Any legal system contains explicitly formulated principles as well as rules; these principles do not lie behind rules but instead bear on the resolution of cases. Thus it is said that no person may profit from his own wrong; that he who seeks equity must do equity; that ambiguous statutes should be construed so as not to apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States. The status of legal principles is somewhat mysterious; they differ in weight, ranging from strong presumptions to tie-breakers when cases are otherwise in equipoise. Usually they operate as factors. But principles are not rules. We might say that principles are more flexible than rules, in the sense that principles bear on cases without disposing of them. The distinction should not be overstated. Since any given rule X is unlikely to resolve all cases that fall under the literal language of rule X, the difference between rules and principles is one of degree rather than of kind. 
What is the relationship between a principle and a standard? If we see a principle as the justification for a rule, the difference seems obvious: a standard is not a justification for an (already specified) rule, but instead a legal provision that needs a good deal of specification to be used to resolve individual cases. If we understand a principle as a relevant consideration in the decision of cases, the distinction between principles and standards is more complex. As I understand it here, a legal principle is different from a legal standard in the sense that the latter “covers” individual cases without specifying the content of the analysis in particular cases, whereas a principle is a background notion that does not by itself cover an individual case, but is instead brought to bear on it. This is a lamentably vague formulation. But the distinction makes intuitive sense. Compare a standard banning unreasonable risks with a principle to the effect that statutes should be construed so as to avoid constitutional doubts. 
One final complication. It is sometimes said that a decision in a case turns on a “principle,” as in the idea that speech may not be restricted unless there is a clear and present danger, or that discrimination on the basis of race is presumed invalid, or that no contract is valid without consideration. In this usage, a principle is not distinguishable from a standard, and at some points below, I will use the terms interchangeably. 
The last category is not a simple alternative to the others. Sometimes a legal system proceeds by comparing the case at hand to a case (or to cases) that have come before. The prior case is inspected to see whether it “controls,” or should be extended to, the case at hand. The prior case will be accompanied by an opinion, which may contain a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. The court deciding the present case will inspect relevant similarities and differences. That court, not bound by the previous opinion, may produce a rule, a standard, a set of factors, or something else. With analogy, we do not have a decision by rule, because the rule is not specified in advance of the process of analogical thinking. The rule emerges from comparison of cases, and it is applied only after it has been specified. Analogical thinking is rule-based (or standard-based) only in the sense that it depends on a rule (or a standard); but analogical thinking does not involve simple rule-application (or standard-application) because the rule (or the standard) is not given in advance. Analogical reasoning is thus not a form of rule-application. 
When courts proceed with analogies, then, the nature of the legal provision—its content and even its character as a rule, a standard, a set of factors—is not known before the analogical process takes place. The nature of the provision is specified in the case at hand by grappling with the precedent; we do not know what we have before the grappling occurs. It is unusual, however, for analogical thinking to yield rules. Most of the time, an analogy will produce a standard, one that makes sense of the outcomes in the case at hand and the case that came before. 
A system of rules is often thought to be the signal virtue of a system of law. Indeed, the rule of law seems to require a system of rules.5 The idea has a constitutional source. The due process clause of the American Constitution is sometimes interpreted so as to require rules, or rule-like provisions, and to forbid a system based on analogies, standards, or factors. This is particularly important in the area of criminal justice and freedom of speech, where the “void for vagueness” doctrine requires clear rules before the state may regulate private conduct. 
It is not an overstatement to say that the void for vagueness doctrine is among the most important guarantees of liberty under law. Consider Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville,6 which is exemplary on the point. 
In the early 1970s, it was a crime to engage in “vagrancy” in the City of Jacksonville. The category of “vagrancy” covered “Rogues and vagabonds, or dissolute persons who go about begging, common gamblers, persons who use juggling or unlawful games or plays, common drunkards, common night walkers . . . persons wandering or strolling around from place to place without any lawful purpose or object, habitual loafers, disorderly persons . . . persons able to work but habitually living upon the earnings of their wives or minor children . . . .” A number of people were arrested under this law. Among them were two white women, Papachristou and Calloway, who had been traveling in a car with two black men, Melton and Johnson. 
The Supreme Court reversed the convictions on the theory that the Jacksonville ordinance was inconsistent with the due process clause. It was “void for vagueness,” because it failed to provide fair notice that contemplated conduct is unlawful, and because “it encourages arbitrary and erratic arrests and convictions.” The Court emphasized several points: “The poor among us, the minorities, the average householder are not in business and not alerted to the regulatory schemes of vagrancy laws; and we assume that they would have no understanding of their meaning and impact if they read them.” Moreover, the “ordinance makes criminal activities that by modern standards are normally innocent.” Thus “[p]ersons ‘wandering or strolling’ from place to place have been extolled by Walt Whitman and Vachel Lindsay. . . . The difficulty is that these activities are historically part of the amenities of life as we have known them.” 
The ordinance was also unlawful because it put “unfettered discretion . . . in the hands of the Jacksonville police.” To say this is not to deny that the ordinance could serve important law enforcement purposes. The Court said: “Of course, vagrancy statutes are useful to the police. Of course, they are nets making easy the roundup of so-called undesirables. But the rule of law implies equality and justice in its application.” 
Notably, the Court quoted a law review article to the effect that “‘Algeria is rejecting the flexibility introduced in the Soviet criminal code by the ‘analogy’ principle, as have the East-Central European and black African states.” Many systems of criminal justice have made it an offense to engage in conduct that is “analogous” to what is specifically prohibited. The analogical principle has played a large role in Chinese criminal law.7 Apparently the Supreme Court believed that this analogical approach to the criminal law8 raises severe questions under the due process clause. 
We can take Papachristou to exemplify a failure of the rule of law. But what specifically does this concept entail? We can identify several characteristics.9 a. Clear, general, publicly accessible rules laid down in advance. 
It is plain that the rule of law requires rules that are clear, in the sense that people need not guess about their meaning, and that are general, in the sense that they apply to classes rather than particular people or groups. Laws should be publicly accessible as well. It follows that there is a ban on “secret law.” Legal proscriptions must be available to the public. Of course vague laws—banning, for example, excessive or unreasonable behavior—are unacceptable, at least in the criminal context; they are akin to “secret law” in the sense that people cannot know what, specifically, they entail. The idea that law 7See Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 217 (1989), citing an unpublished paper by Hungdad Chiu. 
8England too had analogical crimes. This tradition was of course rejected in the United States. 
9I claim little originality here, drawing on Fuller, The Morality of Law, supra note 5, and Raz, in The Authority of Law, supra note 5. should be laid down in advance is associated with the notion that rules, to qualify as such, must specify outcomes before the point of application. When rules are operating, people who interpret or apply the law do not give content to the law in the encounter with particular problems. 
In the real world of law, many complexities arise on these counts. It is a fiction to say that would-be criminals actually consult the law in advance of the crime. In fact we do not know the extent to which criminal statutes are understood by the general public. Undoubtedly the answer varies from area to area, and in many cases people could not describe the law with much accuracy. It is also the case that many laws, including criminal statutes, have a high degree of ambiguity. No legal system is without a large degree of discretion to give content to law at points of application, and this means that ruleness will be limited even in legal systems highly committed to the rule of law. Perhaps this is a failure of the rule of law, but it also seems to be a product of the limitations of human language and foresight. 
b. Prospectivity; no retroactivity. 
In a system of rules, retroactive lawmaking is disfavored, and it is banned altogether in the context of criminal prohibitions. In general, laws must operate prospectively only. The ban on ex post facto laws is the clearest prohibition on retroactivity. More modestly, American law includes an interpretive principle to the effect that civil laws will ordinarily apply prospectively. If the legislature wants to apply a law retroactively, it must do so unambiguously, and if it does so unambiguously, there is at least a question to be raised under the due process clause. 
c. Conformity between law on the books and law in the world. 
If the law does not operate in the books as it does in the world, the rule of law is compromised. If there is little or no resemblance between enacted law and real law, the rule of law cannot exist. If the real law is different from the enacted law, generality, clarity, predictability, fair notice, and public accessibility are all sacrificed. People must be permitted to monitor official conduct by testing it against enacted law. 
In many legal systems, of course, there is an occasional split between what the law says and what the law is, and often the split is severe. But the frequency of the phenomenon should not deflect attention from the fact that this is a failure of the rule of law. d. Hearing rights and availability of review by independent adjudicative officials. 
The rule of law requires a right to a hearing in which people can contest the government’s claim that the relevant conduct meets legal requirements for either the imposition of harm or the denial of benefits. Someone who is alleged to have committed a crime, or to have forfeited rights to social security benefits or a driver’s license, is entitled to some forum in which he can claim that the legal standards have not in fact been violated. Ordinarily the purpose of the hearing is to ensure that the facts have been accurately found. There should also be some form of review by independent officials, usually judges entitled to a degree of independence from political pressures. e. Separation between law-making and law-implementation. 
Legal systems committed to the rule of law separate the task of making the law from the task of implementing the law. For example, the nondelegation principle requires that the legislature lay down rules in advance; it therefore prohibits rules from being created by the people who execute them. The nondelegation principle is now honored much more in the breach than in the observance, in part because there are no clear criteria by which to distinguish lawmaking from law-implementation. The distinction is one of degree rather than kind. But in some areas of law, people engaged in enforcement activity are constitutionally constrained from giving content to the law. The area of criminal justice is an important example. f. No rapid changes in the content of law; no contradictions or inconsistency in the law. 
If the law changes too quickly, the rule of law cannot exist. People will not be able to adapt their conduct to what is required. So too if the law contains inconsistency or contradiction, which can make it hard or impossible to know what the rules are. Needless to say, people should not be placed under mutually incompatible obligations. The problem of rapidly changing law was a prime impetus behind the adoption of the American Constitution. Hence Madison wrote: “The mutability of the laws of the States is found to be a serious evil. The injustice of them has been so frequent and so flagrant as to alarm the most steadfast friends of Republicanism. I am persuaded that I do not err in saying that the evils issuing from these sources contributed more to the uneasiness which produced the Convention, and prepared the public mind for a general reform, than those which accrued to our national character and interest from the inadequacy of the Confederation to its immediate objects.”10 
Both of these phenomena—unstable law and inconsistent law—are part of the fabric of the modern regulatory state. Sometimes regulatory law changes very quickly, thus making it difficult for people to plan. Sometimes regulatory law imposes conflicting obligations, so that it is hard for people to know what they are supposed to do. These are important pathologies of modern law, and they produce high levels of inefficiency and injustice. g. Likelihood of agreement on meaning of rules from people who disagree on first principles. 
A particular advantage of a system of rules is that people who disagree on much else may nonetheless agree about the meaning of a rule. A law that forbids people from going over 55 miles per hour has the same meaning to Republicans and Democrats, libertarians and socialists, anarchists and members of the Ku Klux Klan. When the rule of law is in place, people can know what the rules are without adverting to first principles. Indeed, adverting to first principles is generally illegitimate, short of civil disobedience. By their very nature, rules ban people from basing their decisions on considerations that are perfectly legitimate in other settings. 
This is an oversimplification, as we will see. Disagreements about first principles may break out in disputes over the meaning of rules. But the oversimplification has fundamental truth. And in this oversimplification also lies some of the enduring truth of legal positivism, the law-politics distinction, and the view that ours is a government of law, not human beings. 
10Letter to Thomas Jefferson, October 24, 1787. 
A great virtue of rules is that they circumscribe permissible grounds for both action and argument; in doing so, they reduce costs of many diverse kinds. I have said that in a heterogeneous society, containing people of limited time and capacities, this is an enormous advantage. It saves a great deal of effort, time, and expense. But by truncating the sorts of value-disputes that can arise in law, it also ensures that disagreements will occur along a narrowly restricted range. 
I now discuss some of the characteristic virtues of decisions according to rules. First, however, it is important to note that rules fall in several different categories. Here is a nonexhaustive account, tied to my special concerns here. 
on the grounds that they are a good summary, and that they are desirable as rules, rather than mere advice or rules of thumb, so as to save the costs of making individualized decisions. Of course a rule that counts as a summary of wise decisions may operate, for good pragmatic reasons, as a genuine rule—one that cannot be revisited during particular applications. If people over the age of sixty are banned from being commercial pilots, it is because this is a pretty accurate summary of good individual decisions, and less costly to administer than any alternative. (Consider the expenditures that would be required to assess competence in every case.) If we say that people with sat scores below 500 will not be admitted to a certain college, it is for a similar reason. 
coordinate their behavior so as to overcome collective action problems. This is true, for example, with respect to rules of the road. The rule that people must drive on the left-hand side of the road is valuable because it tells people where to drive, not because it is any better than its opposite. We do not think that people must drive on the left because it is a wise decision, in the individual case unaccompanied by rules, to drive on the left. So too, rules may solve prisoner’s dilemmas, in which individually rational decisions can lead to social irrationality or even disaster. The rules governing emission of pollutants are an example. And if each polluter felt free to revisit the justification for the rule, the prisoner’s dilemma might not be solved. The best solution is probably to fix a rule and to require everyone to adhere to it. 
who may marry whom, for example, say something about the institution of marriage and about social convictions of who is entitled to public recognition of a relational commitment. Three people cannot be married, nor can people of the same sex. These rules do not summarize individually wise decisions, but instead express a social judgment about relations and valuations. We might say that the expressive function of law includes the effects of law on social attitudes about relationships, events, and prospects, and also the “statement” that law makes independently of such effects. 
Suppose that in order to succeed in your plans, you need to engage in consistent behavior over time. Perhaps an exercise program requires you to work out for one hour, and just one hour, every day; or perhaps a good diet requires you to eat the same things, more or less, at the same time for a period. In these circumstances, a rule that is enforceable through some mechanism—perhaps social sanctions—may be the best way to proceed. 
Societies can face similar problems. Perhaps good monetary policy for a certain period requires the Federal Reserve Board to do the same thing each month; suppose too that without a rule, and with particularized consideration of what to do each month, the Board would do inconsistent things. Adoption of a rule may ensure the requisite consistency. In this way, a rule may be a precommitment strategy that overcomes predictable problems with ruleless decisions. 
ments among people who disagree on questions of theory or on fundamental values. Rules might do this in three different ways. First, people can agree that a rule is binding, or authoritative, without agreeing on a theory of why it is binding, and without agreeing that the rule is good. Theories of legitimate authority are highly pluralistic, and acceptance of rules can proceed from diverse foundations. 
Usually the factors at work in the decisions I have in mind are valued in qualitatively different ways. Moreover, those factors cannot be placed on a single metric; they are not commensurable. To understand these claims, something must be said about diverse kinds of valuation and about the difficult problem of incommensurability. 
a. The factors involved in legal decisions are often qualitatively different from one another. It does seem clear that human beings value goods, things, relationships, and states of affairs in diverse ways; all goodness is goodness-of-a-kind.38 There is of course a distinction between instrumental and intrinsic goods. We value some things purely or principally for use; other things, like knowledge or friendship, have intrinsic value. But the distinction between intrinsic and instrumental goods captures only a part of the picture. Intrinsically valued things produce a range of diverse responses. Some bring about wonder and awe; consider a mountain or certain artistic works. Toward some people, we feel respect; toward others, affection; toward others, love. People worship their deity. Negative valuations are similarly diverse. To lose money is to lose an instrumental good (though one that might be used for intrinsic goods, like the preservation of human life). To lose a friend is a different matter. So too, our responses to intrinsic bads are diverse. Many of the relevant distinctions play a role in law, as when beaches must be compared with dollars, or protection of racial equality measured against associational freedom. It is to be sure possible that the use of a single metric, treating goods as relevantly the same, may have some pragmatic advantages; cost-benefit analysis is based on this judgment. But decisions based on factors tend to involve goods that are understood to be valued in qualitatively diverse ways. 
not be commensurable. Return, for example, to the idea that the Constitution requires such hearings as are justified by an assessment of three factors: the individual interest at stake; the likelihood of error and the probable value of additional safeguards; and the government’s interest, pecuniary and nonpecuniary, in avoiding complex 38See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics ( Amartya Sen, Plural Utility, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 83 (198283). procedures. It would be odd to say that this assessment can be made through lining up the relevant variables along any single metric. There is no scale by which it makes sense to weigh these matters. If we devise a scale, we will have to recharacterize the relevant goods in a way that changes their character and effaces qualitative differences. Perhaps this is justified for pragmatic reasons, but something will be lost as well as gained. 
when the relevant goods cannot be aligned along a single metric without doing violence to our considered judgments about how these goods are best characterized. By our considered judgments, I mean our reflective assessments of how certain relationships and events should be understood, evaluated, and experienced. The notion of a single metric should be understood quite literally. By this I mean a standard of valuation that (1) operates at a workable level of specificity, ( comparison along the same dimension. In deciding cases according to factors, there is often no such metric. Decisions nonetheless are made, and they can be justified or criticized on the basis of reasons. But those reasons do not amount to a single scale of value. Of course rules are often developed on the basis of an assessment of incommensurable goods. 
These are brisk and inadequate remarks about a complex subject.39 For the moment my claim is simple: The factors that are typically at stake in law are valued in different ways, and these factors are not commensurable along any scale. 
All this leaves two questions. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to rely on factors rather than rules? And under what circumstances might a legal system be expected to do one rather than the other? 
It is unlikely that we will be able to generate a reliable and general positive theory on this topic. Legislation is a complex product of legislative self-interest, private influence, and public-spirited motiva39More detailed discussion can be found in Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 Mich L Rev 779 (1994). tions on the part of both legislators and those who influence them. Judicial choices between rules and factors are at least equally difficult to attribute to a single behavioral influence, or a set of behavioral influences. It is hard to imagine a simple testable hypothesis that would not be falsified by many results in the world. 
We are likely to do far better by identifying mechanisms by which certain choices might be made, rather than law-like generalizations by which choices are usually made.40 Moreover, the occasional role of public spirit in legislative deliberations—from legislators themselves or from people who influence them—means that the normative and the positive cannot be so sharply separated. Normative views about what makes best sense will undoubtedly affect outcomes. The same is true of others faced with the choice between rules and rulelessness, including judges and bureaucrats. 
Most broadly, we can suggest that rules will be avoided (1) when the lawmaker lacks information and expertise, so that the information costs are too high to produce rules, ( on rules because of political dissensus within the relevant institution, so that the political costs of rules are too high to justify them, ( when people in position to decide whether to have rules do not fear the bias, interest, or corruption of those who decide cases, (4) when those who make the law do not disagree much with those who will interpret the law, and hence when the law-makers do not need rules to discipline administrators, judges, or others, and ( applications of the legal provision are few in number or relevantly different from one another. Rules might thus be chosen when the error rate with the particular rules is relatively low, when the error rate for rulelessness is high, and when the number of cases is large. 
Of course there can be a considerable ex ante investment in rulemaking, at least in the nonobvious cases, and at least if we seek rules that have some degree of accuracy. On the other hand, the absence of rules may produce significant costs at the stage when particular decisions are made. One question is who bears these costs, and how much power they have to minimize them. High investments in choosing the content of the law must be made by people 40See Jon Elster, Nuts and Bolts for the Social Sciences (1989), making this claim much more generally. deciding on the particular applications; they must not only find the facts but also find the law. Consider, for example, the problems of deciding whether airline pilots over the age of 60 are still able to do their jobs competently. Such decisions will be time-consuming, may produce unequal treatment, and may create a lot of error under the pressure of the moment (mistaken stereotypes about people over 60, or misplaced sympathy for discharged employees). Such decisions may also impair predictability and thus create high costs for people trying to order their affairs under law. 
Where those who make the law are not the same as those who interpret and enforce it, there will be complex pressures. On the one hand, the lawmakers may distrust the interpreters and enforcers, and may therefore seek to impose rules. If everyone is aligned in interest, the costs of rulelessness will be diminished, since the lawmakers need not fear that interpreters and enforcers will have agendas of their own. On the other hand, a split between lawmaking on the one hand and law-interpreting/law-enforcement on the other can create some pressure to avoid rules. Here is the key point: When law-making is split from law-interpretation and law-enforcement, many of the costs of producing clarity ex ante will be faced by lawmakers themselves, whereas many of the costs of producing clarity ex post will be faced by others. A law-making body that does not enforce law can “export” the costs of rulelessness to those who must enforce whatever provisions have been enacted. There may be political and other advantages in doing this—though as we have seen, there are countervailing pressures too. 
The odd and perhaps counterintuitive result is that a system of separated powers imposes at least some pressure toward avoiding rules. A system of unified powers does not impose similar pressure, since in such a system people who refuse to make rules ex ante will face the costs of rulelessness ex post. The rise of administrative agencies combining traditionally separated powers helps counteract the difficulty. 
As I have said, the benefits for law-makers of refusing to make rules may, in a system of separated powers, be countered by other factors. The failure to make rules may be punished by the interests that fear the outcomes within another branch of government; or it may fit poorly with the representatives’ own political commitment or electoral self-interest. Similar considerations apply to a decentralized, hierarchical judiciary. In such a system, there will be some incentive for the Supreme Court to avoid making rules and to export the costs of rulelessness to others. But the incentive can be overcome by other considerations. I return to these points below. 
Some of these speculations are borne out by comparing the legal system in England with that in the United States.41 English law is far more rule-bound than American law. The Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges. For their part, English judges treat statutes as rules, interpreting them literally and generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In England, law-making and law-interpretation are far more rule-bound than in the United States, where law-making often takes place in the process of confrontation with particular cases. 
How might this be explained? It is notable that laws in England are drafted by an Office of Parliamentary Counsel, a highly professional body that consists of skilled authors of laws. The Parliamentary Counsel brings about a uniform style of drafting. It is also closely attuned to the methods of English judges, and the Counsel drafts legislation with close knowledge of literalism and of the prevailing canons of construction. The judges’ practice is itself uniform and relatively simple. In a parliamentary system, the government and the legislature are allied, and the high degree of party control means that there is a level of homogeneity in England at the law-making stage. Moreover, and critically, Parliament revisits statutes with some frequency, and it fixes mistakes that are shown as such when particular cases arise. 
The situation in the United States is very different. There is no centralized drafting body, and hence no uniformity in terminology, and little professionalization. In America, the drafters of legislation are multiple and uncoordinated. The party system has largely disintegrated, and the executive and legislature are hardly aligned. Congress appears only intermittently aware of the judges’ interpre41I draw in this section on the extremely illuminating discussion i n Patrick Atiyah and Robert Summers, Form and Substance in Anglo-American Law (1987). tive practices, which are themselves not easy to describe in light of the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits, on just this point, in the Supreme Court. Congress does overrule statutory decisions to which it objects. But it is not in the business of responding rapidly and regularly to particular cases in which literal interpretations misfire. Hence both law-making and law-interpreting practice are very different from what they are in England. 
This brief description connects well with the contextual suggestions offered above. There tends to be more dissensus in America than in England at the law-making stage. The quality of drafting ex ante is lower, as is the possibility of legislative correction ex post. None of this suggests that England or America has the optimal level of rules in light of its own institutional characteristics. But it does suggest that the two legal systems are highly responsive to distinctive contextual features. 
How can a legal system minimize the problems posed by unreasonable generality on the one hand and those of potentially abusive discretion on the other? The best approaches involve (a) highly contextualized inquiries into the likelihood of error and abuse with either rules or rulelessness, and hence an “on balance” judgment about risk; and (b) a presumption in favor of a particular kind of rule, that is, the privately adaptable rule that allocates initial entitlements and does not specify outcomes. But there are other possibilities as well. 
Jeremy Bentham favored clear rules, laid down in advance and broadly communicated. In at least some of his writings, he also favored adjudicative flexibility, allowing judges to adapt the rules to the complexities of individual cases. Bentham was aware that rules could misfire as they encountered particular controversies, especially if we understand the notion of misfiring in utilitarian terms. In courts of law, he concluded, the rules would not be fully binding. This suggests a paradox: How could someone advocate clear rules without asking judges to follow them? Bentham’s ingenious answer involved the different audiences for law. The public would hear general rules; the judges would hear individual cases.42 This is the important idea of an “acoustic separation” for legal terms, justified on utilitarian grounds. There is such a separation in many areas of law, including tax law and the law relating to excuses for criminality. 
Following this idea, we might suggest that legislatures should lay down rules, but that interpreters should feel free to ignore them in contexts where they produce absurdity. In some ways this is the American legal practice. Of course it is equally important to develop subsidiary principles to discipline the general idea of “absurdity” and to give it concrete application in the modern regulatory state. Modern agencies, more than courts, might be entrusted with the job of adapting general rules to particular circumstances. 
There are, however, two large difficulties with the Benthamite strategy. The first involves the right to democratic publicity—more particularly, the right to know what the law is. The Benthamite strategy appears to compromise that right. The rule of law and democratic values might well be jeopardized if the law is not what the statute books say that it is. Benthamite approaches might therefore be unacceptable to the extent that utilitarian judgments about acoustic separation run into liberal principles of publicity. 
The second problem with the Benthamite strategy is that the strategy fails to take account of the fact that general rules can be unacceptable precisely because general rules can create bad private incentives as compared with more fine-grained approaches. The secrecy of the Benthamite approach—the distinction between the law as it is known and the law as it operates in courts of law—will do nothing at all about the problem of poor incentives from crude rules. Indeed, publicizing the exceptions, and telling everyone about the possibility of close judicial attention to the particulars of your case, may well be a good idea if we seek optimal incentives. At least this is so if people would not react to the presence of exceptions by believing that they can do whatever they want and that the rule does not exist at all. 
We might conclude that too often, the Benthamite strategy is neither democratic nor efficient. But there is still a place for a version of it. A legal system might sometimes provide that in exceptional cases, interpreters should be permitted to change rules, 42See Gerald Postema, Bentham and the Common Law Tradition (1986). by exploring whether their justifications create absurdity or injustice, if the particulars of the case so suggest. We might even see a judicial (or administrative) power of this kind as part of the interpretation of rules, not as an authority to change rules. This power should be publicly known—a fully disclosed aspect of interpretation. In some contexts, of course, the possibility of changing rules, or of interpreting them with close reference to whether they make sense in particular circumstances, might be too damaging to the project of having rules. But this contextual judgment cannot be made in the abstract. 
Often a legal system should make the choice between rules and rulelessness on the basis of a contextual inquiry into the aggregate level of likely errors and abuses. I have suggested that when judges or other interpreters are perceived to be ignorant, corrupt, or biased, or in any case when they diverge in their judgments from the people who make rules, a legal system will proceed with rules. Even a poor fit, in the form of over- and under-inclusive rules, can be tolerated when individual decisions will be inaccurate as well. Thus we might find factors when there is no special reason to distrust those who will assess them. So too, individualized decisions are likely to be dispensed with when it is possible to come up with rules that fit well. 
The choice between rules and rulelessness might be seen as presenting a principal-agent problem. The legislature, as the principal, seeks to control the decisions of its agents. A problem with rules is that the agents might be able to track the principal’s wishes better or best if they are given the freedom to take account of individual circumstances. Any rule might inadequately capture the legislature’s considered judgments about particular cases. The costs of rulelessness might be acceptable if the legislature does not believe that the court or other interpreter is likely to be untrustworthy, perhaps because there is a basically shared view of relevant problems. 
On the other hand, without rules the agent might become uncontrollable. This is so especially in light of the fact that a system of factors allows the agent to weigh each factor as he chooses. The result is that a system of rules might be adopted as the best way, overall, to control the agent’s discretion, at least if there is a measure of distrust of some or all agents. It is also true that rules tend to make sense and to be adopted in the face of social consensus within the lawmaking body; decisions by factors are more probable when there is dissensus. It is not hard to obtain a ban on racial discrimination when people agree that this form of discrimination is illegitimate; it is much harder to obtain a similar ban on discrimination against the handicapped, where balancing tests are pervasive. Consider the fact that Congress often delegates discretionary power to an agency when it is unable to agree on the appropriate rule, because of social dissensus, and therefore it tells the agency to act “reasonably.” Examples include the areas of broadcasting regulation and occupational safety and health. This route is followed partly because factors, more conspicuously and regularly than rules, drive discretion underground. The costs of laying down rules are increased in the face of dissensus on their content, and this consideration increases the likelihood that we will see factors instead. 
Sometimes it is impossible to come up with rules in a multimember body. Often participants in a dispute begin discussion by attempting agreement on “principles” rather than concrete rules, as in controversies over the Middle East. So too people are able to agree on a set of relevant factors, or perhaps on some particular outcomes, without being able to agree on a rule, or on the general reasons that account for particular outcomes. Sometimes people agree on general principles but disagree on particular cases. Sometimes the opposite is true. When rules do not emerge from legislatures, it may well be because it is impossible to get agreement from a heterogeneous body. Return here to the fact that legislatures that delegate broad discretion can internalize two large benefits of rulelessness: economizing on information costs and on the political costs of specificity. They can simultaneously externalize the costs of rulelessness, which are faced by administrators. It is administrators who must compile relevant information and face the political heat of making hard and specific choices. 
It follows that we tend to find rules where one group of interests is well-organized or otherwise powerful, and when its adversaries are not. In circumstances of this sort, the well-organized interests can press the governmental body in the direction of rules. A wellorganized group is unlikely to allow itself to become at risk through factors when it need not do so (unless, perhaps, it believes that it is even more likely to be successful with bureaucrats or judges). Consider laws governing the regulation of agriculture, which are often highly specific, in part because the farmers’ lobby is wellorganized, and because the opponents of such laws are not. 
Factors are more likely to be the basis for decision when opposing interests have roughly equivalent power in the lawmaking body, and when they are willing to take their chances with a bureaucracy or a judge. This may be so because they are both highly organized, or because they are both weak and diffuse. A possible example is the Occupational Safety and Health Act, which is quite vague, in part because its opponents and adversaries are both powerful. On the other hand, two well-organized groups might produce rules when compromise is possible and when there are, to both groups, special risks from relying on an agency or a court. 
This may be the case when, for example, the regulated class needs to know what the rule is, so that it can plan its affairs. Perhaps it is better to have fairly bad rules than no rules at all. When such planning is made possible by clear rules, members of the regulated class may have it within their power to avoid (some of) the costs of inaccurate rules. Perhaps they can alter their conduct so as to avoid triggering the rule in cases in which the rule is over-inclusive. On the other hand, this avoidance may itself be an undesirable social cost. Return to the problem of site-level unreasonableness, where application of an overbroad rule forces employers to make workplace changes that produce possibly little gain, and at possibly high cost. 
Rules are also more likely to be unacceptable when the costs of error in particular cases are very high. The enormous danger of error can make the over- and under-inclusiveness of rules intolerable. It is one thing to have a flat rule that people under the age of 16 cannot drive; the costs of the rule—mistaken denials of a license—are relatively low. It is quite another thing to have a flat rule that people falling in a certain class will be put to death. It is for this reason that rule-bound decisions are unacceptable in inflicting capital punishment, and to some extent in criminal sentencing generally. (But here we must believe not only that rules make for error, but also that case-by-case decisions will make for less error.) 
The point also helps explain the dramatic difference between criminal liability, which is generally rule-bound, and criminal sentencing, which is generally based on factors. Part of the story is that specificity is needed at the liability stage, so that people can plan accordingly, and so that the discretion of the police is sharply cabined. Both interests are far weaker at the sentencing stage. Planning is not so insistently at stake. The discretion of the sentencing judge or jury is less prone to abuse than the discretion of the police officer. 
I have noted that rules are less acceptable in the face of sharp limits in information and experience. When information is lacking, or can be obtained only at high cost, officials will avoid them. At the same time, rules—once they are in place—economize on information costs at the point of application. For example, there was a dramatic shift from adjudication to rulemaking in American administrative agencies in the 1960s and 1970s, partly on the theory that rules could resolve many cases at once, and limit the informational costs, biases, and errors of case-by-case judgments. But because of the informational demands faced by people who make rules in the first instance, rules are now exceptionally difficult to promulgate, and there has been a shift in the other direction, toward decision without rules. In the Environmental Protection Agency, for example, it takes over a year and a half to prepare a rule internally; half a year more to receive the legally-required public comments; and sixteen more months to analyze the comments and issue the rules.43 It is not at all surprising that the result is to shift agencies away from rulemaking and toward less costly options. 
Rules are also less acceptable when circumstances are changing rapidly. When circumstances are changing, rules are likely to be inaccurate. Consider, for example, a congressional decision to issue a statutory standard for permissible emissions levels for coal-fired power plants. Surely any such standard will be out of date in a short time because of technological change. In these circumstances rules will become obsolete very quickly, and it may be best to delegate decisions to institutions capable of changing them rapidly, or perhaps to allow case-by-case judgments based on relevant factors. 
When numerous decisions of the same general class must be made, the inaccuracy of rules becomes far more tolerable. Consider, for example, the requirement that all drivers must be over the age of 16, or the use of the social security grid to decide disability claims. 
43See Stephen Breyer & Richard Stewart, Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 107 (3d ed. 1993). Frustrating bureaucratic insistence on “the technicalities” may result simply because so many decisions must be made, and because individualized inquiry into whether technicalities make sense in particular cases is too time-consuming. Similarly, rules can be avoided when few decisions need to be made, or when each case effectively stands on its own. 
There is a general conclusion. The choice between rules and rulelessness cannot itself be made on the basis of rules. That choice is itself a function of factors. It would be obtuse to say that one or another usually makes sense, or is justified in most settings. To decide between them, we need to know a great deal about the context—the likelihood of bias, the location and nature of social dissensus, the stakes, the risk of over-inclusiveness, the quality of those who apply the law, the alignment or nonalignment of views between lawmakers and others, the sheer number of cases. It follows that a well-functioning legal system should be suspicious of two trends in recent writing—extravagant enthusiasm for rules and excessive focus on the possibility of achieving accurate outcomes through fine-grained encounters with particulars. 
A more ambitious strategy might emerge from distinguishing between two sorts of rules.44 Some rules allocate initial entitlements—they unquestionably count as rules—but at the same time they maximize flexibility and minimize the informational burden on government, by allowing private adaptation to determine ultimate outcomes. Consider the rules of the road; taxes imposed on dangerous workplaces; rules allocating property rights and thus creating private property; or rules governing entry into agreements. These might be described as privately adaptable rules. By contrast, some laws do not merely allocate entitlements, but also minimize private flexibility by mandating particular end-states or outcomes. Consider price controls, or specified technology for new cars, or flat bans on the presence of carcinogens in the workplace. Rules that specify 44Related discussion can be found in Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty (1960), distinguishing between “laws” and “commands.” This is a highly illuminating but also confused discussion; I have drawn on some of Hayek’s ideas but tried to reduce the level of confusion. end-states are common in modern regulation, in the form of “command and control” regulation that says exactly what people must do and how they must do it. 
The line between these sorts of laws is one of degree rather than one of kind. What I am describing is a characteristic of some rules, not a crisp category of rules. Notably, all rules allocate entitlements, and the allocation may well have an effect on both preferences and distributions, and hence on end-states as well.45 It is insufficiently appreciated that government cannot avoid the task of allocating entitlements and of doing so through rules. Laissez-faire is a chimera; what is familiarly described as laissez-faire is actually a particular set of legal rules. Our rights, as we live them, do not come from nature. They depend on law.46 
We own property only because the legal system has allocated property rights to us. In this sense, property rights are anything but natural. Freedom of contract, as we understand and enjoy it, is not part of nature. It is a function of legal rules creating and constituting that form of freedom.47 The rules of private property and freedom of contract are rules, and they are legal in character. What I want to emphasize here is that these rules are distinctive in the sense that they allocate initial entitlements, allow private adaptation, and do not specify end-states. 
function of the legal system, which says, often, that people can do as they wish without public or private interference, and with public or private protection. If all this is right, there can be no system of laissez-faire (short of anarchy); legal rules are pervasive and inevitable, indeed coercive in their own way, even in the most 45Hence the Coase theorem will sometimes be wrong insofar as it predicts the initial allocation of the entitlement will not affect outcomes. See Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J Legal Stud 217 ( 
competition in Jules Coleman, Risks and Wrongs 60-62 ( theme in the New Deal era. For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution ch. 2 ( 
( market-oriented of free market systems.48 (People in Eastern Europe, now undertaking the difficult task of creating markets, have seen this all too well.) Government can hardly avoid the task of creating rules allocating rights. 
The claim on behalf of privately adaptable rules is not that laissez-faire is a possibility for law. It is instead that law can choose rules with certain characteristics—rules that will reduce the risks of rules, by allowing private adaptation and by harnessing market and private forces in such a way as to minimize the informational and political burden imposed on government. The ultimate project, then, is to favor rules that specify and allocate initial entitlements, and to disfavor rules that specify outcomes. Hence the rules that constitute markets are entirely acceptable insofar as their rule-ness usually does not produce the risks that tend to accompany rules. 
A key feature of privately adaptable rules is their association with free alienability of rights. Ownership rights are of course freely alienable,49 and in this way they attend to the fact that owners (and purchasers) know how valuable the relevant rights are to them. The informational burden on government is therefore minimized. The surrounding rules do not operate as personal orders. They allow large room for individual maneuver. They are coercive, to be sure. The law of property is itself coercive insofar as it prevents non-owners from claiming what they would otherwise claim and doing what they would otherwise do.50 The virtue of privately adaptable rules is not that they are not coercive and not that they are “natural”; it is that 48See Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom 38-39 (1944): “The functioning of a competition . . . depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system. . . . In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other.” See also Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines 165-66 (1983): “Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance.” 
49To be sure, restrictions on free alienability might be justified for many reasons, including collective action problems, externalities, difficulties with commodification, and so forth. I cannot discuss these issues here. 
50Cf. Sen, supra note 48. they reduce the costs of rule-making and harness private information and preferences51 in the service of outcomes that are themselves not identified ex ante. 
People who favor privately adaptable rules, and who distrust rules that specify end-states, are often known as critics of the modern regulatory state.52 The distinction between the two sorts of rules might easily be harnessed in the service of an argument for private property, freedom of contract, simple rules of tort law, and relatively little else. The same insights might, however, be used on behalf of reform strategies that take the modern state as an important social good. Many current regulatory rules are dysfunctional not because they promote the goals of the modern regulatory state, but because they unnecessarily specify end-states. In so doing, they produce both injustice and inefficiency, in the form of over-inclusiveness and under-inclusiveness, replicating all of the problems typically associated with a refusal to make inquiries at the point of application. 
A prominent example is command and control regulation, pervasive in the law of environmental protection; this form of regulation has been largely unsuccessful because of the pathologies of rules. It makes no sense to say that all industries must adopt the same control technology, regardless of the costs and benefits of adoption in the particular case. Command-and-control should be replaced by more flexible, incentive-based strategies, which could use privately adaptable rules. Instead of saying, for example, what technologies companies must use, the law might impose pollution taxes or fees, and then allow private judgments about the best means of achieving desirable social goals. Government might also allow companies to buy and sell pollution licenses, a system that would create good incentives for pollution reduction without imposing on government the significant informational burden of specifying means of pollution reduction. The familiar economic argument for incentives is a key part of the argument for privately adaptable rules. 
Or consider the area of telecommunications, an area that has for too long been burdened by unduly rigid rules. For much of its history, the Federal Communications Commission has been faced with 51Subject to the qualification in supra note 45. 
52See Hayek, supra note 44; Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World (forthcoming 1995). the task of deciding to whom to allocate licenses. In making this decision, it has alternated between rules and factors. In using factors, the fcc has referred to local ownership, minority ownership, participation by owners in public affairs, broadcast experience, the adequacy of technical facilities, the background and qualifications of staff, the character of owners, and more. The problems with both rules and factors are entirely predictable—inaccuracy through excessive rigidity on the one hand, and discretionary, ad hoc, costly, potentially abusive judgments on the other. It is no wonder that both approaches have largely failed. 
What alternatives are possible? In a famous early article, Ronald Coase argued that the government should allocate broadcasting licenses through what I am calling privately adaptable rules53— based on property rights and market transfers, as we do (for example) for ownership of newspapers and automobiles. In the last year the fcc has experimented with auctions, and the experiments have produced surprisingly good results. Now there is an obvious objection to Coase’s proposal. Perhaps broadcasting licenses should not be regarded as ordinary property; perhaps the criterion of private willingness to pay is an inadequate basis for awarding licenses. The objection contains a real point.54 Broadcasting protects a range of “nonmarket” values, captured in the aspiration to promote attention to public affairs, diversity of view, and high-quality programming. But the objection is not a justification for departing from privately adaptable rules in favor of command and control regulation via rules or factors. Instead the rules for license auctions might be designed so as to ensure auction credits for those applicants who promise to promote nonmarket values. Th e example shows that privately adaptable rules might well be used not to oppose regulatory goals, but instead to harness market forces in the interest of those very goals. 
53See Ronald Coase, The Federal Communications Commission, 2 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1959). 
Problem of Free Speech ( 
Sometimes both rules and factors are intolerable; sometimes market forces cannot or should not be harnessed. Having eliminated both rules and factors, the law might use a lottery instead. (Of course the decision to hold a lottery is supported by a rule.) This is a characteristic approach to the military draft, where rule-bound judgments seem too crude, and where judgments based on factors are too obviously subject to discrimination and caprice. Lotteries are used in many other areas as well. Of course lotteries have an arbitrariness of their own, and for this reason, they may be an inferior approach. 
Alternatively, the legal system, having found both rules and factors inadequate, might abolish the relevant institution itself. (The abolition must of course be accomplished by rule.) Hence the best argument for abolition of the death penalty takes the following form. Rules are unacceptable because they eliminate the possibility of adaptation to individual circumstances. Rule-bound death sentences are excessively impersonal. But factors are unacceptable too, because they allow excessive discretion, and create a risk that irrelevant or illegitimate considerations will enter the decision to impose capital punishment. When judgments are to be made about who is to live and who is to die, a high degree of accuracy is necessary, and errors based on confusion, variable judgments, bias, or venality are intolerable. The problem is that human institutions cannot devise a system for making capital decisions in a way that sufficiently diminishes the risk of error. Rule-bound system create errors; so too with systems based on factors. 
The strongest argument against the death penalty is not that the penalty of death is too brutal, but that it cannot be administered in a sufficiently accurate way. Suppose it could be shown that through individualized consideration in the form of factors, the rate of error is high, at least in the sense that irrelevant or invidious factors play a large role in the ultimate decision of life or death. Suppose that rules are the only way to eliminate the role of such factors, but that rules are objectionable in their own way, because they do not allow consideration of possible mitigating factors. Perhaps evidence to this effect would not be sufficient to convince most people that the death penalty is unacceptable. But if it is possible to persuade a range of people of this conclusion, the sources of the argument lie, I think, in evidence of this sort. 
A system committed to the rule of law is committed to limiting official discretion; but it is not committed to making every decision according to judgments that have been fully specified in advance. Nonetheless, rules are an admirable device for obtaining agreement on the content of law, and also for reducing discretion at the point of application. Often people can agree on rules when they disagree about general theory; they can agree that the rules are binding, that the rules are good, and that the rules have a certain identifiable meaning. Frequently a lawmaker adopts rules because rules narrow or even eliminate the range of disagreement and uncertainty faced by people attempting to follow or to interpret the law. This step has enormous virtues in terms of promoting predictability and planning and of reducing both costs and risks of official abuse. 
Rules are sometimes thought to be associated with merely formal equality; but the association is misconceived. Hayekian understandings of the rule of law, identifying rules with free markets, introduce into that notion further ideas that should be distinguished and that require an independent defense. 
Rule-skeptics say that rules are not what they appear to be. I n their view, full ex ante specification of outcomes is a chimera. The need for interpretation, during encounters with concrete cases, means that ex post assessments of some sort are an inescapable part of law. There is some truth in this claim. Almost any judgment about meaning will partake of substantive ideas of a sort. It is almost inevitable that some case can eventually arise that will confound the attempt to use rules to specify all outcomes in advance. These claims are chastening. But they do not defeat the project of those who are enthusiastic about rules. Usually the question of meaning is easy; often ex ante specification is possible for most cases. A form of rulefollowing is therefore feasible. 
Rules have many goals, but as they operate in law, they are often simple summaries of good decisions in individual cases. In carrying out this task, they reduce costs, ease choice, limit the errors encountered in particular decisions, produce coordination, and make it unnecessary to debate issues of value and fact every time someone does something having social consequences. Because of their ex ante character, rules will usually be over-inclusive and under-inclusive by reference to the arguments that justify them. They will often be outrun by changing circumstances. Usually the crudeness of rules is tolerable, and most of the resulting inefficiency and injustice can be controlled through means short of abandoning rules. But, sometimes the crudeness of rules counts decisively against them. 
Some of the most difficult issues in law involve the choice between rules and factors in cases in which both seem unacceptable—rules, because of their crudeness and their insensitivity to particulars that confound them; factors, because of the likelihood of arbitrariness and discrimination in application. The Benthamite strategy calls for ex ante rules for the public and ex post, case-by-case particularism for judges. I have questioned this strategy on both economic and democratic grounds; but sometimes flexible, contextual interpretation of rules, adapting the general to the particular, can bring about something like the best of both worlds. 
More generally, the choice between rules and rulelessness might well be based on a highly pragmatic, contextualized inquiry into the costs of the two approaches in the particular area at hand. Moreover, privately adaptable rules are a promising effort to minimize the problems of excessive generality, by opting for rules that harness private ordering and thus reduce the informational costs imposed on government. Some people who favor such rules intend their arguments to be a critique of regulation and a basis for approval of unrestricted (though rule-governed) free markets. But privately adaptable rules may enjoy an important rebirth in the context of government regulation—in the creation of rules that are designed to accomplish regulatory goals, but that do so by specifying initial entitlements rather than final outcomes, and that harness market forces in the interest of socially chosen ends. This Working Paper is a preliminary version of an article that will be published in 1996, The Tanner Lectures in Human Values. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, Illinois 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Michigan Law Review. 
This content downloaded from 62.122.78.43 on Sat, 21 Jun 2014 19:14:40 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
It is sometimes suggested that there is a sharp opposition between "liberty" and "equality."' If the law forbids racial discrimination in employment, it may promote equality, but perhaps it will simultaneously interfere with liberty. If the law requires wealthy people to transfer some of their income to poor people, it may promote equality, but it may also undermine liberty. If a health care program ensures universal access to health care, it may promote equality, but it could also raise serious doubts from the standpoint of liberty. The tension between liberty and equality often appears deep, and it plays a large role in American political and legal thought. 
But before accepting the alleged opposition between liberty and equality, we should observe that there are many possible understandings of liberty and equality. These understandings reveal not disputes about dictionary definitions but diverse substantive judgments that need to be identified and assessed. Different conceptions of the two values will lead to different views about their relationship. For example, the term equality could refer to freedom from desperate conditions, in the form of minimum welfare guarantees; to a ban on discrimination on certain specified grounds; to the idea that every citizen should have the same power over political outcomes, as in the one-person, one-vote rule; to similar starting points or basic opportunities for every citizen; to similar incomes or wealth; to similar incomes unless disparities can be justified as beneficial for all; or to much more. 
The same is true for liberty. That capacious term could refer to the basic political rights of free speech and free elections. It could include the guarantees of a fair system of criminal justice, in which rules are laid down in advance and a defendant has a right to a fair 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. - Ed. This essay develops some ideas contained elsewhere. See CASSR. SUNSTEINT,HEPARTIALCONSTITUTION338-46 (1993). The essay greatly benefited from comments by Akhil Amar, Martha Minow, and others at a conference on equal citizenship held at Brown University in March and Susan Moller Okin. 
upon which I draw here. 
2410 trial before an independent judge. It could entail social respect for the outcomes of processes in which citizens pursue their various conceptions of the good, given market forces, existing common law rules, existing preferences, and existing distributions of wealth. The term liberty could refer to a system that ensures autonomy in the formation of preferences and beliefs by providing a decent education for all and by counteracting unjust background conditions. It could refer to much more. 
We can readily see that some conceptions of equality are quite compatible with - indeed identical to - some conceptions of liberty. For example, libertarians, who may appear to oppose equality, insist on equality of an important kind; they want to ensure that all citizens have an equal right to pursue their own ends.2 An understanding of equality lies at the heart of the libertarian creed. 
Freedom from desperate conditions, often treated as an egalitarian idea, is an understanding of liberty as well. Those who emphasize autonomy in the formation of preferences are speaking of both equality and liberty; they want to ensure that unjustified inequalities - inequalities based upon wealth, race, or sex, for example do not limit the free development of individual personality. 
In these circumstances, it is important to be quite careful before seeing any tension between equality and liberty. Tension exists only when we specify conceptions of these broad terms that cannot peacefully coexist. Perhaps such incompatible conceptions cannot be defended. Perhaps the best conceptions of equality are entirely compatible with the best understandings of liberty. 
In this essay, I seek to defend a particular understanding of equality, one that is an understanding of liberty as well. I call this conception "the anticaste principle."3 Put too briefly, the anticaste principle forbids social and legal practices from translating highly visible and morally irrelevant differences into systemic social disadvantage, unless there is a very good reason for society to do so. On this view, a special problem of inequality arises when members of a group suffer from a range of disadvantages because of a groupbased characteristic that is both visible for all to see and irrelevant 
others"). 
LAW? 16-21 (2d ed. 1988), and Owen M. Fiss, Groups and the Equal Protection Clause, 5 PHIL.& PUB. AFF. 107. 147-70 (1976). There are, however, important differences between these approaches and what I defend here, partly because of my understanding of the equality principle, and partly because I suggest that the principle is for legislative rather than judicial enforcement. Many such differences will emerge in the course of the discussion. from a moralpoint of view. This form of inequalityis likely to be unusuallypersistentand to extend into multiplesocial spheres,indeed into the intersticesof everydaylife. 
I do not claimthat this is the only validunderstandingof equality. On the contrary,there are many such understandings.Our Constitution'sequality principleis plural rather than singular. It has numerous manifestations;4a unitary conception of equality would not exhaust the term as it operates in American legal and politicaldiscussion. Considerpoliticalequalityand principlesdisallowing discriminationon the basis of religiousconvictionor prejudice. These conceptionsof equalitywarrantsupport,andthey have considerablegroundingin our constitutionaltraditions.5 
I emphasizethe anticasteprinciple,not because it exhauststhe concept of equality,but because it capturesan understandingthat has strong roots in Americanlegal traditions,has considerableindependentappeal,is violatedin manyimportantpartsof American life, and fits well with the best understandingsof liberty. In other words, the anticasteprincipleis an importantand perhapsinsufficiently appreciated part of the lawyer's conception of equality underthe AmericanConstitution.6 
In describingthe anticasteprinciple,I also offer some information about racialand gender disparitiesin the United States. I do so because it is hardto have a sense of the worldof discrimination without having a good sense of the data. Legal discussionsabout equalityare too often and too exclusivelyconceptual,attemptingto offer perspicuousdescriptionsof discriminationor inequalitywithout a sufficientdiscussionof the factsthat underlieeither the problem or the solutions.7 I will not offer much detail about solutions here, but I do hope that my presentationof informationabout existing inequalitieswill help to illuminatethe problem. 
I emphasizeas well thatenforcementof the anticasteprincipleis mostlyfor legislativeandexecutiveofficersandonly secondarilyfor courts. Sometimein the late nineteenthand earlytwentiethcenturies, there was a large-scaletransformationin the substanceof the constitutionalequality principle. This is a long and as-yet-untold 
infra section II.B.2. 
(unpublished manuscript, on file with author) (discussing the need for data and midlevel solutions in feminist reform of criminal law). story. A set of amendmentsoriginallydesigned at least in part to eliminatesocial caste eventuallybecame a requirementthat legislation be reasonablyrelatedto legitimatestate interests- a requirement whose original home was the Due Process Clause.8 The transformationmakes some sense if we think about the limited capacities of the judiciary. Taken seriously, a full-blown anticaste principle is beyond judicial competence. But if the Constitution speaks to nonjudicialactorsas well, the broadcommitmentsof the Fourteenth Amendment have a different meaning outside the courtroom. It is possible, in short, to insist on the continuingimportanceof one of the great unusedprovisionsof the Constitution, Section5 of the FourteenthAmendment: "TheCongressshallhave power to enforce, by appropriatelegislation,the provisionsof this article."9 
I. FALSE STARTS 
In this Part,I discussthree understandingsof the equalityprinciple. All three have played a majorrole in public and sometimes legal debate. The firststressesthe advantagesof free markets. The second relies on respect for existing preferences. The third and most importantsees the equalityprincipleas a ban on unreasonable distinctionsbetween social groups. As we will see, the difficulties with each of these understandingshelp lay the foundationfor the anticasteprinciple. 
A. 
Markets? 
In light of the extraordinaryrecentoutburstof internationalenthusiasmfor free markets,it should not be surprisingto find a resurgenceof the view thatall invidiousdiscriminationon the basisof race and sex will be eliminatedby laissez faire.10On this view, the appropriateapproachfor law would be to eliminateconstraintson marketorderingand to rely solely on propertyrights,voluntaryarrangements,and freedom of contractto produceequality. 
(1897) (striking down a Louisiana law limiting the right of out-of-state insurance companies to do business in Louisiana as an infringement on liberty of contract not justified by the law's purpose). 

(conceding that discrimination of some sort will persist in markets because such discrimination is "rational"). I focus on race and gender equality, with occasional reference to disability. Other forms of inequality raise additional issues that I cannot take up here. See infra section II.B.4. 
In many ways, free markets are indeed connected with equality on the basis of race and sex. Legal barriers to female and black employment are a form of government intervention in the market, and they have often been an effective and severe hindrance to equality. Antifemale and antiblack cartels, especially when government-sponsored, can drive down both wages and employment for women and blacks. In a free market, by contrast, all people should succeed to the extent that they are able to perform their respective functions - as employers, employees, co-workers, and customers. 
It is unnecessary to stress that women and blacks often perform as well as or better than men and whites. Once discriminatory laws are eliminated, free markets may therefore accomplish a great deal in breaking down a system of inequality. In South Africa, for example, it is most doubtful that the system of apartheid could have survived under free markets. Too many employers would have found it desirable to hire blacks; too many companies would have found it in their economic interest to serve people on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
The point can be made through a simple example. Suppose that an employer prefers to hire only men; suppose he believes that women belong in the home. This employer should face severe obstacles to continued profitability and, in the end, might even be driven out of the market. An employer who restricts himself to one social group will be placed at a serious disadvantage; it would be as if he refuses to hire people whose last names begin with a particular letter. If the employer is sexist or racist, his "taste" for discrimination operates as an implicit tax on the operation of his business. To say the least, self-imposed implicit taxes are self-defeating in a competitive market. 
Much the same can be said for a company that prefers to serve only whites or men. Such a company will artificiallyrestrict its business to one social group, and it will thus impair its own economic interests by reducing its market and the corresponding demand for its product. An employer who hires and serves women as well as men should do much better in market competition. 
As a complete solution, however, free markets will be inadequate if used to remedy sex and race discrimination. There are several reasons.11 First, a market system allows discriminatorily motivated third parties to impose costs on people who agree to treat men and women, or blacksand whites,equally.12Customers, co-workers,and otherssometimeswithdrawpatronageand services from nondiscriminatoryemployers. For example, a law firm that hires female lawyersmightfind itself punishedin the marketplace. 
A grocerystore that hiresblacksmightfindit harderto attractcustomers. Under these circumstancesm,arketpressuresdo not check discriminationbut instead increase the likelihood that it will continue. Ironically,the failureto discriminateoperatesas a tax on the employer's business, rather than vice versa. A nondiscriminator could face the equivalent of a self-imposed tax by virtue of coworker or customerreactions. 
The phenomenon is hardlyunusual. Consider,for example, a shopkeeper whose customers do not like dealing with blacks or women; a commercialairline whose patrons react unfavorablyto female pilots;a universitywhose studentsand alumniprefer a primarilywhite faculty;a hospital whose patients are uncomfortable with female doctorsor blacknurses. The persistenceof privatesegregationin majorleague baseballis a familiarexample. The latter finds a modern analoguein studies of the prices of baseballcards, which show a race-basedpremiumfor white players.13We may speculatethat in some athleticcompetitionscustomerspreferwhite athletes, and these preferencesplay a role in some market decisions. In cases of thiskind,marketpressurescreateratherthanprevent discrimination.14 
Of course,thirdpartiesdo not have uniformpreferences. Many and perhapsmost whites and men are not discriminators.In any case third-partypreferencesare sharplydivided,andfor this reason we should expect a wide rangeof diverseviews and practices,each gaining and losing influence in different times and places.15 My point is only that in some importantsectors, and for important lengths of time, the existence of third-partydiscriminationcan en 
woeful tales, in AN ECONOMIST'SBOOKOFTALES23, 31-43 (1984). 
for Memorabilia: The Case of Baseball, 105 Q.J. ECON.575 (1990). 
hurt by their taste. Sometimes they will be; an employee who prefers not to work with women may find himself with a worse job. But sometimes the third parties will not suffer competitive injuries in markets because they are not competing in markets - consider people who prefer not to fly in airplanes piloted by blacks - and sometimes the harm inflicted by a discriminatory taste will operate like any other harm inflicted by a taste, for example, the taste for color television or high-quality ice cream. Prices will go up, but the relevant goods will not be driven from the market. 
sure that inequality persists even in free markets. The extent of the effect is of course an empirical question. 
Thus far, then, we have seen that co-worker and customer discrimination may lead markets to perpetuate discrimination. A second problem with relying on markets to produce equality is that race and sex discrimination can be a successful and indeed ordinary market response to generalizations or stereotypes that, although overbroad and perhaps in one sense even invidious, provide an economically rational basis for market decisions.16 If stereotypes are economically rational, the market will not operate against them. 
Stereotypes and generalizations are of course a common ingredient in market decisions. There are information costs in making distinctions within categories, and people sometimes make the category do the work of a more individualized and perhaps more costly examination into the merits of the particular employee. 
Many categorical judgments are not only pervasive but also legitimate. We all rely on them every day. Employers rely on proxies of various kinds, even though the proxies are overbroad generalizations and far from entirely accurate. Test scores, level of education, and prestige of college attended are all part of rational employment decisions. Despite their imprecision, such categorical judgments might well be efficient as a cost-saving device and thus persist in free markets; but they might also disserve the cause of equality on the basis of race and gender. 
This is so especially in light of the fact that race and gender are so highly visible and thus so cheaply used as a proxy for other things.17 Different characteristics - for example, educational attainment - might be more accurate as proxies but less efficient to use because the cost of gaining accurate information is higher. 
We might compare statistical generalizations of the sort I am describing with the category of prejudice. Perhaps we can understand that controversial term to include a continuum of unnecessary or inefficient categorical judgments, including, for example, (i) a belief that members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact they do not, (ii) a belief that many or most members of a group have certain characteristics when in fact only some or a few do, and (iii) a reliance on fairly accurate group-based generalizations when 

REV. 659 (1972). 
characteristic should be highly visible in order to be part of a caste system. See infra text accompanying notes 70-75. more accurateand reasonablycheap classifyingdevices are available, or, in other words, when there is a more efficientclassifying device. Statisticaldiscriminationis quite different. It occurswhen the generalization,thoughinaccurate,is less costly to use than any subclassifyingdevice, even thoughsubclassificationwsouldbe more accuratein particularcases. Underplausibleassumptionsaboutthe cost of acquiringinformation,statisticaldiscriminationmight well be efficient. 
Relianceon race-or sex-basedgeneralizationsmaybe a product of prejudice,but this need not be the case. Generalizationsabout race and gendermaywell be overbroad,but no more so thangeneralizations that are typically and unproblematicallyused in many areas of decision. Note that "collegeattended"mightwell be used in the employmentmarket,despiteits considerableimprecisionas a classifyingdevice. Moreover,in the area of sex discrimination,an employermight discriminateagainstwomen, not because he hates or devalues them, but because he has found from experiencethat women devote more time to childcarethando men, or thatwomen are more likely to take leave for domestic duties. For this reason sex discriminationmight be based on genuine facts, not irrational prejudice- althoughthose facts may themselvesbe a productof discriminationelsewhere, particularlywithin the family.18 This formof statisticaldiscrimination- judgmentsbasedon statistically reasonablestereotyping- need not be a form of prejudice. 
My point here is not to celebrateor to condemnstatisticaldiscriminationbut insteadto say that economicallyrationaldecisions can ensurethat inequalitywill persistfor women or blacks,even or perhaps especially in free markets. In variousways, blacks differ from whites and women differ from men. In light of these differences, it is fully possible that in certainsettings,race- or sex-based generalizationsare sufficientlyaccurateas proxiesfor certaincharacteristics. The conclusionis that free marketswill not drive out discriminationto the extent that discriminationis an efficientuse of generalizationsthat, while inaccuratein some ways,have sufficient accuracyto persistas classificatorydevices. 
This point suggeststhat there is no sharpdiscontinuitybetween laws callingfor affirmativeaction and laws embodyingthe antidiscriminationprinciple,at least if the outlawed discriminationis a form of statisticaldiscrimination.The ban on statisticaldiscrimina 
the family as currently constituted "raises psychological as well as practical barriers against women in all other spheres"). tion shows that the law does not just forbid irrational bigotry or prejudice. Instead, the most elementary antidiscrimination principle singles out one kind of economically rational stereotyping and condemns it, on the theory that such stereotyping has the harmful long-term consequence of perpetuating group-based inequalities. 
Along this dimension, the distinction between affirmative action and antidiscrimination is thin in principle.19 It is thin because the law does not only ban discrimination rooted in prejudice or hostility; it also bans discrimination in the form of statistical generalizations of the sort that employers, customers, and others rely on all the time. The ban on statistical discrimination is based on many of the reasons that support affirmative action. I do not contend that the two are the same thing. 
Thus far, then, we have seen that markets are unlikely to bring about equality on the basis of race and sex when third parties are in a position to impose costs on nondiscriminators and when statistical discrimination is rational. The third problem with relying on laissez faire to eliminate discrimination is that in free markets, people who are subject to discrimination may fail to attempt to overcome their unequal status because they will fail to invest in "human capital" the time and effort, in terms of education and experience, needed to produce economically valued characteristics. They may fail to do so simply because of current social practices and a discriminatory status quo. Suppose, for example, that there is current sex discrimination in a certain field for any number of reasons - employers themselves prefer to hire male employees, or third parties impose pressures in discriminatory directions, or employers engage in statistical discrimination. These discriminatory phenomena will affect the decisions of women with regard to education or training in the relevant field and indeed may affect their aspirations in general. As market participants, women might well invest less than men in training to be, for example, doctors or technicians, if these professions discriminate against women and thus reward their investments less than those of men. The decision to invest less would be fully rational as a response to the practices of employers.20 
that insistence on nondiscrimination in fact amounts to affirmative action when racial classifications are accurate). 
investments in human capital will produce externalities. See Shelly J. Lundberg & Richard Startz, Private Discrimination and Social Intervention in Competitive Labor Markets, 73 AM. 
ECON.REV.340 (1983) (producing a model in which workers with similar initial capabilities end up with different amounts of human capital according to how much employers are willing to pay different groups of workers). 
Of course the same would be true in the racial context. If law firms are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will, other things being equal, be less inclined than whites to go to law school. 
If shops are less likely to hire blacks than whites, blacks will be less likely than whites to acquire the skills necessary to work in shops. 
In every sector of the market that contains discrimination, the behavior of prospective black employees will be affected, in the sense that blacks will scale back their investments in acquiring the requisite training and skills. 
The result of these various factors can be a vicious circle or even a spiral. Because of existing discrimination, members of the relevant groups will invest less in human capital. Because of this lower investment, the discrimination may persist or even increase, because its statistical rationality increases. Because of this effect, the discriminatory tastes of employers and customers may well increase. Because of this effect, investments in human capital will decrease still further, and so on. 
These considerations suggest that although free markets can often help further the cause of race and gender equality, they are not a panacea. Discrimination can persist because of the effects of third-party discriminators, because of statistical discrimination, and because of adverse effects on investment in human capital.21 If discrimination is to be reduced,22markets are not enough; supplemental legal controls will be necessary. Empirical questions are very important here, and we cannot get a full handle on the subject without knowing a great deal about the facts. For example, in some imaginable contexts, third-party prejudice will be too weak to promote much discrimination, and in some imaginable contexts, prejudice will be a spur to further investments in human capital. What I am suggesting here, based on highly plausible assumptions and supported by recognizable phenomena in the United States, is that free markets can fail to undermine race and sex inequality. 
I turn now to an influential claim about the relationship between discrimination and law. The claim is that the legal system should take preferences as a given rather than attempt to alter discrimination, and of course I am describing possibilities, not certainties. To see the effects of free markets on race and sex equality, a good deal of empirical data is necessary. 
which reliance on free markets does not itself provide. them. This claim seems especially important for sex equality, thoughit bearson race equalityas well. In manydifferentnations, and in some placesin the United States,womenfrequentlysay that they are content with the sexual status quo. Legal efforts might therefore be thought to representan unacceptableform of paternalism. If women themselves are content, on what basis can the legal systemintervene? Is not legal interventionan illegitimateinterferencewiththe rightto libertyor autonomy?Thussome people suggest,for example,that abortioncannot possiblyraise problems of sex equalitybecause many women are opposed to abortion.23 
These questions raise some complex issues; I deal with them only brieflyhere.24The basic responseis that a social or legal system that has producedpreferences,andhas done so by limitingopportunitiesunjustly,can hardlyjustifyitself by referenceto existing preferences. The satisfactionof privatepreferences,whatevertheir content and origins,does not respondto a persuasiveconceptionof liberty,welfare,or autonomy. The notionof autonomyshouldrefer insteadto decisionsreachedwitha full andvividawarenessof available opportunities,with relevantinformation,and without illegitimate or excessive constraints on the process of preference formation. When there is inadequateinformationor opportunity, decisions and even preferencesshould be describedas unfree or nonautonomous. 
Private preferences often do adjust to limitations in current practicesand opportunities.Considerhere the storyof the fox and the sour grapes.25The fox does not want the grapes because he considersthem to be sour,but his belief that the grapesare sour is based on the fact that they are unavailable. One cannot therefore justify the cessation of the fox's efforts to get the grapesby reference to the fox's preferences. MaryWollstonecraft'As Vindication of the Rights of Women26applies this basic idea to the area of discriminationon the basis of sex. Wollstonecraftwrites,"I will venture to affirm,that a girl, whose spiritshave not been dampedby inactivity,or innocence tainted by false shame, will always be a romp, and the doll will never excite attention unless confinement 
ELIZABETHANDERSONV,ALUEINETHICSANDECONOMICS(1993); JONELSTERS,OURGRAPES(1983); SEN,supra note 1, at 53-55. Poston ed., Norton & Co. 1975) (2d ed. 1792). allows her no alternative."27Mill makes the same points in his work on sex equality.28 
AmartyaSen offersan especiallyvividreal-worldexamplefrom India. In 1944,the All-IndiaInstituteof HygieneandPublicHealth surveyedwidowsandwidowersabouttheirhealth. About 48.5%of the widowers said that they were "ill" or in "indifferent"health, while only 2.5% of widowsgave the same response.29In these circumstancesit would seem odd to base healthpolicyon subjectively held views about health conditions. Such an approachwould ensure that existing discriminationwould be severely aggravated. 
One goal of a legal system is, in short,to ensure autonomynot merely in the satisfactionof preferencesbut also and more fundamentally in the processes of preferenceformation. The view that freedomrequiresan opportunityto choose amongalternativesfinds a naturalsupplementin the view thatpeople shouldnot face unjustifiable constraintson the free development of their preferences and beliefs. 
Thisdiscussiondoes not at all meanthatgovernmentshouldfeel free to reject existingviews of the citizenry,or that such views are irrelevantto antidiscriminationpolicy. For purely prudentialreasons, it is importantfor governmentto be cautiousabout intruding on widespreadcurrentviews even if it seems clear that they are wrong. A system of governmentalreformsthat does not connect with publicconvictionsis likelyto be futile or self-defeating. Moreover, governmentis itself vulnerableto the same distortionsthat affect private preferences.30There is no reason to think that the judgmentsthat underliegovernmentaction are systematicallyless susceptible to distortionthan the judgmentsthat underlie private action. In addition,there is certainlysome relationbetweenprivate desiresandindividualandsocialwelfare,andfor this reasonprivate desires should generallycount in decidingon appropriatepolicy. 
For all these reasons governmentshould be modest in its willingness to revisit privatedesires and beliefs;certainlyit should be cautious before proceeding against apparentlywidespreadpublic judgments. All I suggesthere is thatprivatepreferencesare an un27. Id. at 43. 
(writing against the claim that the existing desires of women are a product of consent). 
RAZ, ETHICS IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN 169-72 (1994). 
perceptions). promising foundation for antidiscrimination policy to the extent that such preferences can be shown to be a product of unjust background conditions. 
C. Irrational or Unreasonable Distinctions? 
Much of equality law has proceeded by asking whether similarly situated people have been treated differently. On this view, blacks can be treated differently from whites only when they are different from whites; the same is true of differential treatment between women and men. At least implicitly, legal doctrines in the area of discrimination allow differences in treatment when people really are different and ban differences in treatment when people really are the same.31 
It will readily appear that the notion that the similarly situated must be treated similarly is purely formal. To become workable, that notion requires a substantive theory explaining what sorts of similarities and differences are relevant. Blacks and whites, for example, are differently situated along many dimensions; so too are women and men. The government could not justify a racially discriminatory law enforcement policy on the ground that blacks are disproportionately involved in crime, even if such a policy could be justified by reference to actual racial differences with respect to participation in crime. What is necessary is a theory to explain when differences will be treated as relevant. By itself the "similarly situated" test cannot supply that theory. From this we might conclude that the problem with the theory is that it is empty, not that it is wrong.32 
As a reaction to the "similarly situated" test in the abstract, this conclusion seems right. But from Supreme Court jurisprudence over the last few decades, we can construct a general understanding registration on the grounds that "[m]en and women, because of the combat restrictions on women, are simply not similarly situated for purposes of a draft"); Michael M. v. Superior Court, 450 U.S. 464, 476 (1981) (plurality opinion) (upholding a statutory rape law applying only to underage females because "the statute ... reasonably reflects the fact that the consequences of sexual intercourse and pregnancy fall more heavily on the female than the male"); Califano v. Webster, 430 U.S. 313, 317-18 (1977) (upholding a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits because Congress acted to compensate women for past employment discrimination); Califano v. Goldfarb, 430 U.S. 199, 216-17 (1977) (plurality opinion) (striking down a statute that treated men and women differently with respect to social security benefits in part because Congress did not enact the scheme "to remedy the arguably greater needs of women"). 
(arguing that equality is meaningless without a separate standard for judging whether people are the same or different). of what the test means, and this understanding is not merely formal. On that understanding, blacks must be treated the same as whites to the extent that they are the same as whites; women must be treated the same as men to the extent that they are the same as men. But these ideas also seem unhelpful. To what extent are blacks the same as whites, and to what extent are women the same as men? The law has answered this question largely by saying that blacks and whites should almost always be taken to be the same, and that women should be taken to be the same as men unless there is (i) a physical difference associated with reproduction,33 (ii) a legally constructed difference not itself in dispute,34 or (iii) a difference closely associated with past discrimination for which the law in dispute operates as a remedy or compensation.35 In all other cases, distinctions based on race and gender should be struck down as irrational, as stereotypical, or as based on hostility and prejudice.36 It follows that the law operates as a ban on formal inequality of the sort that prohibits most explicit distinctions between men and women or blacks and whites. 
There is much to be said on behalf of invalidating formal distinctions on the basis of race and gender. Wholesale disparagement of the pursuit of formal equality makes little sense. In the racial context, formal inequality is often associated with second-class citizenship for blacks. Sometimes the same has been true for gender as well, as in the exclusion of women from the jury and from the practice of law. Many formal distinctions do help produce inequality in the form of second-class status, and many of them are based on prejudice. Even if some formal distinctions between blacks and whites or men and women can be justified, a strong presumption against such distinctions might be defended as being well adapted to the limited capacities of courts. Individualized inquiry into the legitimacy of formal distinctions might produce too many errors in particular cases. Perhaps a flat ban on race and sex distinctions could be justified as a way of producing results that make sense in the aggregate and that allow errors that are few enough in number to be acceptable in light of the risks that would be produced by more individualized inquiry. In addition, formal inequalities tend 
women but not men between the ages of 18 and 20 to purchase 3.2% beer); see also cases cited supra note 31. to encourage people to think in terms of race and gender, and a broad prohibition on laws containing such inequalities therefore has a desirable educative or expressive effect. 
Similar ideas could help justify a judicial refusal to test carefully laws that discriminate in fact but that do not embody formal inequality.37 Careful scrutiny of laws that discriminate in fact but not on their face might lead courts to face issues that are beyond their competence and best assessed legislatively. Consider the extraordinary difficulties that would be raised by asking whether a veteran's preference law would be adopted in a world of sex equality, or whether it could be adequately justified in light of its discriminatory effects.38 
These considerations might form the basis for a justification of the Supreme Court's current equality jurisprudence, casting it as reasonable in principle and sensibly adapted to the courts' modest role. But there is a problem with this project. It is not at all simple to come up with a sensible theory of equality that would map onto, or adequately account for, the existing approach. On what possible theory would the Constitution ban all explicit race and sex distinctions and allow all other laws to stand? There are two problems here. 
First, some deviations from formal equality might well promote equality as that term is often or best understood. Consider, for example, a decision of a local police department to furnish special police protection for women who are traveling alone at night, and suppose that the decision was based on a recent outbreak of sexual violence in the area. It is at least unclear that this decision is inconsistent with equality as it is best understood. Perhaps it promotes equality by counteracting social conditions that subject women to disproportionate risks.39 From this example it may follow that some laws that treat women differently from men are acceptable and indeed promote the goal of equality, rightly understood. Califano v. Webster,40 upholding formal sex discrimination in the benefit formula under social security law, is an explicit and unusual reflection of this point. Perhaps a maternal deference rule could be 
REV. 935, 1000-03 (1989). 
a sex discriminatory statutory rape law on the ground that nature already deters women from engaging in sexual intercourse by imposing the penalty of pregnancy, something to which men are not subject). 
justified duringchild custody proceedings;perhapsalimony determinationsshould be requiredto considerdomestic work, which is closely correlatedwith gender.41 
Alternatively,some laws raise equalityconcernseven if they do not violate formal equality. Considera law that forbids pregnant women from appearingin public. Perhapsno man can be similarly situated to a pregnantwoman, and perhaps there is no problem, from the standpointof formalequality,in these circumstances.But from the standpoint of sex equality, does this make any sense? Surely problemsof inequalityare raised by a law that penalizes a physicalcapacitylimitedto one gender.42Or suppose that the law forbids women from having an abortion, or excludes pregnancy from a disabilityprogram. Under currentconstitutionallaw, there is apparentlyno issue of sex discrimination.43Men cannotget pregnant;women and men are to that extent not similarlysituated. A law that restrictsabortionor excludespregnancythereforeraisesno equalityproblem. But this is an odd way to thinkaboutequality. If the law takes a characteristiclimited to one group of citizens and turnsthat characteristicinto a source of social disadvantage,it may well violate the equalityprinciple,best conceived.44 
Let us push this argumentfurther. Sometimesequalityrequires the similarlysituatedto be treatedsimilarly.But sometimespeople who are differently situated ought to be treated differently,precisely in the interest of equality.45In the area of disabilities,for example,the use of stairsdenies equalityto people who are bound to wheelchairs,and the use of oral communicationcreates a problem for people who cannot hear. Legislativechanges have often been based on an understandingthatpeople who are differentmust Child Custody, 1 S. CAL.REV.L. & WOMEN'STUD.133,203-23 (1993), and Mary E. Becker, Prince Charming: Abstract Equality, 1987 Sup. CT. REV. 201, 219-22. 
(holdingthat"thedisfavoringof abortion... is not ipsofactosex discrimination"G); eduldig v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484, 494-96 & n.20 (1974) (holdingthat excludingpregnancycoverage froma statedisabilityprogramdoes not violatethe EqualProtectionClauseabsentan intent to discriminatee,ven though"it is truethat only womencan becomepregnant"). 
strikingappearanceof argumentsinvolvingsex discriminationin PlannedParenthoodv. Casey,112 S. Ct. 2791,2807,2809,2830-31(1992)(jointopinionof O'Connor,Kennedy,& Souter,JJ.);112S. Ct. at 2842(Stevens,J., concurringin partand dissentingin part);112S. Ct. at 2846-47(Blackmun,J., concurringin partand dissentingin part). 
Dominance: On Sex Discrimination, in FEMINISMUNMODIFIED32 (1987). 
areamaynecessitateinequalityin anotherarea). be treated differently if they are to be treated equally.46 Of course, the expense of the adaptation is relevant to the question of what, exactly, ought to be done. But constitutional doctrine has rarely recognized that differences in people's situations might justify a claim for differential treatment in the interest of equality. 
We can connect this issue to the broader failure of American law to do as much as it might have about existing inequalities on the basis of both sex and race. In many areas there has been much progress; women cannot be excluded from professions, and most laws that build on or ratify sex-based stereotypes are forbidden.47 But if we look at the basic indicators of social welfare, it is not clear how much difference the law has made.48 The relative labormarket status of women has not changed much in the aftermath of judicial decisions.49 The difference between the earnings of women and of men was greater in 1980 than it was in 1955, even though the key Supreme Court decisions were in the 1970s.50 Women continue to face occupational segregation in the workforce, and the result is that women disproportionately occupy low-paying positions traditionally identified as female.51 Thus Gerald Rosenberg's influential study concludes that "[c]ourt action contributed little to eliminating discrimination against women. Cases were argued and won but, litigants aside, little was accomplished."52 
This conclusion is probably too blunt. It is hard to measure the real-world effects of Supreme Court decisions, and the ban on unequal treatment by government may well have made an important difference for many women, even if it is hard for social scientists to tie real-world changes to judicial decisions. A degree of agnosticism makes good sense here. But it is highly revealing that the requirement of formal equality cannot be easily associated with largescale changes in the social welfare of women. 
No. 101-336, 104 Stat. 328 (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. ?? 12101-12213) (Supp. IV 1992). 

HOLLOW HOPE 207-12 (1991) (concluding that "[l]itigation has failed to end [sex] discrimination"); Mary E. Becker, Politics, Differences, and Economic Rights, 1989 U. Cmii.LEGALF. 169, 172-74 (arguing that while antidiscrimination laws have produced progress for women, they have not made women economically equal to men). 

Ironically,some existinginequalitiesmay be partlya productof contemporaryequalitylaw. After divorce,women'seconomicwelfare goes sharplydown, whereas men's goes sharplyup.53 Legal rules,not nature,assurethis resultby generallyrefusingto take account of domesticcontributionsand by refusingto regardthe husband's success in the employment market as a joint asset. The relevantrules mightwell be subjectto legal attack. 
Certainlysome existinginequalitiesstem from laws that do not violate formal equality. Considerveterans' preference laws, sexbased in effect if not in intent. Such laws are immunefrom attack under the formal equality standard,but they can have enormous effects on state employment.54Perhapsmoreimportantis the existence of a socialsecuritysystemthatwas designedfor andthatbenefits male breadwinners,while helping women much less because women do not follow conventionalmale careerpaths.55The failure to provide adequate protection against rape, sexual harassment, and other formsof sexual assaultand abusemightalso raiseequality issues;these failuresraiseno problemsunderthe formalequality approach. 
Now we are in a position to make some general observations about the question of race and sex differences. The question for decisionis not whetherthereis a difference- often there certainly is - but whetherthe legal and social treatmentof that difference can be adequatelyjustified. Differencesneed not implyinequality, and only some differenceshave that implication.Whendifferences do have that implication,the implicationis a resultof legal and social practices,not the resultof differencesalone. Because they are legal and social, these practicesmightbe alteredeven if the differences remain.56Existinglaw recognizesthis point insofaras formal discriminationon the basis of race and sex is prohibitedeven if based on differencesthat are "real"in the sense that as a matterof simple fact, blacks are not similarlysituatedto whites and women REVOLUTION337-40 (1985). 
Massachusetts law giving absolute lifetime preferences to veterans for civil service positions does not violate the Equal Protection Clause even though the law "operates overwhelmingly to the advantage of males"). 
consequences of structural discrimination in the social security system). 
on gender dominance, not gender difference); see also JOHNRAWLSA, THEORYOFJUSTICE 107-08 (1971) (stressing how the social structure affects the naturally unequal distribution of talents and privileges). are not similarlysituatedto men.57But existinglaw stops shortinsofaras it does not allowattackson discriminatorybut faciallyneutral practicesbased on an unequalstatusquo.58 
An analogy may be helpful here. The problemsfaced by disabled people are not a functionof disability"alone"(an almostimpenetrableidea - what would currentdisabilitieseven mean in a different world?) but are instead the result of the interactionbetween physicaland mentalcapacitieson the one hand and a set of humanobstaclesmade by and for the able-bodiedon the other. It is those humanobstacles,ratherthan the capacitiestaken as brute facts, that create a largepartof whatit meansto be disabled. One could not defend, for example,the constructionof a buildingwith stairsand withoutmeans of accessfor those on wheelchairson the ground that those who need wheelchairsare different. The question is whetherit is acceptable,or just, to constructa buildingthat excludes people who need an unusualmeans of entry. That question may not be a simpleone, but it cannotbe answeredsimplyby pointingto a difference. 
We might conclude that there are two fundamentalproblems with the "similarlysituated"idea. The firstis that the idea cannot be made operationalwithouta theoryof some kind. The second is that the implicittheorybehindthe currentapproachseems hardto justifyor even to describe. The best defensewouldsuggestthat the approachis adaptedto a reasonableunderstandingof equality,or several reasonable understandingsw,hile at the same time being uniquelywell suited to judicialadministration.This defense is far from implausible,but it suggeststhat a fulljustificationof the constitutionalequalityprincipleremainsto be offered. 
II. THE ANTICASTEPRINCIPLE 
I suggest that in American constitutionallaw, an important equality principlestems from opposition to caste. This principle grows out of the originalrejectionof the monarchicallegacy59and discrimination in social security even though men are less frequently dependent on their spouses than are women); see also J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B., 114 S. Ct. 1419, 1427 n.l1 (1994) (stating that peremptory challenges are forbidden even if women's perceptions really are different from men's); 114 S. Ct. at 1432 (O'Connor, J., concurring) (emphasizing that law does not always take real differences into account). 

(1992) (discussing consequences of the attack on monarchical heritage). private choices, as in the selection of dancing partners. When I speak of the impermissibility of turning morally irrelevant factors into a systematic source of social disadvantage, I do not mean to deny that in many settings morally irrelevant factors may well be used. But even this point leaves numerous open questions. We do not have anything like a full account of what sorts of differences are relevant to legitimate official judgments. Can such an account be provided here? 
For lawyers, at least, many of the political and moral complexities can be bracketed. Perhaps those involved in the legal system can build on the general understanding that race and gender are irrelevant from the moral point of view without making complex and perhaps sectarian claims about moral relevance in general. Indeed, one happy feature of legal thinking is that participants in legal disputes can often bracket large-scale claims about the right and the good and build incompletely theorized agreements about particular issues.78 There is general public or judicial agreement that race and sex are morally irrelevant in the sense that the distribution of social benefits and burdens ought not to depend on skin color or gender. This agreement is founded on good reasons, because both of these are accidents of birth, because accidents of birth should not produce second-class citizenship, and because it is hard to imagine an account that would justify lesser benefits or greater burdens by reference to these particular accidents.79 To say this is not to say that social roles must have nothing to do with gender; many people think that roles and gender cannot be entirely separated. But it is to say that social disadvantage cannot be justified by reference to race or sex alone, and that point is sufficient for my purposes here. 
Nor, for lawyers, is the notion of moral irrelevance a new one. The anticaste principle has distinctive historical roots. Recall that the Constitution forbids titles of nobility and that an important part of the founding creed involved the rejection of the monarchical heritage, largely on the ground that monarchy made caste distinctions LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES (forthcoming 1995); it has an obvious resemblance to the idea of "overlapping consensus" as found in RAWLSP,OLITICALLIBERALISMsu,pra note 67, at 133-72. 
ability to produce products that the market rewards. These accidents may be entangled with nonaccidental factors; promoting them brings about desirable incentives and also is associated with a range of valuable social goals, like increased productivity. Of course it would be possible to say that when people do not like people of certain races, there is a productivity loss from forbidding them to indulge their "taste" - sometimes this may even be true - but this productivity loss seems inadequate to overcome the basic case offered in the text. among fundamentally equal human beings.80 The Civil War Amendments were rooted in a judgment about the moral irrelevance of race, formerlytaken to be relevantbecause of nature. In the aftermathof the AmericanCivilWara high U.S. officialstated, "God himself has set His seal of distinctivedifferencebetween the two races, and no human legislation can overrule the Divine decree."81In the same period, antidiscriminatio nlaw was challenged squarelyon the groundthat it put the two racesin "unnaturarlelation" to each other.82 
The Civil War Amendmentswere based on a wholesale rejection of the supposednaturalnessof racialhierarchy.The hierarchy was thought to be a functionnot of naturaldifferencebut of law, most notablythe law of slaveryand the variousmeasuresthat grew up in the aftermathof abolition. An importantpurposeof the Civil War Amendmentswas the attack on racial caste.83Thus Senator Howardexplainedthat the purposeof the FourteenthAmendment was to "abolish[] all class legislationin the States and [do] away with the injusticeof subjectingone caste of persons to a code not applicable to another."84The defining case of the Black Codes, placingspecialdisabilitieson the freedmen'slegal capacities,exemplified the concern with caste legislation.85Thus Justice Harlan, dissenting in Plessy v. Perguson,86wrote one of the greatest sentencesin Americanlaw: "Thereis no caste here."87Contemporaryunderstandingsof sex inequalitybuild on this basic idea.88 
I do not contend that the anticaste principle,as I describe it here, can be understoodas a mechanicalreflectionof pre- and postCivil War aspirations. The ratifiersdid believe that caste or class legislation was forbidden;but they did not fully unpackthe category. They understood that legislation always made distinctions anti-Federalists disagreed as to how privileged the government leaders needed to be, both opposed monarchical hierarchy based on heredity alone). 

2 STAN.L. REV.5 (1949) (arguing that the framers of the Fourteenth Amendment intended to forbid discrimination against blacks at the state level). 

1385, 1413 (1992) (explaining how Black Codes were used to prevent blacks from enjoying a wide variety of social and legal privileges available to whites, including testifying in court and owning property). 
amongpersons,and they thoughtthe categoryof caste or class legislation was a small subset of legislation, involving illegitimate groundsfor differentialtreatment. In seeing what counted as illegitimategrounds,they looked not to theorybut to slaveryand the Black Codes as definingillustrations.So far there is considerable overlap between an importantstrandin the Civil Warperiod and what I am urging here. But the Civil War Amendments were targeted at caste legislation,that is, at specificlaws that embodied discriminationand in this way helped to create caste. This is what JusticeHarlanhad in mindin Plessy. Therewas no generalunderstandingthat these amendmentsimposedon governmenta general duty to remove caste statusor bannednondiscriminatorylaws that contributedto caste status - even if it was understoodthat Congresswouldhave the powerto counteractthe legacyof slaverywith affirmativelegislation.89 
The anticaste principleas I understandit here is more ambitious. It is not directedmerelyat caste legislationbut more generally at a social status quo that, through historical and current practices,createssecond-classstatus. We can understandthis principle as emphasizinglegislativeratherthan judicial duties and as reading the Civil WarAmendmentsthroughthe lens of the New Deal, which reflected an understandingthat social practices are often a creationof law,at leastin part,andthatgovernmentis legitimatelymade responsiblefor practicesthat producesocial evils, including pervasive deprivation.90 Reading the Civil War Amendmentsthroughthe lens of the New Deal,91we might see a constitutionalproblemnot only withparticularcaste legislationbut with lower-castestatusin general. 
Thus far I have emphasizedsocial consensusand history. Perhapslawyerscanbuildon these sources,but an adequateaccountof the subject of caste and moral irrelevancecould not rest content withsocialagreementandwiththe past. I cannotofferthataccount here, but a few observationsmaybe helpful. If the notion of moral FourteenthAmendment, 71 VA. L. REV.753, 796-97 (1985). 
the Lochner Court and the New Deal as attempts to synthesize a coherent framework of rights out of existing sources of legal doctrine, including the Civil War Amendments); SUNSTEIN,supra note *, at 40-67 (arguing that New Deal jurisprudence recognized that social practices determining ownership rights, labor rights, and civil rights were themselves products of the legal regime). 
that Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), reinterpreted Fourteenth Amendment equal protection requirements in light of post-Plessy social developments). irrelevance involves a lack of connection to either entitlement or desert, we might think that a wide range of differences among people are indeed morally arbitrary, in the sense that such differences do not by themselves justify more resources or greater welfare. In a market economy, those morally irrelevant differences are quite frequently translated into social disadvantages. Consider educational background, intelligence, physical strength, and existing supply and demand curves for various products and services. Certainly someone does not deserve more goods and services merely by virtue of the fact that many people want what he is able to provide. Consider an especially fast run from one side of a tennis court to another, or a book about a murder that is especially entertaining to read. For good instrumental reasons, including the production of desired commodities, we may well want to reward people who can provide widely valued goods; but the relationship between that talent and desert or entitlement is obscure. 
In a market economy, many factors - strength, intelligence, and educational background - affect resources and welfare, and most of these factors are arbitraryfrom the moral point of view. Is someone really entitled to more money because he was born into a family that stressed education, or because of his intelligence, or because he happened to produce a commodity that many people like? Markets do reward qualities that are irrelevant from a moral point of view. But it would be difficult indeed to justify a principle that would attempt, through law, to counteract all or most of the factors that markets make relevant. The reason is that in general, the recognition of such factors is inseparable from the operation of a market economy, and by and large, a market economy is a source of many important human goods, including individual freedom, economic growth and prosperity, and respect for different conceptions of the good. Any legal solutions that call for major intrusions on markets must be evaluated in light of the effects on various possible human goods that those alleged solutions will compromise. If legal remedies produce more unemployment, greater poverty, and higher prices for food and other basic necessities, they are, to that extent, a bad idea. 
The implementation and reach of any anticaste principle should depend on considerations of this kind. The point is not that human equality should be "traded off" against the seemingly sterile and abstract notion of market efficiency. I do not claim that otherwise unjustified inequality can be supported by some intrinsic good called "efficiency." Efficiency is an instrumental good, though no less important for that. I argue only that intrusions on markets may defeat valuable human goals and that this is important to keep in mind. 
To be more precise: The use of the factors that ordinarily underlie markets is at least sometimes, though of course not always, in the interest of the most disadvantaged, certainly in the sense that lower prices and higher employment are especially valuable to the poor. When this is so, any government initiative that would bar use of those factors - intelligence, production of socially valued goods, and so forth - seems perverse.92 Moreover, a principle that would override all morally irrelevant factors would impose extraordinary costs on society, both in its implementation and administrative expense and in its infliction of losses on a wide range of people. The anticaste principle seems to have greatest appeal in discrete contexts in which gains from current practice to the least well-off are hard to imagine; in which second-class citizenship is systemic and occurs in multiple spheres and along easily identifiable and sharply defined lines; in which the morally irrelevant characteristic is highly visible; in which there will be no major threat to a market economy; and in which the costs of implementation are most unlikely to be terribly high. 
Ideas of this sort do not justify a judgment that poor people constitute a lower caste. For one thing, poor people represent a broad, amorphous, not easily identified, and to some degree shifting group. When people are poor, we cannot say that social and legal practices turn a highly visible and morally irrelevant characteristic into a systemic source of social disadvantage. Of course human deprivation creates a significant problem of justice, and a recognizable constitutional understanding tries to provide all people with freedom from desperate conditions.93 I mean here to identify a separate understanding - one that supports a legal assault on the castelike features of the status quo with respect to race, sex, and disability. It is relevant here that the benefits of antidiscrimination fail to justify many of the inequalities that markets introduce, since many of those inequalities do not benefit the least well-off. But a less rigid set of understandings, allowing inequalities that benefit most people, including many of the disadvantaged, would justify reliance on markets, especially in light of the government's ability to use greater aggregate wealth to help disadvantaged people and to provide a basic floor. See the intriguing finding in NORMAN FROHLICH& JOE A. OPPENHEIMER, CHOOSINGJUSTICE58-60 (1992), suggesting that in experimental studies most people choose average utility with a welfare floor, rather than the difference principle. 
law do seem substantial,and the negative effects on the economy 
Originallythe FourteenthAmendmentto the Constitutionwas understoodas an effort to eliminateracialcaste emphaticallynot as a ban on distinctionson the basis of race.95 A prohibitionon racial caste is of course differentfrom a prohibitionon racial distinctions. A ban on racialdistinctionswouldexcise all use of race in decisionmaking.By contrast,a ban on caste mightwell drawsome measureshaving discriminatoryeffects into question, and it would certainlyallow affirmativeaction programs.96 
Originally,Congress,not the courts,was to be the principalinstitution for implementingthe FourteenthAmendment. The basic idea was that Congress would transformthe status of the newly freed slaves by engagingin a wide rangeof remedialmeasures.97It was not at all anticipatedthat federaljudges responsiblefor the which establishedslaveryas a constitutionalright then-recent and highly visible Dred Scott v. Sanford98 decision, would be enforcingthe Amendment. Indeed,the notion thatjudgeswould play a major role in helping to bring about equality under law was entirely foreign to the drafters and ratifiers of the Civil War Amendments. 
At some stage in the twentieth century, there was a dramatic changein the legal culture'sunderstandingof the notion of equality under the Constitution. The anticaste principle was transformed Concepts of Equality, 92 MICH.L. REV. 2583, 2600-01 (1994) (this issue) (describing antidiscrimination laws as correcting market imperfections to some extent); James J. Heckman & Brook S. Payner, Determining the Impact of Antidiscrimination Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina, 79 AM. ECON.REV. 138 (1989) (concluding that federal antidiscrimination law may account for increased wages and employment among blacks in the South Carolina textile manufacturing industry). 
appears in his dissenting opinion in Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559 (1896), in the sentence immediately preceding his famous assertion that "[o]ur Constitution is color-blind." 163 U.S. at 559. See the excellent discussion in T. Alexander Aleinikoff, Re-Reading Justice Harlan's Dissent in Plessy v. Ferguson: Freedom, Antiracism, and Citizenship, 1992 U. ILL.L. REV. 961 (maintaining that Justice Harlan's dissent in Plessy can be read to support raceconscious programs that combat subordination). 
attack on affirmative action). 
provide a constitutional basis for An Act To Establish a Bureau for the Relief of Freedmen and Refugees, ch. 90, 13 Stat. 507 (1865) [hereinafter Freedmen's Bureau Act]). into an antidifferentiation principle.99 No longer was the issue the elimination of second-class citizenship. The focus shifted instead to the entirely different question whether people who were similarly situated had been treated similarly - a fundamental change. This shift in focus remains one of the great untold stories of American constitutional history. 
So long as the courts were to be the institution entrusted with enforcing the Equal Protection Clause, the shift was fully intelligible, notwithstanding its problematic relationship with the original understanding of the Fourteenth Amendment and with the best understanding of what race and sex inequality really are. The judiciary simply lacks the necessary tools to implement the anticaste principle. The transformation in the conception of equality is therefore understandable in light of what came to be, under the Fourteenth Amendment, the astonishing institutional importance of courts and the equally astonishing institutional insignificance of Congress. But the transformation of an anticaste principle into a prohibition on racial differentiation has inadequately served the constitutional commitment to equal protection of the laws.100It has meant that too little will be done about the second-class citizenship of blacks, women, and the disabled. 
If the legal culture is to return to the roots of the constitutional commitment and to a better understanding of equality, the legislative branch should take the lead. The anticaste principle, if taken seriously, calls for significant restructuring of social practices. For this reason legislative and administrative bodies, with their superior democratic pedigree and fact-finding capacities, can better implement the principle than can the courts.101 
Of course there are difficult issues of strategy, timing, and implementation. Some legal interventions may not be fruitful; they may even be counterproductive. Some may breed confusion and resentment. Others may be unintelligible. Still others may disrupt a society's basic organizing frameworks in a way that does great harm and little good. Outsiders - and insiders too - will often know too little, and both must be careful about introducing legal 388 U.S. 1 (1967), with its reference to "White Supremacy." 388 U.S. at 11. The triumph of the antidifferentiation idea can be found in Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229 (1976), and City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). 
Immunities Clause would be a better source of the equality principle of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
the way of social reform). principles that do not cohere with cultural norms. Context will thereforemattera greatdeal. But these issuesconcernquite different mattersfrom the issue of principlethat I am now discussing. 
Whatis the relationshipbetween the anticasteprincipleand the familiaridea that some classificationsare "suspect,"in the sense that the courts will be hostile to discriminationagainst certain groups? We can start by observing that the Supreme Court has granted heightened scrutinyto laws that discriminateagainst certain identifiablegroupsthoughtlikely to be at particularrisk in the ordinarypolitical process.102When the Court grants heightened scrutiny,it is highlyskepticalof legislation,and the burdenof every doubt operateson behalfof groupschallengingthe relevantlaws.103 
The difference between the two ideas can be describedin the following way: The notion of suspect classificationsis based on a fear that illegitimateconsiderationsare likely to lie behind legislation, whereas the anticasteprincipleis designed to ensure against second-classstatusfor certainsocialgroups. The two ideas overlap, because lowercastes maywell be subjectto legislationgroundedon illegitimateconsiderations. But the two ideas are nonetheless distinct, because illegitimateconsiderationsmay lie behindlegislation discriminatingagainstgroupsthat do not count as lower castes, and because the anticasteprincipleimposes duties on governmentthat go well beyond a ban on illegitimatelymotivatedlegislation. 
In decidingwhetherto grantheightenedscrutiny,the Courthas not been altogetherclear aboutits underlyingrationale. The Court appears to have examined a set of factors - above all, the relevance of the group characteristicto legitimategovernmentalends, the likelihood that the group in question will be subjectto prejudice, the immutabilityof the characteristict,he existenceof past and distinctions)C;leburnev. CleburneLivingCtr.,473U.S.432,440-42(1985)(refusingto apply strictscrutinyto legislationdistinguishingthe mentallyretardedbecauseof the lackof a legal traditiondisadvantagingthis group);Craigv. Boren, 429 U.S. 190, 204 (1976) (applying heightenedscrutinyto legislationusinggenderdistinctions). 
context,and "intermediatescrutiny,"usedin the contextof sex discriminationA.n interesting developmentis the Court'srecent suggestionthat it has failed to determinewhether genderclassificationsare inherentlysuspectandthuswhetherintermediatescrutinyor strict scrutinyshouldapplyin gendercases,seeJ.E.B.v. Alabamaex rel.T.B., 114S. Ct. 1419,1425 n.6 (1994)(decidinga genderdiscriminationcasewithoutmentioningthe differencebetween intermediateandstrictscrutiny),thoughit is not clearthatthereis muchdifferencebetween the two standards. present discrimination, and the group's lack of political power.104 In this way, it has moved well beyond the defining case of discrimination against blacks to include discrimination against women, illegitimate children, and sometimes aliens.105 
Most of these factors have yet to be fully analyzed. They purport to involve a quasi-factual investigation into real data, but they actually depend on controversial and usually unidentified normative judgments. For example, we cannot know whether a characteristic is "relevant" just by looking at facts. Often race and sex are relevant to employment decisions, in the sense that profits depend on them. We cannot know whether a group has historically been subject to "discrimination" without knowing whether the unequal treatment was justified; discrimination is of course a value-laden category. 
Similarly, a major problem with the key issue of political powerlessness is that relevant judgments are based not simply on facts about political influence. They also depend on some controversial and usually unarticulated claims about how much political power is appropriate for the group in question and about the legitimacy of the bases for legislative judgments on matters affecting the group. The claim that a group is politically weak in the constitutional test is thus a product of controversial and rarely articulated claims. 
For example, blacks may have a good deal of political power; they can influence elections, even elections of the President. The same is true of women, who of course can affect elections a great deal. The potentially large electoral influence of both groups does not exclude them from the category of groups entitled to particular protection against discrimination. The reason is that even if they can wield political influence, prejudice in the constitutionally relevant sense is likely to operate against both blacks and women in the political process. Blacks may be subject to hatred or devaluation; women may be subject to stereotypes about their appropriate role that affect their political power and even their own aspirations. The conclusion is that the category of political powerlessness looks like an inquiry into political science, but it really depends on some judgments about the legitimacy of the usual grounds for government action classifying on the basis of race and sex. The real question is whether legislation disadvantaging the relevant group is peculiarly 
U.S. 365 (1971) (illegitimate children); Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762 (1977) (aliens). likely to rest on illegitimategrounds. Heightenedscrutinyis a way of testing whetherit does. 
This discussion should show that the basic features of the Court's analysis - the history of discrimination,the category of prejudice,the inquiryinto whetherthe relevantcharacteristicis immutable - can be analyzed in the same way. These ideas are designed to help determine if illegitimateconsiderationstypically underlie legislation classified on the relevant basis. As noted, a judgmentthat there has been a history of discriminationdepends on a theory of appropriatedistribution,at least of a general sort. We rarelysay that criminalshave suffereda historyof discrimination, and if we do say so, it is not because they are punishedfor criminalconduct. To say thatthere has been prejudiceis to say that the usual grounds for discriminationare impermissible, even though those groundsmay representgood-faithmoralconvictions. Consider,for example,the widely held view that women and men shouldoccupydifferentsocialroles - a view that,despiteits popularity,may not be used to supportlegislation. Moreover,immutability is neither a necessarynor a sufficientcondition for suspect class status. Blind people are not entitled to the heightenedscrutiny accordedlegislationtargetingsuspectclasses,even though the conditionof being blindis usuallyimmutable. And if new drugsor technology allowed blacks to become whites, or vice versa, and made sex-changeoperationsfeasibleand cheap,wouldcourtsabandon their careful scrutinyof race and sex discrimination?Surely not. 
My majorpoint here is that the anticasteprincipleis quite different from the antidiscriminationprinciple. We might therefore think that undercurrentdoctrine,discriminationagainst,for example, Asian Americansand Jews should be presumedinvalid,without also thinking that Asian Americansand Jews count as lower castes. The inquiryinto suspectclassificationis thereforequite different from the inquiryinto caste, thoughthe two ideas do overlap. 
The above discussionillustratesthat many groupsthat are frequently subjectto discriminationdo not qualifyas lower castes in the way I have understoodthat term. It seems reasonableto think that Asian Americanssufferfromdiscriminationand prejudice,but it is doubtfulthat they qualifyas a lower caste, becausethey do not appearto be systematicallybelow othergroupsin termsof the basic indicatorsof social well-being. The same is true for many other groupssubjectto discriminationi,ncluding,for example,homosexuals and Jews. Homosexualsare not a lower caste in the sense that they are not worse off than heterosexualsin terms of many of the usual indicatorsof social welfare;they cannot show second-class citizenshipin this sense. But they are also subjectto pervasivediscriminationand prejudice,with possibly corrosiveeffects on selfrespect, and in that sense they are subjectto social practicesconnected to the issues of caste that I have been discussing. 
Nothing I have said here is meant to legitimatediscrimination againstgroupsthat have sufferedand continue to suffer from private and publicprejudice.Forexample,there is indeed an equality norm that is offended by discriminationon the basis of religion. ThoughI cannotsupportthe pointhere, I thinkthe same is truefor discriminationon the basisof sexualorientation. But the anticaste principledoes not cover groups simply by virtue of the fact that they are often subjectto illegitimatediscrimination.The anticaste principlehas special meaningsand uses. It does not exhaust the several constitutionalprinciplesof equality. 
C. Some Data 
As I have understoodthe matter,the inquiryinto caste has a large empiricaldimension. The principlefocuses on whether one groupis systematicallybelow othersalongimportantdimensionsof social welfare. I offer some relevantinformationhere. Needless to say, the accountis farfromcomplete. Throughoutthis discussionit will be useful to recallthat about twelve percentof Americansare black. 
It is not surprisingto find dramaticdisparitiesbetween whites and blacks along nearlyall dimensionsof social well-being. Begin with economicmeasures. The per capitaincomeof whitesis nearly double that of blacks. The median income of white householdsis $37,783, as comparedto $21,548for black households.106Nearly one-third of black Americanslive below the poverty level, compared to about one-tenth of white Americans.107Ten percent of whites over sixty-fivelive below the poverty line, as comparedto about a thirdof blacks.108Perhapsworstof all, 45% of blackchildrenlive below the povertyline, as comparedto 16%of white chil106. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS, U.S. DEPT. OF COMMERCE, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 1993, at 467 tbl. 732, 462 tbl. 721 (113th ed. 1993) [hereinafter STATISTICAL ABSTRACT]. 
dren.109 About a quarter of black households earn less than $10,000 per year, compared to fewer than 10% of white households.110 
Thereare also strikingdisparitieswithrespectto unemployment levels. In 1992, 6.5% of whites were unemployed,as comparedto 14.1%of blacks.1l Disparitiesof this sort persistover time. Consider the charton the followingpages: 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] 
BY DEMOGRAPHIC [Percent; monthly data seasonally adjusted] 
We might turn to education, longevity, and crime. Over 80% of whites have completed high school, while about two-thirds of blacks have their high school diplomas.113 About 23% of whites have completed a college degree, as compared to about 13% of blacks.114 The life expectancy of a white American is four years longer than the life expectancy of a black American.115 From 1970 to 1990, about ten people per 100,000 were murdered each year.116 During this same period, the annual murder rate for white men ranged from seven to ten per 100,000, compared to a range of fifty to eighty for black men.117 Similarly, the murder rate for white women was between two and three per 100,000, compared to ten to fifteen for black women.118 In 1991, thirty whites out of a thousand were subject to a crime against their person, down from thirty-two in 1973, but forty-four blacks out of a thousand were subject to such a crime, up from forty-two in 1973.119 
Consider political representation. Of the 435 members of the House of Representatives, only forty are black. In the Senate, the numbers are even more striking: of the one hundred senators, only one is black.120There are also inequalities in political participation. About 70% of white people were registered to vote, as compared to 64% of blacks, in the 1992 elections. There are slightly higher disparities for voting itself, showing about a 10% differential in the last presidential election.121 
With respect to sex inequality, most of the numbers are far less dramatic. Women's life expectancy is higher than that of men.122 The educational attainment of men and women is about the same, especially in light of changes over the past twenty years - though white men are significantly more likely to be college graduates than white women.123 Most of the disparities between men and women involve income, wealth, and political representation. 

1994). 

The basic economic indicatorsshow large differences. About 69.3% of women are in the labor force, as comparedto 88.9% of men. The median yearly earningsof women is $24,000,compared to $35,850for men. At every stage of educationalattainment,men out-earn women by a substantialmargin. The average annual income of a womanhighschool graduateis about$19,000;for a man, the averageis about $28,000. For a womanwith some college education, the annual figure is over $22,000, as compared to over $33,000for a man. For a womanwho has at least a bachelor'sdegree, the annual figure is about $33,000, as compared to over $50,000for a man.124 
The poverty rate for single-mother families is 59%.125 Note in this regardthat 15,396childrenundereighteen live only with their mother, comparedto the 2182 who live with their father only.126 And after divorce,the averagestandardof living of men increases by 42%, whereas that of women decreases by 73%.127 There are 388 male representativesin the House of Representatives and forty-eight women.128Of one hundred senators, only seven are women.129 
This is merely a brief collection of informationshowinggroupbased disparitiesthat bear on the question of second-classcitizenship. As we will soon see, the informationsuggestsa need to shift from judicial to legislative forums - and also, ironically,to use race- and gender-neutralremedies. 
III. THE FUTURE 
A. From Antidiscrimination to Anticaste 
Equality law has had two principalstages. The first was concerned with preventing explicit discrimination,public or private, againstblacks and women. This includedthe attackon American apartheid,led by ThurgoodMarshalland culminatingin Brown v. Board of Education,130and also the attackon explicitsex discrimination,led by Ruth Bader Ginsburg.131The legal assaulton public 
general disparity is uncontroversial. 
discrimination was eventually matched by the statutory attack on private discrimination.132The second stage consisted of challenges to public and private practices that did not involve explicit discrimination but that stemmed from prejudice or that otherwise had large and not adequately justified discriminatory effects.133 This second stage built on the first. Neither has entirely run its course. 
Both of these movements for reform had substantial success, certainly in eliminating the most conspicuously unsupportable public and private practices. Both were connected with anticaste goals, and to the extent that they operated within the judiciary, they were also well adapted to the limited institutional capacities of the judiciary.134 On the other hand, the successes, important as they have been, have had ambiguous effects on the inequalities discussed above. From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that if the elimination of second-class citizenship is an important social goal, it would be valuable to start in new directions, some of which have not typically been associated with civil rights at all. 
If opposition to caste is a basic goal, civil rights policy should concern itself first and foremost with such problems as lack of opportunities for education, training, and employment; inadequate housing, food, and health care; vulnerability to crime, both public and private; incentives to participate in crime; disproportionate subjection to environmental hazards; and teenage pregnancy and single-parent families. Policies of this kind suggest a major shift in direction from the more narrowly focused antidiscrimination policies of the past. 
This is hardly the place for a full program for legislative reform. But in resolving current problems, most of the traditional claims of civil rights law provide incomplete help. The problem is not rooted in explicitly race- or sex-based classification, nor does it lie in prejudice, at least not in any simple sense.135 It lies instead in policies and programs that contribute to second-class status, often in ex132. See, e.g., Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, tit. VII, 78 Stat. 241, 253-66 (codified as amended principally at 42 U.S.C. ?? 2000e to 2000e-17 (1988 & Supp. III 1991)). 
(codified at 42 U.S.C. ? 1973b (1988)); Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, tit. VII, 78 Stat. 241, 253-66 (codified as amended principally at 42 U.S.C. ?? 2000e to 2000e-17 (1988 & Supp. III 1991)). 
unable to improve the lot of women or blacks and that any progress achieved by these two groups usually resulted from extrajudicial forces). 
this notion is hard to administer, for reasons well discussed in Strauss, supra note 38, at 939, 988-90. tremely complex ways involving interactions between past practices and a wide array of current policies.136 
In proposing reforms, we might look quite eclectically at a range of protections against the sorts of disparities discussed above. For example, policies promoting economic growth are an important part of equality law insofar as growth is associated with employment and the reduction of poverty. But because the association is imperfect,137many other steps are necessary. I simply note a few possibilities here; of course a range of details would be required in order to assess any of them. 
Targeted educational policies, including efforts to promote literacy and Head Start programs, provide promising models.138 At least partial successes have resulted from parental leave and "flextime" policies.139 Certainly, employment-related policies are important insofar as job increases are closely connected with the reduction of poverty. In the area of voting rights law, the race-neutral remedy of cumulative voting might be preferable to racially explicit approaches.140 Consider as well recent initiatives designed to reduce violence generally and violence against women in particular - through education, additional government resources for crime prevention and punishment, and new legal remedies for victims of sex-related violence.141 We might compare these with President Clinton's recent executive order on environmental justice, designed to prevent disproportionate health and safety effects from the existence of environmental hazards.142 
causes of increased homelessness to a variety of indifferent or well-intentioned governmental and social actions, such as the destruction of skid row housing and the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill). 
to economic growth can actually fail to help the poor). 
(1987) (portraying Head Start as one of the clear success stories of the Great Society). 
Thought in the 1970's, 1989 U. CHI.LEGALF. 9. 
Gimme Five, NEWREPUBLICM,ar. 1, 1993, at 16. 
1133, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. (1993). 

Of course there are limits to how much legal reformcan do to redressthese problems,at least in the shortrun. But there is much that law can do to help.143 
B. 
On the accountI have offered, there is no constitutionalobjection to genuinelyremedialrace- and sex-consciouspolicies,at least as a general rule.144If a basic goal is oppositionto caste, affirmative action policies are ordinarilypermissible. Partly this lesson stems from the historyof the Civil WarAmendments;if historyis relevant,it is hard to supportthe view that affirmativeaction programsare invalid.145But partlyit is a lesson of logic. We have seen that in an importantway the antidiscriminationprincipleis continuous with the affirmativeaction principle. Insofaras statisticaldiscriminationis outlawed,the governmenthas singled out one form of rationalcategorizationand subjectedit to special disability. At least along this dimension,the antidiscriminationprinciplepartakes of an affirmativeaction principle. 
To be sure, it may be possible to generalizefrom the Civil War Amendmentsa generaloppositionto the use of skin color as a basis for the distributionof social benefits and burdens. Perhaps we should say that governmentought never or rarelyto considerskin color in its officialdecisions,becauseuse of skin color has bad educational and expressiveeffects, and because it legitimatesthe view that people should see each other, and themselves,in racialterms. But this view is historicallyadventurous,14a6nd it would also involve a highly intrusiverole for the courts. Race-consciousprograms occupy an exceptionallywide range. They can be found in Donohue, supra note 94 (arguing that employment discrimination laws successfully reduced discrimination); Miller, supra note 138 (describing the successes of the Head Start program). 
only pretextually remedial, especially in the gender context, in which purportedly remedial measures may in fact be discriminatory. See, e.g., Weinberger v. Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S. 636 (1975) (striking down a social security law giving benefits to women but not to men because the provision actually reflected irrational gender stereotypes). Also, some approaches might be too crudely connected with remedial goals, see, e.g., Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commn., 497 U.S. 547 (1991) (upholding a race-conscious approach despite its crudeness), or perhaps with rigid quotas, see, e.g., City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989). 
opposition to affirmative action programs). 
distinctions" such as affirmative action programs ignore the 130-year-old intentions expressed by Congress in the Freedmen's Bureau Act). education, employment, licensing, and elsewhere.147They have been accepted at local, state, and federal levels and by courts,administrators,presidents,and legislatures;14t8hey have come from people whose views sharply diverge, includingconservativesand liberalsalike - both Democratsand Republicanshave supported them.149In these circumstancesj,udges shouldbe extremelyreluctant to say that there is anythinglike a flat ban on race-conscious programs. 
It mightbe concludedthatrace-andsex-consciousremedialpolicies are not merelyunobjectionablebut even mandatoryunderan anticasteprinciple. Perhapssuch policies are necessaryin orderto counteract second-class status; certainly many people have so thought. But suchpolicieshave a mixedrecord,andin some places and ways, they have been a conspicuousfailure. Some platitudes are worth repeating: In some places, race-consciousjudgments have stigmatizedtheir purportedbeneficiaries,by making people think that blacks are present only because of their skin color. In some places, such judgmentshave fueled hostility and increased feelings of second-classcitizenship.Some people who woulddo extremely well in some good institutions - schools or jobs - are placed by affirmativeactionin programsor positionsin whichthey perform far less well, with harmful consequences for their selfrespect. Ironically, affirmative action programs can aggravate problemsof caste by increasingthe social perceptionthat a highly visible feature like skin color is associated with undesirable characteristics. 
In part the failureshave stemmedfrom resistanceto any remedies at all for the legacyof discriminationa,ndit wouldbe wrongto discount the extent to which opposition to affirmativeaction can stem from oppositionto any changein the statusquo. But in part the failure has stemmedfrom a general convictionthat skin color and gender should not matterto social outcomes. In view of both history and principle,that convictionshould not be discountedor schools); Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. Federal Communications Commn., 497 U.S. 547 (1990) (minority preferences for broadcast licenses); Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Educ., 476 U.S. 267 (1986) (layoffs allocated partly by race). 
construction set-aside program); Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448 (1980) (congressional set-aside program in construction grants); Regents of the Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978) (state-level university admission program). 
(discussing the overwhelming passage of the minority business enterprises program at issue in Fullilove by both the Senate and the House). trivialized. It is relevant in this regard that many defenses of affirmative action programs are hard to offer in public. Often the nature of affirmative action programs is not discussed publicly because to do so would be humiliating to the supposed beneficiaries or intolerable to the public at large. 
Perhaps this is partly a product of the unfortunate rhetoric of affirmative action.150 But partly it is a result of a deep-seated resistance to "racialism" as producing frequent unfairness in individual cases and as inconsistent with widespread convictions about the relationship between individual achievement and social reward. Elaborate arguments might be and have been offered to try to undermine this resistance and these convictions.151 But it is at least revealing that sometimes these arguments seem too elaborate to carry much weight before the very people to whom they are aimed. 
I do not mean to say that all or most affirmative action programs should be abolished. There is too much variety to allow for sensible global judgments. But we know enough to know that such programs have often failed and that race-neutral alternatives are often better. 
These considerations suggest both a presumption in favor of race- and gender-neutral policies and the need to develop legal reforms that are not gender- or race-conscious - that do not give rise to widespread fears that government is playing favorites or is subject to the lobbying pressure of well-organized private groups. And it would be possible to administer an anticaste principle in race- and gender-neutral terms. We can think of many examples, including broad-based anticrime and antidrug measures; literacy and educational programs; policies designed to protect children from poor health and from poverty, including neonatal care and childhood immunizations;152and programs designed to discourage teen pregnancy and single-parent families. Policies of this kind could easily be designed in race- and sex-neutral terms, and such policies would be directed against many of the important problems faced by both blacks and women. 
130, 136-38 (Ellen Paul et al. eds., 1991); see also Thomas Hill, The Message of Affirmative Action, in REASSESSINGCIVILRIGHTSs,upra, at 108. 
action are indistinguishable in principle). 
corresponding rates for whites. See Gaps in Infant Mortality Rate Still Widening Between Blacks, Whites, CHI. TRIB.,Apr. 30, 1994, at 19. 
These are some of the directions in which equality law might move in the future. It is ironic but true that a third stage of civil rights policy, directed most self-consciously against race and gender caste, might also be self-consciously designed - for reasons of policy and principle - so as to avoid race- and gender-specificity. 
CONCLUSION 
In this essay I have criticized three approaches to the problem of race and sex equality in law. Free markets can accomplish considerable good in the area of equality as everywhere else, but they are only a mixed blessing for race and sex equality. Reliance on existing preferences has related problems, at least to the extent that those preferences are an artifact of an unjust status quo. The notion that the law forbids unreasonable distinctions is purely formal. As often interpreted, the idea has substance behind it, and perhaps it is well suited to the institutional limits of the judiciary. But the substance is not simple to defend. It sometimes requires identical treatment in cases in which distinctions make sense, and ignores inequality when inequality is present. Sometimes the cause of equality requires people who are differently situated to be treated differently, and this is a major gap in constitutional doctrine. 
I have suggested that one of the prevailing constitutional norms ought to be an anticaste principle, one that forbids social and legal practices from turning highly visible but morally irrelevant differences into a basis for second-class citizenship. I have also sought to show realms in which a system with castelike features persists in modern American society; this is an area in which a good deal of information is indispensable. Partly for this reason, the anticaste principle is mostly for legislative rather than judicial enforcement. Courts lack the requisite fact-finding capacity and electoral legitimacy. But this does not mean that others, prominently including Congress, are relieved of an important and even constitutional duty, violated by widespread current practices, to eliminate the castelike features of American society. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
JANUARY 1994 
NO. 1 
* Assistant Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Professor ofJurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Akhil Amar, Bruce Ackerman, Steve Calabresi, David Currie, Dan Kahan, Abner Greene, Harold Krent, Alan Meese, Richard Ross, and Peter Strauss for helpful comments. Cyrus Amir-Mokri provided exceptional research assistance. For financial support, we are grateful to The Russell Baker Scholars Fund and The James H. Douglas,Jr. Fund for the Study of Law and Government. 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1 1994 
INTRODUCTION 
Many think that under our constitutional system, the President must have the authority to control all government officials who implement the laws. 1 The text, structure, and history of the Constitution, we are told, plainly require this result. 2 Under this view, it is therefore something of an embarrassment that the Supreme Court has permitted conspicuous exceptions to this constitutional imperative. We now have independent special counsels, independent agencies, and other such exceptions, commonly thought to be inconsistent with the basic founding commitment to a "unitary executive." 
Some believe that this conception of unitariness derives from something that the framers decided-that the framers constitutionalized a strongly unitary executive, and that anyone following the original design must follow this structural pattern. 
We think that the view that the framers constitutionalized anything like this vision of the executive is just plain myth. It is a creation of the twentieth century, not the eighteenth. It derives from twentieth century categories applied unreflectively to an eighteenth century document. It ignores strong evidence that the framers imagined not a clear executive hierarchy with the President at the summit, but a large degree of congressional power to structure the administration as it thought proper. 
We reach this conclusion with reluctance. A strongly unitary executive can promote important values of accountability, coordination, and uniformity in the execution of the laws, and to whatever extent these were the framers' values, they are certainly now ours. If these values are Unitary Executive, Plural Judiciary, 105 Harv. L. Rev. 1153 (1992); David P. Currie, The Distribution of Powers After Bowsher, 1986 Sup. Ct. Rev. 19; Geoffrey P. Miller, Independent Agencies, 1986 Sup. Ct. Rev. 41; Theodore B. Olson, Founders Wouldn't Endorse America's Plural Presidency, Legal Times, Apr. 27, 1987, at 11 [hereinafter Olson, Plural Presidency]; Theodore Olson, Separation of Powers Principle is No 'Triviality' (Bowsher v. Synar), Legal Times, July 21, 1986, at 4 [hereinafter Olson, Separation of powers]. 
Miller, supra note 1, at 58-60; Olson, Plural Presidency, supra note 1, at 11-12; Olson, Separation of Powers, supra note 1, at 4. 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 2 1994 not advanced by the original design, we seemingly face an unpleasant dilemma-either we adhere to that design and sacrifice important institutional values, or we advance these institutional values and sacrifice fidelity to the original design. History apparently leads us to choose between the original design and a design many now view as indispensable. 
At least this is so unless there is a compelling nonhistorical3 argument supporting a strong unitary design. We believe that there is indeed a plausible structural argument on behalf of the hierarchical conception of the unitary executive. This is an argument that emphasizes changed circumstances since the eighteenth century, and that accommodates the framers' design within this changed constitutional context-an argument, that is, that translates 4 the framers' original design from the language and context of the eighteenth century into the world today. 
points we will speak of originalism, a term that seems to us decreasingly helpful. Just as the "interpretivist-noninterpretivist" division now seems unsatisfactory, for reasons explained in Ronald Dworkin, The Forum of Principle, in A Matter of Principle 33, 34-35 (1985), so it is necessary to question the "originalist-nonoriginalist" division in the context of many legal disputes, especially those that involve an effort to maintain fidelity to constitutional commitments in the face of changed circumstances. When circumstances have changed, a supposedly nonoriginalist interpretation may well have a stronger claim of fidelity to the original understanding, for reasons suggested in Part III below. The approach that we advocate may therefore be described as an originalist one. See infra text accompanying notes 37-47. 
different ways. See, e.g., Paul Brest, The Misconceived Quest for the Original Understanding, 60 B.U. L. Rev. 204, 218-22 (1980) (arguing for nonoriginalist constitutional interpretation using a historical interpreter as translator); MichaelJ. Perry, The Authority of Text, Tradition and Reason: A Theory of Constitutional "Interpretation," 58 S. Cal. L. Rev. 551, 599 (1985) (discussing Robert Bennett as translator); H. Jefferson Powell, Rules for Originalists, 73 Va. L. Rev. 659, 672 (1987)("[tlo converse with the founders, you need a translator") (emphasis deleted); Terrance Sandalow, Constitutional Interpretation, 79 Mich. L. Rev. 1033, 1067-69 (1981) (arguing that no inflexible "core" of the founders' values exist but that instead each generation must interpret these values itself); Cass R. Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv. L. Rev. 405, 494-95 (1989) (discussing effect of changed circumstances in interpreting old texts); Mark V. Tushnet, Following the Rules Laid Down: A Critique of Interpretivism and Neutral Principles, in Interpreting Law and Literature 193 (Sanford Levinson & Steven Mailloux eds., 1988) (comparing neutral principle and interpretivist approaches to interpreting the Constitution). The notion of course was not born with Brest. Perhaps its most creative pre-Brest appearance was in an extraordinary piece by Felix Cohen, which linked the process of interpretation across contexts to the theory of relativity, to suggest that "[t]he achievements of modem mathematics and physics... give ground for hoping that we shall some day achieve a powerful new organon for mutual understanding,-a theory of translation." Felix S. Cohen, Field Theory and Judicial Logic, 59 Yale LJ. 238, 272 (1950). Most recently, James Boyd White has discussed the notion of reading as translation in James B. White, Justice as Translation: An Essay in Cultural and Legal Criticism ( translation in his distinction between "interpretation" and "construction." See Francis Lieber, Legal and Political Hermeneutics 11, 44 (St. Louis, F.H. Thomas & Co., 3d ed. 1880) ("Interpretation is the art of finding out the true sense of any form of words," while "[c]onstruction is the drawing of conclusions respecting subjects that lie beyond the 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 3 1994 
After outlining the debate over the origins of a unitary executive in Part I, this Article goes on to make two basic points. The first, set out in Part II, is historical. Conventional wisdom insists (1) that the framers believed in a hierarchical executive branch, with the President in charge of all administration of the laws,5 and (2) that we must also ensure a hierarchical executive branch, at least if we are to be faithful to the framers' constitutional design.6 We think that the conventional wisdom is wrong on both counts. There is no historically sound reading of the Constitution that compels anything like the first claim. Any faithful reader of history must conclude that the unitary executive, conceived in the foregoing way, is just myth. 
But we also think that this conclusion does not mean that a strongly unitary conception of the constitutional design is wrong. Part III of this Article offers a justification of that conception, relying not on false history, but on the best reading of the framers' structure translated into the current, and radically transformed, context. Carried into this context, certain crucial aspects of the unitary executive view make most sense of the framers' design, even if the application of that design differs dramatically from the application in the framers' own context. 
In Part III, we therefore discuss the basic commitments of the original constitutional system-the avoidance of factionalism, political accountability, a degree of centralization in government, and expedition in law enforcement-and show that in the face of post-New Deal developments, those founding commitments would be compromised by limiting presidential power over the administration of the laws. However ironic it may be, the claims on behalf of the strongly unitary executive, while implausible as a matter of simple history, may nonetheless be right as a matter of constitutional interpretation. 
current disputes about the relationship between the President and the administration. We discuss Congress' power to create independent prosecutors and independent agencies. We also attempt to sort out a set of issues that have become prominent in the wake of the Supreme Court's surprising reentry into this area in the period from 1976 to the present. expression of the text."). Alfred Hill has described a practice of constitutional interpretation that may in result be quite similar to the translator's practice. See Alfred Hill, The Political Dimension of Constitutional Adjudication, 63 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1237 ( (asserting probable intent of founders was that common practice of the times be observed). For general treatment of the idea of fidelity as translation, see Lawrence Lessig, Fidelity in Translation, 71 Tex. L. Rev. 1165 (1993). 
implementation or execution of legislative enactments. 

HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 4 1994 
Whether the founders framed a strongly unitary executive, or whether we should continue to recognize what they framed, is not a new debate. Throughout our history the question has been the subject of intense controversy.7 Fueled more recently by the work of Presidents, judges, and academic observers,8 the question has regained center stage. Before the late 1970s, the question seemed well settled, even if the answers were to some observers quite-jarring. It was clear that "executive" functions must be performed by officers subject to the unlimited removal and broad supervisory power of the President.9 But it was equally clear that Congress had the constitutional power to remove from the President's authority officers having "quasi-legislative" and "quasijudicial" functions.1 0 
In these two sentences could be found the basic wisdom about the relationship between the President and administrative agencies. Some unsettled questions remained. But it appeared that those questions would be answered through accommodations, formal and informal, between Congress and the President, and not as a matter of constitutional law. 
All this changed in the 1980s. Spurred by President Reagan's efforts to assert hierarchical control over the bureaucracy,' the entire field ex7. See especially the various opinions in Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926); see also, e.g., Nathan -D. Grundstein, Presidential Power, Administration and Administrative Law, 18 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 285, 300 (1950) (discussing debate over extent of autonomy that executive has in appointing and removing administrators); Miller, supra note 1, at 52-58 (laying out pragmatic and neoclassical approaches to separation of powers debate); Peter L. Strauss, The Place ofAgencies in Government: Separation of Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84 Colum. L. Rev. 573, 599-600 (1984) (noting that the Convention was "ambivalent" about the President's relation to those who would actually administer the laws). 

Wilson's power to remove a regional postmaster without first gaining the consent of Senate as the statute required. The Court found unconstitutional the statutory provision limiting the President's removal authority. Myers also sets out three exceptions to this rule. See infra text accompanying notes 102-108. 
involved the power of President Roosevelt to remove a Commissioner from the Federal Trade Commission. The statute provided for removal by the President only for "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office." The Court held that, because of the quasi-legislative and quasijudicial nature of the Commission, these limitations on the removal power were constitutional. 
No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 (1981), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 (1988) (requiring agencies to conduct cost-benefit analyses and submit "Regulatory Impact Analyses" of such analyses to OMB); Exec. Order No. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323, 323 (1985), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 (1988) (directing agencies to create and publish yearly regulatory agendas for OMB approval); see also Thomas 0. McGarrity, Reinventing Rationality: The Role of Regulatory Analysis in the Federal Bureaucracy 19-24 (1991) (reviewing President Reagan's executive 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 5 1994 perienced a minor revolution. Sharp new battle lines were drawn. In several cases, the Supreme Court limited congressional efforts to insulate administration of the laws from presidential control. 12 These cases seemed to suggest that the whole idea of independent administration could no longer be sustained-a change in understanding that, if accepted, would dramatically alter the framework of American government. 
This shift in the Court-toward greater solicitude for presidential control over implementation-inspired an even greater shift in the academy. Scholars began to assert more forcefully that the conventional view of the executive power-in particular, the idea that Congress could create independent agencies-was constitutionally unfounded.'8 Perhaps the Court could eventually be persuaded to conclude that the Constitution prohibited Congress from creating "independent agencies." But in several more recent cases the Supreme Court unambiguously committed itself to the idea that Congress may, at least sometimes and at least to some extent, make administration independent of the President. 14 Indeed, the Court has allowed Congress to go beyond independent "quasilegislators" and "quasijudges" and create independent prosecutors1 5-an innovation from the previous cases that appears to expand congressional authority. 
The recent cases leave many questions unanswered, involving the precise relationships among the President, the so-called executive agencies, and the so-called independent agencies. These questions assumed special importance in connection with efforts by President Bush to assert orders); Peter L. Strauss & Cass t Sunstein, The Role of the President and OMB in Informal Rulemaking, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 181, 185-97, 202-03 (1986) (describing President Reagan's executive orders and arguing that their application can and should be extended to independent agencies). President Reagan's efforts should be seen as the culmination of a long historical trend, beginning with President Nixon. See, e.g., Harold H. Bruff, Presidential Management of Agency Rulemaking, 57 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 533, 546-52 (1989) (reviewing evolution ofpresidential management programs beginning with President Nixon). 
legislative veto); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 118-37 (1976) (holding that Congress does not have constitutional power to appoint members to Federal Election Commission, which is responsible for administration and enforcement of election laws). 
32-36; Lee S. Liberman, Morrisonv. Olson: A Formalistic Perspective on Why the Court was Wrong, 38 Am. U. L. Rev. 313, 318 (1989); Miller, supra note 1, at 43. 
Sentencing Commission. See Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 408-12 (1989). The Commission consists of seven members, at least three of whom must be federaljudges, and has the authority to promulgate binding sentencing guidelines. See id. at 368-70. Under the statute, the President may remove Commissioners only for "good cause." See id. at "independent prosecutor" only for "good cause." See Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 685-93 (1988). 

HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 6 1994 close control over government regulation; 16 they have new urgency as a result of likely new efforts by President Clinton to claim authority over a government staffed largely by Republican Presidents. 17 Heated struggles arose between President Bush and Congress over a range of unresolved issues.18 Similar issues are likely to rematerialize during the Clinton Administration, and these debates will undoubtedly raise new issues about exactly how unitary the executive branch can claim to be. 
It is time again to ask whether the executive is "unitary" in the sense that the President must have plenary power to control administration and execution of the laws. It seems clear that the belief in a unitary executive has captured the high ground of principle, so that arguments for an "evolving Constitution," for flexibility in interpretation, or for judicial deference to political compromise, have become moves of compromise or mere politics. But is this really a debate between principle and politics? Or more precisely, is this a debate where principle favors the unitary view? 
Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 232 (Jan. 28, 1992) (asking executive and independent agencies to refrain from issuing new regulations during 90 day period, and to review existing regulations with goal of minimizing economic impact); Memorandum on Implementing Regulatory Reform, 28 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc. 728 (Apr. 29, 1992) (extending moratorium for another 120 days). President Bush also formed the Council on Competitiveness on March 31, 1989, to exercise power granted by Reagan's executive orders. See supra note 11. 
Executive Order 12,866. The new order provides that OMB and the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs will oversee agency regulation, requires that agencies undertake regulatory analyses under the new principles, and effectively places Vice President Gore in charge of the overall regulatory policymaking function. See Exec. Order No. 12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735 (1993); see also Marshall Ingwerson &John Dillin, Vacancy Signs Abound in Capital, Christian Sci. Monitor, Feb. 1, 1993, at 3 (reviewing continuing Republican control of many agencies). 
the Postal Service. He had attempted to prevent the board from exercising its statutory authority to represent itself in challenging a Postal Rate Commission decision, either by having the Department ofJustice dismiss the suit on behalf of the board, or by removing the board. See Mal Order Ass'n of Am. v. U.S. Postal Serv., 986 F.2d 509, 512 (1993). The D.C. District Court enjoined President Bush from removing the board, see id., and the D.C. Circuit Court held that the board can represent itself in court if its position is inconsistent with that of the Department ofJustice. See id. at 515. 
Possibly the most intense battle during the Bush presidency was fought between Vice President Quayle and Congress over the role of the Council on Competitiveness. Before the issue became moot with the election of President Clinton, Congress threatened to cut all appropriations for the Council if it failed to increase public accountability. See, e.g., 138 Cong. Rec. 13,214-15 (1992) (statement of Sen. Glenn); Eric Pianin & Steven Mufson, Administration Seeking Showdown on Spending, Wash. Post, Sept. 13, 1992, at Al. 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 7 1994 
We begin with some basics? 9 No one denies that in some sense the framers created a unitary executive; the question is in what sense.20 Let us distinguish between a strong and a weak version. The strong versionheld by those whom we will call the modem unitarians-contends that the President has plenary or unlimited power over the execution of administrative functions, understood broadly to mean all tasks of lawimplementation. All officers with such functions must either be removable at the President's discretion or be subject to presidential countermand in the context of policy disagreements. The Constitution creates "a hierarchical unified executive department under the direct control of the President," 21 with consequences we develop in detail below. 2 2 In the & Rhodes, supra note 1; see also Saikrishna B. Prakash, Note, Hail to the Chief Administrator. The Framers and the President's Administrative Powers, 102 Yale LJ. 991 (1993) (building on the work of Calabresi & Rhodes). 
would be departments responsible for daily administration, the Convention clearly and consciously chose a single and independent executive over a collegial body subject to legislative direction."); Prakash, supra note 19, at 998-99 (Convention chose a single executive based on values of accountability and efficiency). 
recently, and helpfully, summarized by Calabresi and Rhodes. As they describe it, the position is grounded in the Vesting Clause of Article II, which provides: "The executive Power shall be vested in a President." U.S. Const. art. If§, 1. This clause, together with the Take Care Clause, id. § 3, creat[es] a hierarchical, unified executive department under the direct control of the President. ...[Thus,) the President alone possesses all of the executive power and .. . he therefore can direct, control, and supervise inferior officers or agencies who seek to exercise discretionary executive power. The practical consequence of this theory is dramatic: it renders unconstitutional independent agencies and counsels to the extent that they exercise discretionary executive power. 
Calabresi & Rhodes, supra note 1, at 1165 (footnotes omitted). 
The Constitution embraces, the modem unitarians conclude, a single organizational structure, with the Take Care Clause empowering the President to exercise control over subordinates, at least so far as those subordinates exercise "purely executive power." "Unitary executive theorists reject the view that the Take Care Clause contemplates merely a housekeeping role for the President, who 'takes care' from a distance while unnamed others 'faithfully execute' the laws." Id. at 1167-68. 
Of course Congress has some role in filling in the details, but that role, according to the modem unitarian view, is crucially limited: "Unitary executive theorists concede that Congress has broad power under the Necessary and Proper Clause to structure the executive department. .. . They maintain, however, that '[n]o matter what structure Congress selects ... the President must retain the authority to give directives to the officers who assist' him." Id. at 1168 (footnotes omitted). 
Finally, the modem unitarian rejects textual clues that may suggest a structure somewhat to the contrary. Thus, though the Constitution contemplates some appointments being vested (and hence some loyalty engendered) in heads of departments, and not the President, and though the framers oddly (for the unitarian) felt it necessary to make explicit that the President could get reports from his officers, unitary executive theorists reject the contention that Congress's power to vest the appointment of inferior officers in the "Heads of Departments" necessarily 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 8 1994 modem unitarian's view, the Constitution constitutionalizes a single organizational value-unitariness-at the expense of other possible governmental values-such as disinterestedness or independence. The conclusion is that any organizational structure that violates unitariness violates the Constitution. 
The weak version offers a more unruly picture. It contends that there are functions over which the President has plenary powers; that these functions are the "executive" functions in the constitutional sense; but that in the founding vision, "executive" functions-which must of course be specified in detail23 -are not coextensive with all the functions now (or then) exercised by the President.24 As for these nonexecutive functions exercised by the executive, the original unitarian-as we will refer to those who believe in the weak version-contends that Congress has a wide degree of authority to structure government as it sees fit. Under this view, unitariness is a significant constitutional value, but it is not a trumping constitutional value. Other values may at times override unitariness, and it is Congress that is to choose among these competing values. 
In outline form, the belief in a strongly unitary executive is grounded in the Vesting Clause of Article II: "The executive Power shall insulates these officers from presidential control. Rather, these theorists contend, this Clause was an insignificant housekeeping provision added at the last minute. Unitary executive theorists also deny that the President's explicitly delineated power to "require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments" implies that the President has no inherent power to tell principal officers what to do. Unitarians contend that the Opinions . Clause represents too slender a reed to support this qualification of the substantial grant of power embodied in the Article II Vesting Clause. 
Id. (footnotes omitted). 
Charles Tiefer provides a similar description of the modem unitarian view. This view posits constitutional mandates for executive organization, not only in areas with traditional Executive hierarchies such as communicating with foreign governments and directing the military, but also in the area of access to the courts. Under this view, the Executive branch consists of agencies organized in a unitary body under the President's control either directly or through a chain of command. Congress' checks on abuse within this unitary body consist of hearings, investigations, new legislation, political pressures, and impeachment, but Congress cannot shield agencies within this unitary body from presidential control or removal. Thus, even in conflict of interest situations, such as when the Executive department is called upon to conduct investigations of the President or his top officials, proponents of this approach maintain that Congress cannot divest the President of control over the investigation. 
Charles Tiefer, The Constitutionality of Independent Officers as Checks on Abuses of Executive Power, 63 B.U. L. Rev. 59, 61 (1983) (footnotes omitted). 

Questions-A Foolish Inconsistency?, 72 Cornell L. Rev. 488, 492-96 (1987) (arguing Constitution's silence about administration was product of "explicit purpose to leave Congress free to make whatever arrangements it deemed 'necessary and proper"). 
HeinOnline -- 94 Colum. L. Rev. 9 1994 be vested in a President."25 This clause creates "a" President, not several; it is powerful, and to some decisive, textual evidence in favor of the view that the Constitution creates a hierarchy with the President at the top.26 Moreover, the President is given all executive power. The framers did not split up that power among different national entities. The Take Care Clause is said to reenforce this view. This clause explicitly gives the President the power to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed." 27 It may be true that the Take Care Clause is a duty at least as much as it is a power; but the duty is the President's, and as with any duty, it implies certain powers. If we take the two clauses together, the argument goes, the President exercises hierarchical control over everyone within the executive department, and people who exercise discretionary authority must serve either at the President's pleasure or remain subject to his will in the sense that he can countermand their decisions. Congress' authority to structure the executive branch cannot intrude on this basic principle. 28 
On this view, the founders imagined a hierarchical 29 executive branch, with the President operating at the head of that hierarchy. From this structure, certain limitations on the power of Congress naturally flow-limitations on Congress' power to restrict or control the extent of the President's authority over subordinates who execute the laws. It follows that the so-called independent agencies are in conspicuous violation of the Constitution."° It also follows that the Independent Counsel Act, 1 like all other efforts to separate the President from the administration, is unconstitutional under Article 11.32 
One could approach the question whether the Constitution embodies the strong version of unitariness from at least two perspectives, one labeled broadly "originalist," the other not.3 3 We understand originalism to require the interpreter to ask whether the modem unitarian's limitations on Congress' power were indeed understood as such by those who ratified the Constitution. AsJustice Scalia has stated the test, the originalist would ask whether (1) the text standing alone contains strong unitarian limitations, or (2) whether strong unitarian limitations were so well 
imagined an entirely hierarchical executive for the unitarian's claim to be in substance correct. See infra text accompanying notes 73-75; notes 58, 96 and accompanying text. We simply begin with what is (for us) a natural assumption here, and relax it later on. understood at the founding so as to be implied by the document itself.3 4 A nonoriginalist who is nonetheless insistent on maintaining fidelity with founding commitments would ask either (1) whether such limitations should be understood to follow from the best understanding of the framers' design,3 5 or (2) whether such limitations follow from the original understanding translated into the current (and quite different) context.3 6 We now proceed to explore, on originalist grounds, which version of unitariness is embodied in the Constitution. 
How can we know whether the framers believed in a strongly unitary executive branch? Many originalists would approach this question through a (by now) standard formula-by considering almost mechanically the key sources of interpretation, "text, structure, and history," as the basis for uncovering the Constitution's original meaning.3 7 And so, beginning with the framers' text, we could read in Article II that "the executive power" is to be "vested in a President" who shall "take Care that the laws be faithfully executed." This is quite likely to yield (for us) a very strong conception of the President's power-after all, it says "the executive power," not "some" executive power, and "all" this executive power is vested in "a" President.3 8 
There are of course other bits of text added to this core-text that defines some additional power and a few minor duties 3 9-but in the main, the document might appear quite clear. Any question about this clarity is easily resolved by considering the second originalist step-structure. Article II's Vesting Clause is less conditional than Article I's: Article I vests legislative power "herein granted," while Article II vests "the executive power" without such a qualification. And so with text and structure, we quite quickly come to a conception of the executive that fits well with a familiar picture of the modem presidency-a strong, constitutionally empowered "chief-administrator" of the executive branch. 40 
But we might ask up front how well this method can serve us in this setting. For when we "begin" with an old text, we are likely also to begin with a range of modem presuppositions about the meaning of that textmodem, not founding, presuppositions. The text is not self-interpreting, and the presuppositions with which we begin will color our reading of the words, possibly more than they illuminate the world the words were meant to construct.4 1 "Executive power" means to us all power not legislative and not judicial; but we might ask, was this its meaning for the framers? "A President" is for us the center of national policymaking, both such a limitation should be understood to follow from the best understanding of the framers' design. On this question, we remain agnostic. Finally, as we suggested above, see supra note 3, it may be that an understanding of this form of "nonoriginalism" is the best way of understanding what "originalism" should be. For further discussion of this point, see infra Part III. 
138 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1499, 1505 ( 
& Rhodes, supra note 1, at 1165. It might be revealing that much of this debate is a debate through italics. 

indicates the Framers attempted to establish an executive who alone is accountable for executing federal law and who has the authority to control its administration"). 
recover original meaning, we cannot rely on text "alone." 
foreign and domestic; was this who he was at the start of the nation?42 A power to "take Care" that the laws be faithfully executed yields for us an implied power to control and direct all those in the executive branch who administer the law; would the framers have understood this to follow? The Opinions Clause 43 (giving the President the power to demand written opinions), the Commission Clause" (requiring the President to commission officers), and the Inferior Officers App6intment Clause 45 (allowing Congress to vest the appointment of some officers somewhere else) all for us read plainly, but for the most part insignificantly; were they also unnecessary scribbles for the founders? 
It is our suspicion that much of the conventional reading of Article II's text is informed by very modern ideas, and this leads us to adopt a distinctive interpretive strategy. Rather than beginning with text or structure alone, we begin with history. Our aim is to dislodge modem preconceptions about the nature of the President and executive power by contrasting these conceptions with those of the framers and with the actual theory and practice of the early Congress. It is an important truism that the framers were quite skeptical of broad executive authority, a notion that they associated with the tyrannical power of the King.46 Their skepticism about executive authority-their rejection of the monarchical legacy-at least raises doubts about the idea that the President was to be entrusted with control over all of what we now consider administration. 
We rely, however, not on general ideas about the executive, but on a more particular examination of how well the strongly unitarian claim fits with the founding vision. We begin with three puzzles presented by the original practice. In each, we compare the actual historical practice of the framers and the early Congresses with what the unitarian would predict that same practice would be. The practice is important, even if not decisive, because it is relevant to an assessment of the original understanding.47 While the practice does not prove the original understand42. On the question of policymaking alone, consider President Washington's selfconception of his role in the legislative process: "Motives of delicacy," [President Washington] once wrote, "have uniformly restrained the P- from introducing any topick which relates to Legislative matters to members of either house of Congress, lest it should be suspected that he wished to influence the question before it." He would not permit congressional committees to solicit his opinion, but intimated his willingness to express his views, "when asked," to a friend. 
Leonard D. White, The Federalists: A Study in Administrative History 55 (1948) (quoting Draft Letter by George Washington (Feb. 1792), in 31 The Writings of George Washington 491, 493 (John C. Fitzpatrick ed., 1939)). 

(1969). 
post-enactment practice for interpreting the meaning of the Constitution. The mere fact ing, an original practice widely inconsistent with a proposed original understanding should draw that understanding into doubt. As we suggest, in every case the original practice conflicts sharply with the practice predicted by the modem unitarian's theory. Together, we suggest, the three puzzles force us to ask whether there is a different model of the original executive that better captures the original design. We conclude that there is. 
We begin with the narrow but revealing question of criminal prosecution, as presented in the contest over the independent counsel and resolved in Morrisonv. Olson. 48 The Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 49 enacted in the wake of Watergate, established the office of the independent counsel to investigate and prosecute offenses against certain officers of the administration. 50 Without exploring the details of the Act, suffice it to say that under certain circumstances, the statute vested in the special counsel full prosecutorial authority for some limited period of time, uncontrolled by the President except to the extent that the Attorney General could discharge the special counsel for "good cause."5 1 The claim of Theodore Olson (the prosecuted) was that the power of Alexia Morrison (the prosecutor) was power from "the executive power," and hence "vested" in the President alone. For Justice Scalia, writing in dissent,52 the case was quite straightforward: The Constitution vests executhe early Congresses enacted a bill certainly cannot show that the bill is constitutionaltake for example, the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Sedition Act, ch. 74, 1 Stat. 596 (1798) (expired Mar. 3, 1801); The Alien Enemies Act, ch. 66, 1 Stat. 577 (1798) (current version at 50 U.S.C. §§ 21-23 (1988)); The Alien Act, ch. 58, 1 Stat. 570 (1798) (expiredJune 25, 1800); The Naturalization Act, ch. 54, 1 Stat. 566 (1798) (repealed by Act ofApril 14, 1802, ch. 28, § 5, 2 Stat. 153, 155). In this area, Congress' self-interest appears to be at stake, and we may therefore discount its conclusions. We do believe the practice is relevant, even persuasive, and we will rely upon it below. But we are not using the practice to prove a particular theory; rather our aim is to use it to raise doubts about a reigning, strongly unitarian theory. A complete picture of the original understanding would include a much broader survey of practice notjust after, but before the Constitution's enactment. Our aim here, however, is not the final history of the founding. It is enough to jar current understandings by emphasizing the inconsistencies they produce. Note that this practice of looking to the early Congresses as an understanding of the framers' meaning is common in the Supreme Court as well. See, e.g., Harmelin v. Michigan, 111 S.Ct. 2680, 2694 (1991) ("The actions of the First Congress... are of course persuasive evidence of what the Constitution means, [Marsh v. Chambers, 463 U.S. 783 (1983); Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 150-52 (1925); cf. McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316, 401-02 (1819)]."). 

sections of 2, 5, 18, 28 & 39 U.S.C.). 
tive power in the President, and prosecution is an executive power; the independent counsel exercises prosecutorial discretion, but without the President's control; the act creating the independent counsel is therefore unconstitutional. ForJustice Scalia, the President must in some way control the exercise of all executive power, and this statute did not furnish that control.53 
So much certainly follows as a matter of modem unitarian theory; but what about the framers' actual practice? At the core ofJustice Scalia's argument was an implicit claim about that practice. In defining the scope of "executive power," Justice Scalia wrote: 
In what other sense can one identify "the executive Power" that is supposed to be vested in the President (unless it includes everything the Executive Branch is given to do) except by reference to what has always and everywhere-if conducted by government at all-been conducted never by the legislature, never by the courts, and always by the executive .... Governmental investigation and prosecution of crimes is a quintessentially executive function.5 4 This is a textually plausible claim. To many modem readers, it seems certainly correct. But has "the executive Power" "always and everywhere" been so understood? 
In answering this question, again, we proceed in two steps. First, does the constitutional text in its original context speak to the question at issue? Second, if the text does not squarely answer the question, does the original practice reveal an understanding uniformly shared by the framers that itself resolves the question?5 5 The text of course does not say whether prosecution is within the term "executive Power."56 So the originalist must turn to the second step, and ask whether despite textual ambiguity, the framers clearly understood prosecution to be within the term "executive Power." 
If the framers' and early Congresses' actual practice is any indication of their original understanding, then they did not understand prosecution to be within the notion of "executive Power" exclusively, and therefore did not understand it to be within the exclusive domain of the President. While the argument for this conclusion has been discussed before in depth,5 7 we can quickly summarize the important points here. 
Consider first the original structure of federal prosecution. If the modern unitary model were the framers' model, one might think that the framers would have established a hierarchical department of legal affairs, responsible for all federal prosecution, with officers answerable to the President or the President's agent (for example, the Attorney General).58 In fact, the record is not at all so neat. The first Congress established no hierarchical department of legal affairs-as we discuss below, the Department ofJustice was not even born until 1870.- 9 Nor did the framers establish a general or centralized body for federal prosecution. Most importantly, they established no absolute rule that prosecution must be conducted solely by those answerable to the President. In each of these three design elements, the unitary model mispredicts the original practice. We consider these in turn. 
First: For the first eighty years of the Republic, there was no centralized and hierarchical department of legal affairs in the executive branch. While the Judiciary Act of 1789 did create the office of Attorney General, it did not create a "department" under him. 60 By statute, the Attorney General had just two duties: to represent the United States in the Supreme Court (only), and to answer legal questions submitted to him by the President or heads of departments on matters relating to the operation of those departments 6 1 -though from the start, the Attorney General also served as the President's legal advisor.6 2 The same act created district attorneys who prosecuted suits on behalf of the United States in the district courts.63 Until 1861, however, these district attorneys did not report to the Attorney General, and were not in any clear way answerable to him. Before 1861, the district attorneys reported either directly to no one (1789 to 1820) or to the Secretary of the Treasury (1820 through 
Second: The first centralized federal prosecution was outside the direct control of the President. Within the Department of the Treasury, Congress established the office of the Comptroller, and in 1797 charged him with the power "to institute suit for the recovery of" a "sum or balance reported to be due to the United States, upon the adjustment of any [revenue officer's account]."66 This power was expanded in 1817, giving the Comptroller the power "to direct suits and legalproceedings, and to take such measures as may be authorized by the laws to enforce prompt payments of all debts to the United States."67 But the Comptroller himself was not directly within the President's control, and most commentators understood the Comptroller to be "relatively independent."6 8 So special was the Comptroller's position that it led Madison, who ordinarily supported an absolute removal power by the President over executive officers, to comment that "there may be strong reasons why an officer of this kind should not hold his office at the pleasure of the Executive branch of the Government."6 9 At one point in the debate, Madison argued that the Comptroller should hold his office for a fixed tenure. 70 See infra text accompanying note 156. 
By clear implication and subsequent practice the district attorneys thus became subject to the comptroller's instructions for this class of cases, as well as the fifth auditor's instructions after 1820 in cases involving delinquent collectors of revenue. They also assisted the Postmaster General in suits against delinquent postmasters and their sureties, and in the prosecution of offenses against the mails. The attorneys might, therefore, receive instructions from three major federal agencies, to none of which they were clearly responsible. 
Leonard D. White, TheJeffersonians: A Study in Administrative History 1801-1829, at 340 (1951); see also Tiefer, supra note 21, at 75 ("The Attorney General did not control or supervise federal district attorneys; his function was merely to advise the President and the Cabinet. Federal revenue collectors obtained legal enforcement for their collection cases in decentralized fashion, paying fees to the federal district attorneys or to private counsel." (footnotes omitted)). 
Comptroller General (1939). 
Tiefer, supra note 21, at 75. 
Organization 22 (1927); Tiefer, supra note 21, at 73-74. 
at 74. 
lawyers are wont to do, that much of the argument against modem unitarians hangs on this single reference. to one debate by Madison. Indeed, Madison the next day "withdrew the proposition which he yesterday laid upon the table," id. at 639, though it is not entirely clear to what proposal this refers. The point that must be stressed, however, is that too much of the anti-unitarian case may be resting upon this single speech by Madison. Congress did not entirely follow Madison's suggestion, 71 but nonetheless the Comptroller's decisions to prosecute were independent, as were his final determinations of disputes referred by statute to him.72 More importantly, whether Madison's initial thoughts prevailed or not, what is clear is that all thought the matter open for Congress' determinationthat is, that Congress had significant flexibility in structuring the duties of this "executive" officer. 
Thus, the organizational structure of the original executive, at least with respect to prosecution, was not hierarchical. But perhaps the essence of unitarianism is not organizational structure. Perhaps instead the essence is mere control, through whatever structure. If the President retained either directory authority over the district attorneys, or removal authority over all exercising prosecutorial power,73 the unitary position may seem unimpaired, at least so far. While acknowledging that there was no clear organizational hierarchy, the unitarian could still claim that the essential requirement of presidential control was preserved 74 : Even if the story just told shows that the Attorney General could not direct or remove district attorneys, nothing yet shows the President could not.75 
Third: But so far this story ignores a crucial fact about federal prosecution at the founding-federal officers were not the only ones who conducted federal prosecutions. State officials also conducted federal prosecutions, and these officers were clearly not subject to control by the offend against any of the prohibitions of this act, he shall be deemed guilty of a high misdemeanor,... and shall upon conviction be removed from office." Act of Sept. 2, 1789, ch. 12, § 8, 1 Stat. 65, 67. Compare this with the-Temoval provision for the Secretary, which stated simply "[t]hat whenever the Secretary shall be removed from office by the President," without providing any limitations on the President's removal power. § 7, 1 Stat. at 67. 
was that the Comptroller be independent of the President for checks and balances reasons. But the modern unitarian could perhaps argue that the real motive for the independence was simply efficiency, and therefore that the Comptroller's position is not strongly probative of the framers' understanding of any constitutionally required control of the President. 
Ordinance Making Powers of the President of the United States 188-97 (1925); Itzhak Zamir, Administrative Control of Administrative Action, 57 Cal. L. Rev. 866, 877 (1969). 
believed they were vesting in the President removal authority over the Attorney General. See Susan L. Bloch, The Early Role of the Attorney General in our Constitutional Scheme: In the Beginning There Was Pragmatism, 1989 Duke L.J. 561, 582. 
to cease prosecution under the Alien and Sedition Acts. See, e.g., Letter from Thomas Jefferson to Wilson C. Nicholas (June 13, 1809), in 12 The Writings of Thomas Jefferson 288 (Andrew A. Lipscomb ed., 1905) [hereinafter Lipscomb, Writings ofJefferson]; Letter from ThomasJefferson to Edwin Livingston (Nov. 1, 1801), in 8 The Writings of Thomas Jefferson 57-58 n.1 (Paul L. Ford ed., New York, G.P. Putnam's Sons 1897) (hereinafter Ford, Writings ofJefferson]. In 1897, the Supreme Court concluded the President had the power to remove a U.S. attorney, despite his being granted a four-year term under the appointment statute. See Parsons v. United States, 167 U.S. 324, 343 (1897). President. Perhaps it would be possible to say that state officers enforcing federal law were not exercising "the Executive power of the United States"; but it seems quite reasonable to think that insofar as enforcement of federal law is at stake, this was indeed their responsibility. As Harold Krent writes, 
Congress vested jurisdiction in state courts over actions seeking penalties and forfeitures, granted concurrent jurisdiction to state courts over some criminal actions, and assigned state officials auxiliary law enforcement tasks. Thus, Congress assigned law enforcement responsibility to state officials who were far removed from control of the executive branch.76 Even when actions were criminal, "[t]he decisions whether to sue and what punishments to seek remained in the discretion of individuals outside the Executive's control."77 The original practice thus violated the unitarian's plan, even in its most minimal form.78 Here at least, some federal prosecution was exercised that was clearly beyond the President's control. 
But not here only. For not only was federal prosecution vested in at least some federal officers not subject to direct presidential control, 79 and in some state officers far removed from executive control,8 0 but federal points: (1) "Congress limited the Executive's effective control over law enforcement by dispersing supervisory responsibility among various executive officials," id. at 286; (2) Private actions constituted prosecution outside the executive's control, see id. at 290-303; (3) States exercised some federal prosecutorial authority, see id. at 303-10. The last two points are discussed below, see infra text.accompanying notes 77, 81-83. For an example of a statute giving control of prosecution to state officials, see Act ofJuly 6, 1798, ch. 66, § 2, 1 Stat. 577, 577 (respecting alien enemies); see also Thomas Sergeant, Constitutional Law 269-70 (Philadelphia, Abraham Small 1822). Finally, one should note that there is an important difference between vesting executive authority in a state official and vesting executive authority in a federal official not directly responsible to the President. Only the latter is subject to the machinations of Congress, and hence the former might be considered constitutionally distinct. We do not address that difference, pointed out to us by Alan Meese, in the analysis that follows. 

alternatively, the extent of original executive control. For obviously one cannot carry over modem conceptions, built upon modem capacity and technology, to'the eighteenth century world. What may appear to us to be lax control may have, in context, appeared quite centralized. And indeed, as Charles Thach argues, against the background of state executives, and the continental executive, Article II's executive was quite strong. See Charles C. Thach, Jr., The Creation of the Presidency 1775-1789: A Study in Constitutional History, Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political Science, No. 4 1922, at 1, 77. It would remain possible for the modem unitarian then to argue that compared to the degree of control existing before 1787, the new Constitution was a more centralized and unitarian structure. Nonetheless, that it was more centralized would not entail a present understanding of it as fully centralized. 
64-72 and accompanying text. 

It was in the nineteenth century that one of the features distinguishing the framers' world from ours changed. Here was the rise of a massive federal bureaucracy;4 14 but unlike the legal culture today, the culture of the nineteenth century theorists was firm in its faith in the scientific model of administration, so that the theorists did not see constitutional problems with relatively independent agencies. The nineteenth century culture could accommodate the growth in bureaucracy by approving relatively independent agencies while staying within the bounds of fidelity. 
But for us, the central fact of the eighteenth century executive (limited national government and limited delegations to federal administrators) has changed, and the central assumption of the nineteenth century solution (neutral, scientific administration) has failed. For now, we not only have a large administrative bureaucracy, but we also have profound skepticism about whether it is possible and desirable for that bureaucracy to operate free from politicaljudgment. EchoingJustice Brandeis (quoting Justice Holmes) in ErieR.R. Co. v. Tompkins,4 15 we could say that administration "in the sense in which courts speak of it today" can no longer be understood to be neutral, or scientific. Politics is at its core, in the sense that valuejudgments are pervasive and democratic controls on policymaking are indispensable. 4 16 This raises a central problem for a modem bureaucratic state. The question the interpreter must answer is how best to accommodate this current skepticism-what structure makes most sense of the framers' design, given the change in the extent of the bureaucracy and the change in our understanding of what bureaucracy is. 
The answer to this question is not simple. No doubt our understandings are complex and multiple, and no doubt the principal place for registering changes in understanding is the legislature, not the judiciary. Congress' diminished enthusiasm for the independent agency form attests to the possibility that new views about expertise and factionalism can influence legislative judgments, informed by constitutional considerations, about appropriate structures. 4 17 It would be possible to say that courts should not take account of changed understandings in the process of constitutional interpretation. But it is also possible to think that changes of this kind are relevant to interpretation as well as to lawmaking, as the Court itself recently insisted in describing the shifts from Pessy to Brown and Lochner to West Coast Hotel.4 18 
A structural argument for a unitary executive, then, comes down to this: Where the framers allocated a power that they thought of as political, that power was allocated to people who were themselves politically accountable. This was part of the fundamental commitments to account414. See Young, supra note 401, at 47-48. 
note 350, at 27-31, 67-71. ability and avoidance of factionalism. At the founding period, the existence of a degree of independence in administration could not realistically have been thought to compromise these commitments. Today, by contrast, a strong presumption of unitariness is necessary in order to promote the original constitutional commitments. The legislative creation of domestic officials operating independently of the President but exercising important discretionary policymaking power now stands inconsistent with founding commitments. 
It follows that in order to be faithful to the founding vision in changed circumstances, courts must now bar Congress, at least as a presumption, from immunizing from presidential control the activities of officials who exercise discretionary policymaking authority-at least if those officials are not adjudicators. 4 19 In order to be faithful to the original design, that is, the interpreter must see as part of the constitutional structure a constraint not explicitly stated in that design, requiring that certain kinds of policymaking remain within the control of the executive. 
This general statement leaves many unanswered questions and ambiguities, and we will address some of them below. But the basic conclusions of the argument are not obscure. To the extent that Congress has authorized executive officials to engage in adjudicative tasks, it may immunize those officials from presidential control by, for example, preventing presidential interference in ongoing cases and offering "for cause" protection against discharge. To the extent that an employee has truly ministerial tasks, and is not engaged in policymaking activity, "for cause" protections are entirely acceptable. The Court was correct in Myers; the Civil Service Act is constitutional. 420 But to the extent that an agency official makes discretionary decisions about the content of public policy, the best reading of the constitutional plan is that in general, the official may not be insulated from presidential supervision. The President must retain the power to discharge him if his decisions are contrary to presidential dictates. 
A contrary view, set out forcefully by Abner Greene, could also be suggested by this same history--one that argues against a strongly unitary executive. 42 1 Perhaps the original design reflected a carefully calibrated set of judgments about institutional authority, with a division between lawmaking and law implementation; perhaps the most important changed circumstance was the disturbance of this calibration through the delegation of policymaking authority to the President. On this view, the key founding commitments call for diffusion of power and for checks and discussed in Martin v. Occupational Safety &Health Rev. Comm'n, 111 S. Ct. 1171, 1178 (1991). 

61 U. Chi. L. Rev. 123, 125-26 (1993). balances between the legislature and the executive. 422 The principal threat of the post-New Deal period lies in the concentration of lawmaking and law-executing power within the presidency. To restore the original balance, courts must now allow a high degree of independence from presidential power, so as to prevent what the framers dreaded most: the concentration of governmental power in a single institution-here, the executive. 423 
This argument also stresses the need to maintain fidelity with the original constitutional design. It too is an argument of translation. But it takes the post-New Deal developments as a reason for more rather than less caution about unitariness in administration. The new circumstances mean that unitariness is a far greater threat than it once was-not that unitariness is a constitutionally compelled solution.4 24 
More particularly, this view fears that the new delegations have threatened to confer excessive power on the executive branch-to create an "imperial presidency." The changed circumstances argue in favor of a narrow reading of "executive power" and for broad congressional authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause, precisely in the interest of maintaining the original commitment to a system of checks and balances.4 25 On this view, congressional power to insulate administration from presidential control is a necessary quid pro quo for the exercise of discretionary lawmaking power by people other than legislators. 426 The rise of lawmaking by nonlegislative bodies-most especially, the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine 427-makes it especially necessary to insist on congressional prerogatives under the Necessary and Proper Clause, in order to prevent an aggregation of powers in the presidency. In short, Greene urges, the post-New Deal developments mean that modern interpreters should place less value on unitariness than did the framers, because of the need to maintain fidelity with the commitment to the diffusion of power.4 28 
This argument is hardly without force. It shows that there is no algorithm for deciding how to maintain fidelity with past instructions in the face of changed circumstances. But we do not believe that the argument 
Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 967 (1983) (White, J., dissenting) (arguing that legislative veto is appropriate means by which Congress can secure accountability of executive and independent agencies that have significant delegated power). 
to agencies. See A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935). For the brief history of the doctrine-not invoked to invalidate a statute since Schechteritselfsee Stephen G. Breyer & Richard B. Stewart, Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy: Problems, Text, and Cases 66-91 (3d ed. 1992). 
is ultimately persuasive. The first and most fundamental problem is that the argument treats diffusion of power as an end in itself, rather than as an instrument for serving various purposes connected with the preservation of liberty. The second problem is that even if broad delegations of authority are the problem, independent agencies are not the solution. 
We can make these points by considering two lessons of the post-New Deal experience. First, there is the problem of administrative accountability, one of the important founding values. The rise of independent regulatory commissions compromises that value. 429 Second, there is the problem of faction, the very problem that the system of checks and balances was intended to solve. To the extent that we multiply (and specialize) the bodies exercising lawmaking power (without a presidential or congressional check), we increase geometrically the opportunities and the costs of faction. From the standpoint of constitutional structure and constitutional commitments, the creation of a body of independent entities seems to be a cure worse than the disease. Both theory and practice support this conclusion. 430 
The original diffusion of power was supposed to protect liberty, in large part by limiting the authority of factions. 431 The rise of a large bureaucracy immunized from presidential control tends to endanger rather than promote that original goal.4 32 Through concentrating power in bureaucracies that combine lawmaking and law-executing authority, we do not promote a healthy system of checks and balances, but instead aggravate the relevant risks to liberty.4 33 The insulating arm of the President is not free from risk. But because the President has a national constituency-unlike relevant members of Congress, who oversee independent policymaking discretion, see Jerry L. Mashaw, Prodelegation: Why Administrators Should Make Political Decisions, 1J.L. Econ. & Org. 81, 81-82 (1985); but the argument depends crucially on the assumption of presidential direction of bureaucracy. 
"have proved to be more susceptible to private pressures, to manipulation for private purposes, and to administrative and public apathy than other types of government agencies"); Cass R Sunstein, Paradoxes of the Regulatory State, 57 U. Chi. L. Rev. 407, 426-28, 439-40 ( to the political pressure of well-organized private groups"). 

discussed the problems of control over independent agencies by congressional committees, noting that committees are not the same as Congress. Weingast argues that there is too simple a slippage from legislative control to committee influence. See Barry R. Weingast & MarkJ. Moran, Bureaucratic Discretion or Congressional Control? Regulatory Policymaking by the Federal Trade Commission, 91 J. Pol. Econ. 765, 777-79, 788-92 (1983) [hereinafter Weingast & Moran, Bureaucratic Discretion]; Barry R. Weingast & Mark J. Moran, The Myth of Runaway Bureaucracy. The Case of the FTC, Regulation, May/June 1982, at 33, 33-34 [hereinafter Weingast & Moran, Runaway Bureaucracy]; see also INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 946-48 (1983). agencies with often parochial agendas-it appears to operate as an important counterweight to factional influence over administration. 43 4 
Perhaps Congress can point to the need to limit presidential authority in order to support some isolated efforts to prevent concentration of power in the President. We will offer some examples below. But it seems clear that the changed circumstances do notjustify the immunization of all or most bureaucratic power from the President. This is because it is hard to identify how independent administration is a realistic solution to the constitutional problems caused by changed circumstances. Indeed, independent administration would sacrifice many values the founders saw as essential. 
We conclude that if the framers thought that the realm of "executive" power was roughly coextensive with the realm of political choice, it makes sense to say that most of modem administration must fall under the power of the executive; and this is so even if the framers had a relatively capacious, but not specifically constitutionalized, conception of what counted as "the administrative." Their conception of administrative (or permissibly nonexecutive) power certainly did not extend to the broad-scale selection of domestic policies for the country as a whole. If we are to translate their structural choices into current conditions, we may conclude that a largely hierarchical executive branch is the best way of keeping faith with the original plan. At least this is so if we are asking whether the President has a degree of removal and supervisory power over people who are authorized to make high-level discretionary decisions about the content of national policy. 
In this section, we briefly discuss the implications of our approach on the resolution of current issues involving the relationship between the President and the administration. Our goal is not to reach final conclusions about these questions, many of which would require far more elaborate treatment than we can provide here. We are concerned principally with a general approach, not with specific solutions. We are attempting to see how the argument from translation might bear on contemporary disputes, a surprisingly large number of which are unsettled. 
We have noted that the 1980s saw a surprising rebirth of contestation about the issue of presidential control over administration of the laws. 43 5 It is clear from the recent cases that the so-called independent agencies are constitutional-at least in the sense that Congress has the power to provide that some administrative officers do not serve at the pleasure of L. Rev. (forthcoming 1994). 
the President.4 36 To this extent, the constitutional assault on independent administration, at least in its broadest forms, has been decisively repudiated. And to this extent, we think that current law is entirely unobjectionable. The independent agencies perform a large number of adjudicative functions; consider the NLRB, the FTC, and the FCC. More important, and in our view crucially, it is possible to interpret the statutes conferring independence on certain agencies in such a way as to maintain the essentials of presidential power, that is, the power necessary to maintain basic presidential authority over the relevant areas.4 37 It follows from this interpretation that, for example, President Clinton has a degree of supervisory authority over the FCC, the FTC, and the NLRB, insofar as broad policymaking authority is involved. This conclusion is inconsistent with current understandings in Congress and the executive branch,43 8 but it is, in our view, consistent with a proper understanding of the constitutional scheme. 
Insofar as we emphasize this last point, we claim that complete independence from the President-if Congress sought to create it-would in many cases raise serious problems. But the unitary structure for which we argue would produce no question about independence in cases in which special institutional considerations support a legislative judgment that it is proper to achieve a degree of immunity from the President. Here the Necessary and Proper Clause provides ample authority, and here the argument from changed circumstances is not decisive, since it does not supply considerations that argue sufficiently against limiting presidential authority. The Federal Reserve Board is a good example. There is no question that the Federal Reserve Board exercises policymaking authority; but just as the framers sought to insulate the Comptroller from the President, and vested the discretion over deposits in the U.S. Bank in the Secretary of the Treasury,43 9 so too the value of separating the "purse from the sword" wouldjustify keeping the Federal Reserve Board (holder of the post-Keynesian purse) distant from the President. 
independent prosecutor); Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986) (upholding lawmaking Comptroller General removable only by congressional initiative, but limiting Comptroller's ability to perform executive functions). 

undertake cost-benefit analyses before enacting new regulations, both President Reagan and President Clinton expressly exempted those agencies that are considered independent under 44 U.S.C. § 3502(10) (1988). See Exec. Order No. 12,866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51,735 (1993) (but requiring all agencies to comply with regulatory agenda for interagency coordination); Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 (1981), reprinted in 5 U.S.C. § 601 (1988); see also 139 Cong. Rec. 12,909 (1993) (statement of Sen. Exon, comparing the "independent forum of the Interstate Commerce Commission to the politically controlled Department of Transportation"). 
Froomkin, supra note 120, at 810 & n.149. 
This is a historical point; but it is supported by a distinctive structural consideration. If the Federal Reserve Board were subject to day-to-day presidential supervision, there would be a risk that in reality, or in public perception, the money supply would be manipulated by the President for political reasons. Even a perception of this sort would have corrosive effects on democratic processes; it would mean that the state of the economy would be perceived to be an artifact of short-term partisan considerations. This would be intolerable from the democratic point of view; it would likely have adverse effects on the economy as well. Congress could permissibly decide that it is proper to prevent this state of affairs. But this argument is limited to the particular concerns surrounding the Federal Reserve Board; it could not easily be invoked for such agencies as EPA, OSHA, or even the nominally independent NLRB. 
To be sure, it would be possible to say that independence is quite generally required to protect against distortions of elections by political interest. If, for example, the EPA is subject to presidential authority, perhaps environmental enforcement will be influenced by electoral considerations. It would be most surprising if this has never happened in the past. But independence would pose obvious difficulties for a range of constitutionally recognized policies such as coordination 4 40 and accountability. The risks to democratic elections are far greater for a political Federal Reserve than for a political EPA. And if independence were acceptable for the EPA, it would probably be acceptable nearly everywhere else. We do not think that the argument that independence is necessary should be accepted without a very strong congressional showing; the model of the Federal Reserve could not be easily adopted elsewhere without compromising central (if translated) constitutional commitments. 
The relevant history suggests that Congress may indeed immunize some specific functions from the President, and nothing in subsequent circumstances should draw this conclusion into question. As we have seen, the framers did not believe that prosecutorial authority need be concentrated in the President operating through the Attorney General.44 ' Moreover, our argument based on changed circumstances does not lead to the conclusion that the Independent Counsel Act is unconstitutional. We have emphasized the need to promote accountability and to limit factionalism by ensuring that large-scale domestic policymak440. Consider in this regard the large number of agencies enforcing environmental policy and the importance of a coordinating presidential role in order to produce rational regulation. See generally Al Gore, From Red Tape to Results: Creating a Government that Works Better & Costs Less (National Performance Committee, 1993) (concluding that helpful method to eliminate waste would be to give the President greater power); see also Breyer, supra note 189, at 10-29 (cataloguing problems in lack of coordination and systematization of policy). 
ing is not placed in independent actors.44 2 It would be an unwarranted expansion of the argument to apply it to the independent counsel, who does not engage in domestic policymaking in the sense in which we understand that term.44 3 
There is a further consideration. As in the case of the Federal Reserve Board, a special structural justification applies to the independent prosecutor. The structural consideration lies in the notion, of course familiar to the framers, that no person should be judge in his own cause.44 4 It is at least unseemly4 45 to say that the prosecution of highlevel executive branch officials will be controlled by other high-level executive branch officials. Congress could reasonably decide that the appearance or reality of favoritism requires an independent prosecutor for such officials. If the congressional judgment is reasonable on this point, courts should defer, especially in light of the complexity and delicacy of the underlying questions. To be sure, many people have offered plausible objections to the Independent Counsel Act,446 but these objections raise issues of policy, not of constitutional obligation, at least in light of the Constitution's structural commitment to preventing self-dealing by government officials. 
The Court's validation of the Independent Counsel Act is probably the largest and most controversial innovation in the recent cases. Before 1980, there was general agreement that executive officers must be under the authority of the President; the Court distinguished Humphrey's Executor from Myers on precisely this ground.447 Now the distinction lies elsewhere, in the line between independence, which is sometimes constitutional, and encroachment, which is not.44 8 On the old view, independent agencies performed adjudicative and legislative functions as well as executive functions, and it was for this reason that they could be insulated 
that the Act is desirable as a simple matter of policy. Note too that the statute upheld in Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988), allowed the Attorney General to discharge the counsel for "good cause," a provision that meant the counsel is not truly independent, and that therefore makes the constitutional issue simpler. See infra text accompanying notes 465-466. 
ed., 1961). 
is most appropriate for circuit courts to appoint officers to monitor elections for federal officials). 
Amicus Curiae in Support of Appellant at 11, Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988) (No. 87-1279). 
(distinguishing Myers on grounds that office of postmaster is purely executive, unlike a commissioner of FTC). 
note 7, at 667-68 (advocating a separation of function and checks and balances analysis rather than formal separation of powers analysis). 
from the President. But after Morrison v. O1son,449 execution of the laws can be split off from the President if the splitting does not prevent the President from performing his "constitutionally appointed functions."45 0 This is a lamentably vague standard; but it has considerable historical support insofar as it turns on whether the authority in question is within the Article II enumeration. 45 ' For present purposes our conclusion is very modest: At least insofar as we are dealing with prosecutors for whom there is a special claim for independence-as is of course the case for investigation of high-level presidential appointees-some degree of independence is constitutionally acceptable. Other efforts to insulate prosecution would be more difficult, because the prosecutorial power is now intermingled with substantive policymaking. 452 
In Morrison, the Attorney General was able to discharge the independent counsel for "good cause," and the Court emphasized this point in upholding the (for this reason misnamed?) Independent Counsel Act. 453 But the Court has not said what "good cause" means. The Court has also failed to define "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office"-the ordinary standards for presidential removal of members of the independent commissions. 45 4 Nor does anything in Humphrey's Executor speak to the particular issue, notwithstanding some casual dicta suggesting a high degree of independence. 455 
This is an extremely important matter. There is no controlling judicial decision on how "independent" the independent agencies and officers can legitimately claim to be. If the statutory words allow for considerable presidential removal (and hence supervisory) power, the notion of independent administration of the laws can be solved simply as a matter of statutory construction. Perhaps Congress has not, in fact, created any truly independent administrators. 
We think that it would indeed be possible to interpret the relevant statutes as allowing a large degree of removal and supervisory power to remain in the President. At the very least, the statutory words do not entirely immunize commissioners from the control of the President, but 
(1988) (appointment of commissioners for OSHRC). But see 26 U.S.C. § 7443(f) (1988) (Tax Courtjudges may be removed by the President, "after notice and opporlunityfor public hearing,for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, but for no other reason." (emphasis added)). 
"independent of executive authority, except in selection." Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 625 (1935); see also Greene, supra note 421, at 166. instead allow him to remove them in certain circumstances. Purely as a textual matter, the words "good cause" and "inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office" seem best read to grant the President at least something in the way of supervisory and removal power-allowing him, for example, to discharge, as inefficient or neglectful of duty, those commissioners who show lack of diligence, ignorance, incompetence, or lack of commitment to their legal duties. The statutory words might even allow discharge of commissioners who have frequently or on important occasions acted in ways inconsistent with the President's wishes with respect to what is required by sound policy. Perhaps in some such cases, the statutory basis for discharge has been met. 
Of course, the case would be easier if the President could show that the officer's policy judgments amount not just to policy disagreements but to unquestionable inefficiency, neglect, or malfeasance-because they reflect (for example) incompetence or a refusal adequately to consider consequences. But perhaps the President's power could go further. A commissioner of the FTC might well, for example, be thought to neglect her duty if she consistently ignores what the President has said, at least if what the President has said is supported by law or by good policy justifications. At the minimum, we suggest that the statutory words could be taken to allow a degree of substantive supervision by the President. 
This result might seem strongly counterintuitive in light of the frequent understanding that independent agencies are entirely immunized from presidential policymaking. 456 But there is a partial precedent for precisely this conclusion: Bowsher v. Synar.457 In that case, the Court held that Congress could not delegate power to administer the GrammRudman-Hollings Act to the Comptroller General, because-and this is a central claim-the Comptroller was subject to congressional will. In the Court's view, those who execute the law must not be subject to the policymaking authority of the Congress except insofar as legislative instructions are embodied in substantive law. 458 The relevant statute allowed the Congress to discharge the Comptroller for "inefficiency," "abuse of office," "neglect of duty," or "malfeasance." 459 The Court said that these words conferred on Congress "very broad" removal power and would authorize Congress to remove the Comptroller for "any number of actual or perceived transgressions of legislative will."460 
The words governing congressional power over the Comptroller General and presidential power over independent agencies are substantially the same. If those words have the same meaning in these admittedly different contexts, the President turns out to have considerable power over the commissioners. If the words have the same meaning, the 
President has "very broad" removal power over the commissioners of the independent agencies, with correlative powers of supervision and guidance. It would follow that the independent agencies are in fact subject to a considerable degree of presidential control "for any number of actual or perceived transgressions of presidential will." They are not, as a matter of statute, "independent" of him at all. 
This is an adventurous and not unassailable conclusion. As we have noted, it is inconsistent with the general 461 understanding that independent agencies are immune from the policy oversight of the President. It would of course be plausible to suggest that because of the difference in the contexts, the same words should have different meanings. Perhaps a statute restricting congressional power over the Comptroller General should be understood to impose thinner limitations than a statute controlling presidential power over independent commissioners-even if the words are the same. Such a reading would hardly be an implausible reconstruction of legislative goals. Congress unquestionably created many of the independent agencies in a period in which it sought to limit presidential supervisory power. 
In view of what we see as the constitutional backdrop, however, courts should probably invoke a "clear statement" principle;46 2 one that interprets statutes to grant the President broad supervisory power over the commissions. On this approach, courts would allow the President such power unless Congress has expressly stated its will to the contrary. Such an approach would minimize the risks of the independent agency form and promote coordination and accountability in government. It would recognize that many independent agencies perform important policymaking functions, and that the performance of such functions by truly independent agents is plausibly inconsistent with the constitutional structure. 463 At the very least, we would require Congress to speak unambiguously if it wants to compromise those goals.4 4 These suggestions do not answer the question of precisely when the President may discharge the commissioners. But they do indicate that he has far more authority than is usually thought. 
Association appears to agree with the point we are making here. See American Bar Assoc. Recommendation, reprinted in Strauss & Sunstein, supra note 11, app. at 206-07. The Department ofJustice also holds this view. See Memorandum for Hon. David Stockman Director, Office of Management and Budget, reprinted in Peter M. Shane & Harold H. Bruff, The Law of Presidential Power: Cases and Materials 355, 357-58 (1988). 
narrowly all delegated powers that may curtail citizens' right to travel). 

Suppose that the independent counsel could never be removed by the Attorney General, even "for good cause." Or suppose that Congress amended the statute governing the FTC so as to provide that the commissioners are independent of both Congress and the President, in the sense that they could be removed by the President only for "high crimes and misdemeanors" or "gross misconduct amounting to criminality." Would such statutes be constitutional? 
Nothing in the relevant cases clearly decides these questions. Probably the best answer is that the independent counsel must be removable for "good cause" in order to qualify as an "inferior officer" (and thus be appointable, as the current law provides, by judges465 ). The notion of "inferior" implies the existence of a superior, and a truly independent counsel-that is, one not at all controllable by the Attorney General or the President-would have no superior. We may therefore infer from the Morrison Court's emphasis on the "good cause" provision that some sort of control by the Attorney General (or otherwise through the chain of command headed by the President) is a constitutional imperative for "inferior officers."466 Nothing we have said here is inconsistent with this understanding. 
The question is more difficult for the Federal Trade Commissioner. He is not an inferior officer appointed byjudges, and indeed he has been appointed through the normal channels, that is, by the President subject to advice and consent by the Senate. The question is therefore one of permissible constraints on the power of removal and supervision. In Bowsher and indeed Myers itself, Congress reserved to itself a role in removal-raising the problem of encroachment 467-and a truly independent commissioner (or head of OSHA, or the EPA, or the Department of Education) would not suffer from that infirmity. On the question whether Congress can create genuinely independent administrators, there is precious little guidance. 
Probably the best answer is that as a general rule (and subject to important exceptions), Congress is without constitutional power wholly to immunize administrative officers exercising important discretionary policymaking authority from presidential control. Congress is therefore without power to create a "headless Fourth Branch" of government.4 68 
General removable only at initiative of Congress); Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 107 (1926) (Act required consent of Congress to remove Postmaster). 
concurring) (agreeing that ChiefJudge of Tax Court isa "head of a department"); see also FTC v. Ruberoid Co., 343 U.S. 470, 487 (1952) (Jackson, J., dissenting) ("[Administrative bodies) have begun to have important consequences on personal rights.... They have become a veritablefourth branch of the Government, which has deranged our three-branch To be sure, true independence in administration does not create the distinctive dangers of encroachment and aggrandizement; 46 9 but it does threaten the core constitutional commitments to political accountability, expedition in office, and coordinated policymaking. If our argument from changed circumstances is persuasive, Congress cannot properly immunize such officers from the President without violating the Vesting Clause of Article II and thus exceeding its power under the Necessary and Proper Clause. 
There are important exceptions to this general proposition. These would include (1) purely adjudicative officers, 470 (2) people who perform ministerial duties, 47 1 and (3) people who perform merely investigatory and reportorial functions-recall that Congress can have a staff.472 All three exceptions have historical roots. But subject to these exceptions, we believe that Congress could not create fully independent officials without offense to the constitutional structure, at least in the absence of special circumstances. This conclusion follows from the constitutional commitments to coordination, accountability, and prevention of factionalism. 
Whether current courts should so conclude is another question. It may be that in light of the difficulty of the relevant line-drawing problems, courts should defer to legislative judgments, and the constitutional prohibition should be under-enforced by judges.4 73 Certainly courts should give Congress the benefit of the doubt in close cases. 
Here we arrive at a crucial innovation in the post-1980 cases-the distinction between encroachment and independence. The cleanest line between Bowsher and Chadhaon the one hand and Mistrettaand Morrison on the other is that in the first two cases Congress attempted to give itself a degree of ongoing authority over the administration of the laws.474 The legal theories much as the concept of a fourth dimension unsettles our three-dimensional thinking." (emphasis added)). 

Executor, the Court was not discussing rulemaking power, in which the FTC was not engaged at the time. See Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 628 (1935). 
United States, 488 U.S. 361, 415-16 (1989) (Scalia, J., dissenting); see also Richard B. Stewart, The Reformation of American Administrative Law, 88 Harv. L. Rev. 1667, 1693-97, 1799-1800 (1975). 
simultaneous grant of executive powers to and retention of congressional control over Comptroller General) and INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 959 (1983) (finding unconstitutional congressional reservation of veto power over executive decision to allow deportable alien to remain in United States) with Mistretta,488 U.S. at 411 (upholding Act limiting President's removal power over Federal Sentencing Commissioners to "good Court has firmly set itself against such aggrandizement. In the Court's view, independence in administration is one thing; congressional encroachment into the administrative process is quite another. "Aggrandizement" and "encroachment" are defining constitutional evils. Separation of administration from the President and Congress does not involve either aggrandizement or encroachment, and is far less objectionable. 
The Court has not given a clear rationale for this sharp distinction. In some ways it seems quite puzzling. For one thing, independence can be understood as a form of aggrandizement. Congress might make agencies independent not to create real independence, but in order to diminish presidential authority over their operations precisely in the interest of subjecting those agencies to the control of congressional committees. 4 75 Independence, in short, might be a way of increasing legislative power over agencies. More fundamentally, the distinction sometimes reads like a kind of "turf protection" model of the Constitution, one that is disassociated from text, history, or structure, and also from any underlying values that maintenance of the relevant "turfs" are supposed to preserve. 4 76 
The question, in short, is this: How is the presence of a congressional role in law-execution worse than an absence of a presidential role? It might be thought that the two pose equivalent risks to constitutional commitments. 
But there are in fact plausible structural reasons for the distinction. First, congressional control over administration creates a specter of combination of lawmaking functions and law-executing functions. The decision to divide the two is unambiguous in the Constitution, and that decision is in turn a product of a belief that the division is an important guarantor of private liberty, democratic control over government, and protection against factionalism. Encroachment is plausibly a greater threat to these values than independence. 477 cause") and Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 691 (1988) (upholding Act requiring that Attorney General have "good cause" for removing independent counsel). 
Discretion, supra note 433, at 768-70; Weingast & Moran, Runaway Bureaucracy, supra note 433, at 33-34. 
1513, 1546-48 (1991) (arguing for substantive, individualist approach to separation of powers rather than a structural "turf"-oriented one). 
functions. But the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) helps counter this problem, see 5 U.S.C. §§ 554, 556, 557 (1988), and we think these provisions have constitutional foundations. It is not an adequate answer to say that independence itself threatens this value. Independent agencies are subject to a degree of internal separation of functions. See id. § 554 (precluding agency employees who engage in prosecution from participating or advising in decisions). This provision, together with other safeguards in the APA, counteracts some of the risks involved in combination of execution and legislation. We think that provisions of this kind are responsive to genuine constitutional concerns; they 
Second, the prohibition on congressional participation operates as a check against open-ended delegations of power. If Congress may not delegate administrative authority to its own agents, it is likely to be clearer in delegating policymaking authority in the first instance. We can understand the Court's hostility to encroachment as having roots in the structural commitment against open-ended delegations of authority, a commitment with clear connections to the goal of providing a kind of accountability. 478 Congress may be content not to set out law in advance if it knows that it may control implementation decisions on a case-by-case basis. Even if the Court will not play a large role in enforcing the nondelegation doctrine directly, mostly for institutional reasons, 4 79 it can discipline the prospect of delegation through institutionally acceptable devices that impose incentives on Congress to limit the scope of delegation. 
Courts have not yet explained the distinction between independence on the one hand and encroachment and aggrandizement on the other. We do not suggest that it should be made as critical as the Supreme Court has made it. But if the foregoing arguments are right, the distinction can be explained by reference to constitutional structure. It makes sense as a means of separating functions and discouraging broad delegation of lawmaking authority. 
Morrison upholds cross-branch appointments,48 0 but the Court was properly cautious about the basic idea, which could produce many oddities. Suppose, for example, that Congress said that judges would henceforth appoint the Assistant Secretaries of State and Defense and the Assistant Attorneys General. In such cases, there would have to be an implicit structural limit on Congress' power under the Inferior Officers have a kind of constitutional status, not in the sense that courts should mandate them, but in the sense that they grow out of constitutional commitments. 
Schechter Poultry Corp. v United States, 295 U.S. 495, 529 (1935) (citing Necessary and Proper Clause as support for prohibiting congressional abdication or transfer of "essential legislative functions"); TheodoreJ. Lowi, The End of Liberalism: The Second Republic of the United States 92-97 (2d ed. 1979) (criticizing as unconstitutional liberal delegations of power by Congress to administrative agencies); see also Theodore J. Lowi, Two Roads to Serfdom: Liberalism, Conservatism and Administrative Power, 36 Am. U. L. Rev. 295 (1986) (describing how broad delegations of power defeat the rule of law as embodied in the Constitution), even though we do not believe that courts should carefully police the prohibition, see Richard B. Stewart, Beyond Delegation Doctrine, 36 Am. U. L. Rev. 323, 324 (1987) (arguing against court invalidation of statutes based on over-delegation). 
J., dissenting) (but concurring on fall of nondelegation doctrine); Stewart, supra note 478, at 326. 
Appointment Clause.4 8 ' Otherwise Congress could wreak havoc with the system of checks and balances. 
But when are cross-branch appointments constitutional? Probably the answer lies in the Court's emphasis in Morrison on the absence of an "incongruity" in the vesting of appointment power in another branch.48 2 We should understand the term to refer to principles of constitutional structure, having to do with the integrity of each branch. Where there is incongruity, the Constitution contains a structural barrier to the placement of appointing authority. It follows that in the cases we have hypothesized, there would be a valid objection based on the system of checks and balances. But this idea casts no doubt on Morrison itself. Indeed, in Morrison presidential appointment might itself have been incongruous in light of the obvious conflict of interest. The congressional judgment was permissible only for this reason. 
If this is the relevant concern, cross-branch appointments should be permitted only in the narrowest circumstances. On this view, Morrison was a case about the oddity of allowing the President to be the judge in his own cause. It does not stand for any broader proposition. 
Both Mistretta and Morrison allow certain officials exercising important governmental responsibilities to be immunized from plenary presidential control.48 3 But it is surely true that some employees must serve at the will of the President. Without offering a detailed analysis of the complexities here, we suggest that there are four distinct categories of cases, and that the categories should be treated differently. 
(1) High-level officials who exercise foreign affairs powers and other authorities included in the enumerated authority of the President 484 must be at-will employees. This much follows from adherence to the original understanding. As we have seen, the founding belief in a unitary executive entailed presidential control over a range of important functions.485 Nothing in current circumstances argues in the other direction. Thus (to take the two principal examples) the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense must be at-will employees. 

congruity is one the Constitution allows the Supreme Court to make. Article II, section 2, clause 2 provides that Congress may "by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think prper,in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments." The emphasized language may indicate that thejudgment as to propriety is left to Congress alone. Consider section 3 of Article II, which provides that the President "may adjourn them to such Time as he shall think proper," which likewise would appear to vest thejudgment in the President alone. See also U.S. Const. art. I, § 9, ci. 1 (states may continue migration of people as they "think proper" to admit). 
(2) Good cause limitations are permissible for officers who exercise adjudicative or ministerial functions. The original understanding exemplified this judgment,48 6 and our argument for changed circumstances does not undermine or complicate that analysis. 
(3) The same conclusion applies to those few officials who have the sorts of conflicts of interest exemplified by the Federal Reserve Board and independent counsels. This conclusion builds on historical understandings.48 7 It also fits comfortably with current institutional arrangements. 
(4) Domestic officials who do not fall within (1), (2), or (3) may be protected by "good cause" provisions, but for the most part only if those provisions are interpreted so that the relevant officials are controllable through general policy directions of the President. As we have said, a good cause standard should be interpreted to allow for a high degree of presidential supervisory authority.488 At least in most cases involving important policymaking functions, a removal standard would be unconstitutional if it were inconsistent with this idea, that is, if it entirely eliminated presidential control over general policy decisions. It follows that Congress could allow many officials to be protected by a "good cause" provision-not merely the heads of such traditionally "independent" agencies as the FCC, FTC, and SEC, but also those of (for example) the EPA and some of the Cabinet departments as well. But on our understanding, a good cause limitation does not immunize the relevant officials from the policy direction and oversight of the President.48 9 
CONCLUSION 
The framers did not constitutionalize presidential control over all that is now considered "executive"; they did not believe that the President must have plenary power over all we now think of as administration. The textual argument to the contrary uses twentieth century understandings to give meaning to eighteenth century terms. 
With respect to implementation of the laws, history suggests that the framers understood Congress to have broad power to structure government arrangements as it saw fit. Many prosecutors, state as well as federal, were free from the control of the Attorney General and the President. The first Congress also made the Comptroller free from presidential control, because some of his functions were related to those of Congress and the judiciary. The Postmaster General was similarly immu486. See supra text accompanying notes 103, 126-130, 236-248 (discussing original view that ministerial functions, and also those involving adjudicative powers, could be immunized from the President). 
separate the purse and sword); supra text accompanying note 444 (noting Hamilton's concern that no person should be judge in his own cause). 

particular issues that might arise through assertions of presidential authority. nized from presidential control, because of his distinctive role in spending taxpayer funds. The Opinions Clause would be entirely superfluous if the framers understood the President to have plenary control over administration; why would the framers deem it necessary to give the President the power to demand written opinions from people over whom he had full control as a matter of constitutional compulsion? Finally, the text and history of the Necessary and Proper Clause suggest that Congress had considerable authority to structure the executive branch as it chose. 
In light ofall these considerations, our first goal has been to respond to the persistent notion that if we care about constitutional text and history, independent prosecutors and independent agencies are an embarrassing accommodation to political necessity, or a shameful compromise with expediency. We have shown that the belief in a strongly unitary executive does not derive from the framers themselves. 
We reach this conclusion about the framers with reluctance. The belief in a strongly unitary executive has considerable appeal. It is simple and unambiguous. It fits well with important political and constitutional values, including the interests in political accountability, in coordination of the law, and in uniformity in regulation. Believing that these interests have constitutional status, we have ventured an argument on behalf of the strongly unitary executive, one that emphasizes changed circumstances and an interpretive practice concerned with fidelity to original commitments and labeled here as translation. 
The crucial development in this regard is the downfall of the nondelegation doctrine and the rise of unforeseen administrative agencies exercising wide-ranging discretionary power over the domestic sphere. In view of this development, it would not be faithful to the original design to permit officers in the executive branch, making discretionary judgments about important domestic issues, to be immunized from presidential control. We have therefore sketched an argument on behalf of a strongly unitary executive, in which the President has a high degree of supervisory and removal authority over most officials entrusted with discretion in the implementation of federal law. We have applied this argument to many areas of current dispute. 
We believe that this view is consistent with constitutional commitments and that it maintains fidelity with those commitments in dramatically changed circumstances. But it is important to acknowledge that our argument is based on a distinctive method, one that rejects ahistorical claims about the unitary executive. It follows that the constitutional commitment to unitary execution of the laws should not be rooted in the supposed mandates of history. It should be based instead on the effort to interpret the Constitution faithfully over time, an effort that will inevitably involve a large measure of pragmatic judgment, and historical understanding. Cu 4 ) -o UcI. 
U 
0 0)4 40 c 04 044 Z44 0)-4 4)0 'v 0 ,.4 
Cu 
Cuu 
0404 i0'0* 00 00 4.t.(l 0c 0 0 
C" 
CC 
0 mC. 0~U 
c WbE m 
0 s. 
0 w 
C/)i ... 
CIS.0j a, * 
t4 0 
0 qw CLr~d cl 
0 V. 
. 0)0). 00 0 40CC 0 d0 r.) 00~ 
C~ bO 0 
0C1C0 .0,0. C) U) 0 W U00 0 0d C) 
U)d cn 4 0 0 o 0 * 
V 
w * 00 0 t40 0~ c 0 Cd 0 000 o~ 0 b ) o 0 CIS 0 " 0 w 0 0 0 0 0 "AEE 040c CSo 
C,0 a 0 0U o~ C. 0 
0 0-0 U4 w 01 w 1 0 z 0 ' S.~010 oUC 01C. ) 
01 0 
REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1341845?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
The Harvard Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Harvard Law Review 
This content downloaded from 155.69.24.171 on Mon, 20 Jun 2016 04:49:09 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms 
Some people think that there is a deep opposition between "government intervention" and "free markets." But the opposition is too simple. No one is really opposed to "government intervention." Markets depend for their existence on law, which is necessary to establish property rights and to set out the rules governing contracts and tort. Short of anarchy, a system of legal entitlements, set by the state, is inevitable.1 If we are asking whether the state is an important part of the solution to current social problems, there can be only one answer: it had better be. But what is the relationship between the state and social well-being? 
This question assumes special significance in light of the original aspiration of the American founders - to create a deliberative democracy.2 Public officials would be accountable to the citizenry at large, but they were also supposed to engage in deliberative tasks, and to profit from and to encourage deliberation among the people as a whole. Both the structure of the national government and the system of individual rights were intended to encourage public deliberation. 
Things have not worked out as the Framers envisioned. One of the most serious problems is the public emphasis on issues and events that have little relevance to most people's lives. People lack accurate information about what is most important.3 In elections, for example, "soundbite politics" often replaces discussion about public issues.4 The problem affects day-to-day governance too. Instead of focusing on, for example, education and its improvement, public attention is often directed to sensational anecdotes, crude oversimplifications of issues, * Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. B.A. I975, Harvard College; J.D. I978, Harvard Law School. I am grateful to Jon Elster, Dan Kahan, Richard Posner, Julie Roin, Geoffrey Stone, and David Strauss for valuable comments, and to Thomas Brown for outstanding research assistance. 
I "The functioning of . . . competition . . . depends, above all, on the existence of an appropriate legal system . . . In no system that could be rationally defended would the state just do nothing. An effective competitive system needs an intelligently designed and continuously adjusted legal framework as much as any other." FRIEDRICH A. HAYEK, THE ROAD TO SERFDOM 38-39 (I944). 
2 See Joseph M. Bessette, Deliberative Democracy: The Majority Principle in Republican Government, in How DEMOCRATIC Is THE CONSTITUTION? I02, II4 (Robert A. Goldwin & William A. Schambra eds., I980). 
3 See SHANTO IYENGAR, Is ANYONE RESPONSIBLE? How TELEVISION FRAMES POLITICAL ISSUES I27-43 (I99I) (describing the distorting effects of television news coverage); cf. STEPHEN BREYER, BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE 2I, 34 (I993) (showing that public assessment of the riskiness of many activities diverges widely from expert assessments). 
4 See, e.g., KIKu ADATTO, SOUND BITE DEMOCRACY 4 (1990). 
I303 I304 HARVARD LAW 
REVIEW [Vol. I07:1303 or scandals about public officials' private lives. In these circumstances, we are likely to end up with misdirected policies or worse a form of government by faction, the evil most feared by the American founders.5 A high priority for those thinking about the role of the state should be to develop methods for focusing attention on things that matter to people's lives. 
An important part of this task is to establish criteria by which to measure governmental performance. If broadly debated and wellpublicized, such criteria should promote democratic discussion and at the same time help to counteract the very problems to which they draw attention. To develop criteria of this kind, we need a theory of social well-being. To be helpful, the theory must be not only substantively plausible but also practical to apply. This constraint is a demanding one. The best substantive theory might well be abandoned because it is not administrable - because the underlying data cannot be compiled without great cost, because the theory does not allow comparisons among regions or over time, or because it is too unruly and complex. 
In the United States, there are many measures of economic performance. But here and abroad, gross domestic product (GDP) is the most influential indicator of social well-being. When GDP is growing, it is often thought that a number of good things will happen employment will increase, poverty will go down, and people will be able to obtain a wide range of valuable things. Concentration on GDP has important political effects. It focuses media, public, and governmental attention in a distinctive way. 
Part of my goal here is to show - what most economists do not deny - that GDP is an inadequate measure of social well-being, and that we lack an adequate alternative. GDP is too crudely connected to things that people should care about. To overcome the limits of GDP, I offer a simple proposal: Democratic governments should produce an annual "quality of life report," designed to measure their performance in producing good lives for their citizens. This report should be highly publicized and broadly disseminated. I also propose that the ingredients in the report are plural and diverse. They are not commensurable. Both the fact of incommensurability and the general attack on GDP have some important consequences for law. 
I suggest as well that it is important to attend to the relationship between legal provisions and the various ingredients of individual and social well-being. Per capita GDP, for example, becomes more important if money is both necessary and sufficient for the acquisition of valuable things. We might ultimately be able to evaluate legal 
S See, e.g., THE FEDERALIST No. IO, at 77-78 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., I96I) (discussing the nature, cause, and effects of faction). 
AND provisions by exploring their relationship to the various components of individual and social well-being. A quality of life report would help in initiating this project. 
In the course of the discussion, I offer a great deal of data about social and economic trends within the United States. The failure to identify the empirical dimensions of legal disputes is a continuing weakness in the legal culture.6 While the facts identified by a "quality of life" report will not dispose of strictly legal debates, they do have implications for many legal controversies, especially those involving the criminal justice system, race and sex equality, and government regulation. 
One of the simplest measures of social and economic well-being, used internationally and by many nations, is gross domestic product (GDP). The term refers to the total quantity of goods and services produced, weighted by their respective prices.7 Goods and services that are not paid for are not included. 
GDP is highly influential in international comparisons. It also plays a large role in the domestic sphere. To take a crude illustration, consider the astonishing fact that the words "gross national product"8 appeared in I6,055 major news stories in the last two years - and that the words "gross domestic product" appeared in 39,007 stories.9 It would be an absurd exaggeration to say that ordinary people frequently talk about GDP or GNP.10 But the numbers for GDP affect legislative deliberations, presidential judgments, media reports on the 6 In the law of free speech, for example, it is crucial to know whether an "actual malice" regime for libel law in fact alters press behavior as compared with a negligence regime - and whether the alterations lead to more or less information about public issues. In administrative law, it is important to know whether stringent judicial review actually improves agency performance. 
7 See U.S. DEP'T OF COMMERCE, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 437 (II3th ed. I993) [hereinafter STATISTICAL ABSTRACT I993]. 
8 Gross national product (GNP) means GDP adjusted to measure the total income received by the inhabitants of the country. It adds to GDP all interest, profits, dividends, and rents coming into a country from abroad, and then subtracts all interest, profits, dividends, and rents paid to people in other countries. See ECONOMIC INDICATORS HANDBOOK 59 (Arsen J. Darnay ed., I992). In November, I99I, the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis shifted emphasis from GNP to GDP. See id. 
9 Search of NEXIS, Curnws library (Feb. i6, I994). 
10 Media attention is often focused on the "leading economic indicators," including average weekly hours, housing starts, and the money supply. These too are only crudely connected with social and economic welfare, for reasons that will emerge in the course of the discussion. state of the economy, professional recommendations, and much more. A different measure would focus attention on different things. 
Certainly GDP is a useful figure, for it bears a relationship to important social goals. If we think of income as an all-purpose means - as something that people want regardless of what else they want - we might well attend to GDP. There are, however, a number of problems with relying on GDP as a measure of well-being. Some of these problems suggest that GDP is imperfect as a measure of purely economic goals. Some of them suggest that important social, rather than purely economic, variables are not reflected in GDP, though of course it is artificial to distinguish the economic and the social.1" i. GDP and Economic Well-Being. - GDP's ability to measure economic well-being is doubtful for a number of reasons. 
(a) Distributional Issues. - If income is unequally distributed, a high GDP may disguise the fact that many people are living bad or even desperate lives. For example, the United States has the highest per capita real GDP in the world. 12 But it also has a higher rate of children living in poverty - one in five - than does any other wealthy country in the world. The rate of children living in poverty is double that of the industrialized nations taken as a whole and four times that of Western Europe. 13 Nearly half of all black children in the United States live in poverty.14 
(b) Excluded Goods and Services. - GDP does not include goods and services that are free, including some that are plausibly connected with economic well-being. For example, unpaid domestic labor is not a part of GDP.15 Many environmental amenities, such as clean air and water, are not reflected in GDP. The GDP figure thus fails adequately to measure either the benefits of a healthy environment or 11 See A.C. PIGOU, THE ECONOMICS OF WELFARE I2 (4th ed. I962) ("[T]here is no guarantee that the effects produced on the part of welfare that can be brought into relation with the measuring-rod of money may not be cancelled by effects of a contrary kind brought about in other parts, or aspects, of welfare; and, if this happens, the practical usefulness of our conclusions is wholly destroyed. . The real objection then is, not that economic welfare is a bad index of total welfare, but that an economic cause may affect non-economic welfare in ways that cancel its effect on economic welfare."). 
12 See UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, at I35 (I993) [hereinafter HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993]. 
13 See Ray Moseley, Among Rich Nations, U.S. Has Highest Child-Poverty Rate, CHI. TRIB., Sept. 23, I993, ? i, at 4. 
14 See id. 
15 See Luisella Goldschmidt-Clermont, Measuring Households' Non-Monetary Production, in REAL-LIFE ECONOMICS 265, 265 (Paul Ekins & Manfred Max-Neef eds., 1992); MARILYN WARING, IF WOMEN COUNTED 2 (I988). the costs of its degradation.16 There are other gaps in what GDP measures. It does not, for example, reflect changes in leisure time; but it is clear that any increase in leisure is a gain. 17 Most generally, a serious problem with GDP is that the figure excludes all social costs and benefits that do not have prices.18 
(c) Unclear Correlations with Other Important Economic Indicators. - GDP sometimes seems to be a general placeholder for a number of indicators of economic well-being. But in fact, it may not be closely correlated with some important indicators. Consider two major social goals: reduction of poverty and of unemployment. Of course GDP growth can be an important factor in counteracting both unemployment and poverty, and nothing I say here is inconsistent with this judgment. But it is also possible for GDP increases to be accompanied by increases in unemployment and hence poverty (which is closely correlated with unemployment); indeed, this phenomenon has often happened. 
Economic growth is a function of productivity growth and employment growth, where productivity is understood as GDP divided by total employment. 19 Increases in productivity can contribute to an increase in GDP, possibly without increasing employment levels at all. For example, converting a plant to use industrial robots may 16 GNP needs to be modified to account for: any depreciation of natural capital stocks, in the same way that net national income is equal to gross national income less estimated depreciation on man-made capital. . [and] any damage losses accruing to human wellbeing from the extraction, processing and disposal of materials and energy to the receiving environments. 
DAVID PEARCE, ECONOMIC VALUES AND THE NATURAL WORLD 3I (I993). See also the discussion of adjusted national product - GNP adjusted for depreciation of physical capital - in 0yvind Lone, Environmental and Resource Accounting, in REAL-LIFE ECONOMICS, cited above in note 15, at 239, 253-54; and the discussion of natural resource accounting in Robert Repetto, Earth in the Balance Sheet: Incorporating Natural Resources in National Income Accounts, ENVIRONMENT, Sept. I992, at I2, I5-I7. 
In I993, President Clinton directed the Commerce Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis to develop a new measure of GDP, one that incorporates the cost of pollution and the value of environmental amenities. See ROBERT V. PERCIVAL, ALAN S. MILLER, CHRISTOPHER H. SCHROEDER & JAMES P. LEAPE, ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION 394 (Supp. 1993). 
17 In I952, Kuznets attempted to redefine GNP to take leisure into account. See Simon Kuznets, Long-Term Changes in the National Income of the United States of America Since I870, in INCOME & WEALTH OF THE UNITED STATES: TRENDS AND STRUCTURE 29, 63-69 (Simon Kuznets ed., I952). Note also that a i968 study showed a spectacular gain in leisure over the last century. See A.W. Sametz, Production of Goods and Services: The Measurement of Economic Growth, in INDICATORS OF SOCIAL CHANGE 77, 83 (Eleanor B. Sheldon & Wilbert E. Moore eds., I968). 
18 See, e.g., EzRA J. MISHAN, THE COSTS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH I22-66 (I967). 19 See Arthur M. Okun, Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance, in AM. STAT. ASS'N, I962 PROCEEDINGS Bus. & ECON. STAT. SECTION 98, 103 (I962) ("[T]he reduction of one point in the unemployment rate means perhaps a I.8 percent increase in total labor input measured in manhours. Then, to get the 3.2 percent increment in output, manhour productivity must rise by about 1.4 percent."). I308 HARVARD LAW raise production levels while eliminating the jobs of hundreds of assembly workers. Increases in GDP may therefore fail to produce increases in employment levels. Because poverty is well correlated with unemployment, it follows too that when GDP goes up, poverty may not go down.. 
The following table shows changes in GDP, unemployment, and poverty from I970 to the present. GDP growth rates are generally correlated with changes in unemployment rates, particularly in especially high and especially low GDP growth years. There are, however, years in which the two figures are not correlated. For present purposes, a key point is that GDP rates are far from identical to unemployment and poverty rates. If we know what happens to GDP, we do not necessarily know what happens to unemployment and poverty. 20 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT 304 (Poverty I992) (I994) [hereinafter EcoNOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I994]; ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT 35I (GDP I970-9I), 382 (Unemployment I970-92), 380 (Poverty I970-9I) (I993) [hereinafter ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993]; STATISTICAL ABSTRACT I993, supra note 7, at 444 (GDP I992). 
AND as an indicator of economic welfare, it fails to capture important aspects of social well-being. 
(a) Uncertain Relation to Valuable Things. - It is often thought that GDP serves as a good proxy.for valuable things. But the relationship between GDP and important social goals is far from clear. 
Consider, for example, the likelihood of subjection to violent crime. Physical security is surely an important ingredient in well-being, but it is at best indirectly reflected in GDP. Consider also the fact that there is no inevitable connection between GDP and life expectancy. Some countries have a relatively low GDP but long life expectancy and low rates of infant mortality.21 Many countries have a high GDP but do poorly in promoting longevity.22 Education is an important part of a good life, whether or not educated people accumulate wealth; but the association between education and GDP, while real, is crude. 
Certainly we can speculate, with some plausibility, that wealthy people are less likely to commit crimes and better able to pay for education, and that high social wealth can and will be devoted to improving criminal law enforcement, life expectancy, and public health. But what has been said thus far should show that the connection between GDP and these other goods is unclear. 
(b) Dependence on Legal and Social Practices. - The most basic point here is conceptual: The value of money depends on social and 21 See UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990 at 9, tbl. i.i (I990) [hereinafter HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990] (presenting information on Sri Lanka, Jamaica, and Costa Rica). The level of childhood immunizations puts the United States 2ISt in the world, tied with Pakistan and below India, Bulgaria, North Korea, Indonesia, and Botswana. See Moseley, supra note I3, ? I, at 4. 
22 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990, supra note 2I, at 9, tbl. i.i. The points discussed in the text are connected to a broader debate. Emphasizing some of the problems with accounts inspired by utilitarianism, John Rawls proposes that judgments about well-being might be made by reference to "primary goods." In his latest formulation, Rawls points to "a. basic rights and liberties . . .; b. freedom of movement and free choice of occupation against a background of diverse opportunities; c. powers and prerogatives of offices and positions of responsibility in the political and economic institutions of the basic structure; d. income and wealth; and finally, e. the social bases of self-respect." JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM i8i (I993). This approach is in many respects a considerable improvement over utilitarian accounts and those that rely on an aggregated figure representing the private willingness to pay. In place of primary goods, Amartya Sen has suggested that a good measure of well-being should focus on people's "capabilities" and "functionings." See AMARTYA SEN, INEQUALITY REEXAMINED 79-84 (I993). The term "capabilities" refers to a person's capacity or opportunity to choose among valuable activities or functionings. We might ask, for example, whether someone is able to get access to food, medical care, shelter, education, political participation, and so forth, or whether that person is able to avoid public and private violence, physical pain, and other forms of suffering. Like the list of primary goods, the list of capabilities and functionings is heterogeneous. Its chief advantage is that it enables us to focus on the question why such things as wealth and income are valuable, that is, what they enable people to have and to be. legal practices determining what money can be used to buy. If certain exchanges are blocked - if money cannot be used to purchase valuable things - per capita GDP becomes less important. Wealth is less valuable when money cannot be used to buy votes or political power, or education, or marriage, or self-respect. Similarly, the value of money is reduced to the extent that it is unnecessary for someone to have money to obtain important goods. If education, health care, political power, and clean air are free, money is less valuable.23 
In short, the value of money is largely a function of the legal regime. To understand the relationship between GDP and valuable things, it is necessary to understand the set of legal entitlements through which people are enabled to get, or are disabled from getting, things of importance to their lives. It might then be possible to "map" legal provisions onto the various ingredients of well-being.24 (c) Commensurability. - GDP is of course an aggregative measure, and it is aggregative in a distinctive sense.25 GDP is not simply an index of different values, created to allow ease of understanding and comparison. Instead, it measures diverse items through the same basic dimension of "value," defined by willingness to pay. 
This approach assumes commensurability in the sense that it acts as if diverse goods can be assessed according to the same metric. This form of valuation seems wrong because it ignores qualitative differences among diverse social goods.26 Some things (like education and health) have intrinsic as well as instrumental value; other things (like cash) are simply for use. Intrinsically valuable things are themselves valued in different ways. 
The problem with GDP is that because it is aggregative, it effaces qualitative differences. For this reason it is a crude indicator of social welfare and an unpromising foundation for democratic deliberation. Suppose, for example, that we are told that if OSHA issues a certain occupational safety regulation, GDP will be reduced by o.ooi%. To 23 Of course there may be harmful social effects from prohibiting the use of money as a basis for exchange, or from providing goods for free. Both of these decisions may mean that there is less wealth upon which to draw. But these are different matters. 
24 This is a generalization of the "entitlement approach" suggested in AMARTYA SEN, POVERTY AND FAMINES 45-5 I (I980I). 
25 Economists and others critical of GNP have proposed a number of alternative measures. William Nordhaus and James Tobin, two early critics, suggested that it would be better to attempt to generate a "measure of economic welfare" (MEW). See William D. Nordhaus & James Tobin, Is Growth Obsolete?, in THE MEASUREMENT OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE 509, 512-I3 (Conference on Research in Income & Wealth, Studies in Income & Wealth Vol. 38, Milton Moss ed., I973). 
A more recent measure is the Daly & Cobb "index of sustainable economic welfare" (ISEW). See HERMAN E. DALY & JOHN B. COBB, JR., FOR THE COMMON GOOD 401-55 (I989). 
26 See ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS 8-I6 (1993); Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 MICH. L. REV. 779, 782-90 (1994). 
AND make a sensible evaluation, we need to know a great deal more. To what does this number refer? Does it include greater unemployment, higher inflation, and the scaled-back production of important goods? Does it mean more poverty? At least in principle, it would be much better to have a highly disaggregated system for assessing the qualitatively different goods at stake. People should be informed about the diverse potential effects and make judgments on the basis of an understanding of the qualitative differences. If all the relevant goods are aligned along a single metric, they become less visible, or perhaps invisible. 2 7 
GDP is hardly the only indicator of social welfare. In the United States, over fifty indicators are now in use.28 The United Nations offers many more.29 A major problem with the current American approach is that the measures - offered in an endless and barely intelligible succession - lack organization and clarity.30 In this section, I describe some of the most important indicators. 
The unemployment rate, announced every month, includes the number of people sixteen years of age or older who are actively seeking employment.3' It therefore excludes people who are not seeking work, even if they say that they would like a job and that they are not 27 The use of GNP creates other difficulties, but because these seem less fundamental and in some ways more complex, I simply identify them here. 
(a) GNP depends on willingness to pay and thus on existing preferences for various social goods. One could do much worse than to make assessments on the basis of existing preferences; people's well-being is certainly connected with satisfaction of consumption choices. Existing preferences are not, however, an adequate guide to social well-being, because they may depend on unjust background conditions or on simple ignorance. See AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES 48 (Professor Dr. P. Hennipman Lectures in Economics Vol. 7, I985). 
(b) As noted, GNP is an important method for making cross-national comparisons. But per capita GNP is an inadequate comparative guide if there are large differences in conditions and hence in needs. If distinctive needs are a product of local circumstances, GNP per capita will be an inadequate proxy for well-being. 
(c) The existence of positional goods poses a problem for GNP. Positional goods are those that are valuable because only a few people have them. Status symbols of various sorts, including luxury automobiles, are examples. See Richard H. McAdams, Relative Preferences, I02 YALE L.J. i, I8-I9 (I992). If GNP is growing partly because it includes a large number of positional goods, it is not clear that welfare is growing as well. 
28 See NORMAN FRUMKIN, GUIDE TO ECONOMIC INDICATORS at xiii (I990). 29 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I29-34. 
30 A possible exception is the Statistical Abstract, cited above in note 7. The abstract is helpful, but it has many failings as well. Above all, it is so detailed that readers cannot easily get a general picture; the latest edition includes I433 tables. 
31 See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at 224. I3I2 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. I07:I303 seeking work because they do not believe that jobs are available for them. 
The following tables show differences in employment along lines of race and sex; these are significant because although overall unemployment may be low, it is good to know whether members of identifiable social groups are disproportionately out of work.32 32 See supra p. I308 (showing the variation in unemployment rates over time). 33 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993, supra note 20, at 39I. I994] WELL-BEING AND THE STATE I3I3 16-19 20 Years 16-19 20 Years Year Total Total Years and Over Total Years and Over The poverty level emerged from the I96I plan of the Department of Agriculture.35 Like judgments about unemployment, the judgment about who is poor is far from a simple matter of fact.36 The I96I estimate measured how much money was necessary to meet nutritional requirements, and this amount was multiplied by three to determine the total income necessary to meet all living expenses.37 Poverty thresholds have been updated every year by taking into account the consumer price index. Hence, the annual threshold for a family of four was $3I69 in I964, $ii,6ii in I987, and $I3,924 in i99i.38 
The official measure of poverty does not include noncash income; it therefore excludes "food stamps, Medicare and Medicaid, school lunches, and subsidized rental housing."39 34 See id. 35 See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at I96. 36 See SEN, supra note 24, at 9-23 (discussing possible concepts of poverty). 
37 See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at I96. The "multiplication by three" is of course quite crude. It was based on a I955 study showing that food consumes one-third of the average household budget. See id. 
38 See U.S. DEP'T OF COMMERCE, CURRENT POPULATION REPORTS SERIES P-6o, No. i8i, POVERTY IN THE UNITED STATES: I99I, at A-6 (Aug. I992). 
39 FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at I95. 
Of course, there are large disparities in terms of race and sex in the percentage of persons and families living in poverty.41 
The consumer price index, the most important indicator of the rate of inflation, is designed to reflect price changes for a set of goods, including housing, clothing, food and drink, medical care, entertainment, education, and tobacco products.42 Annual percentage changes show striking disparities over time: 40 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993, supra note 20, at 380, tbl. B-28. 41 See id. (showing that the percentage of blacks living in poverty is nearly triple that of whites, and that the percentage of black female householders in poverty is nearly double that of white female householders). 
42 See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at 63. 
THE 
The average weekly earnings of workers in private nonagricultural industries, calculated monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, are provided in current dollars and in constant I982 dollars.44 43 The information in this table was compiled from several sources. The CPI-U figures for all items were drawn from Statistical Abstract I993, cited above in note 7, at 482, tbl. 756; the CPI-W figures, from Economic Indicators Handbook, cited above in note 8, at 227; CPI DETAILED REPORT, March I993, at i66, tbl. 6A; and CPI DETAILED REPORT, March I992, at I67, tbl. 6A. The CPI-U figures up to 1990 for all items excluding energy and all items excluding food and energy, are from Economic Report of the President I993, cited above in note 20, at 4I4, tbl. B-58. The CPI-U figures for I99I and I992 are from Economic Report of the President I994, cited above in note 20 at 339, tbl. B-62. CPI-U is the consumer price index for all urban consumers; CPI-W is the CPI for urban wage earners and clerical workers. In I980, the CPI-U represented 8o% of the noninstitutional population, and the CPI-W, 32%. See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at 63. 
44 See ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT 1994, supra note 20, at 320, tbl. B-45; ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I993, supra note 20, at 396, tbl. B-42. Income distribution is measured in terms of quintiles. Income taxes have little effect on income distribution. The following table shows changes over time with respect to income, before and after tax, in the United States: 45 See id. 
AND 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Lowest fifth 3.8 3.9 3.8 3.9 4.0 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.2 Second fifth 9.5 9.6 9.7 9.7 9.8 9.9 9.9 10.0 10.2 10.6 Third fifth 16.0 16.0 16.4 16.3 16.4 16.4 16.5 16.7 16.8 17.1 Fourth fifth 24.1 24.1 24.0 24.4 24.6 24.6 24.6 24.8 24.8 24.6 Highest fifth 46.5 46.4 46.1 45.7 45.3 45.2 45.0 44.4 44.2 43.5 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Lowest fifth 4.5 4.6 4.2 4.6 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.9 4.9 4.9 Second fifth 11.0 10.9 10.4 11.0 11.0 11.1 11.3 11.5 11.6 11.7 Third fifth 16.7 16.6 16.1 17.2 17.2 17.4 17.5 17.8 17.9 17.8 Fourth fifth 24.3 24.0 23.2 24.7 24.8 24.8 24.8 25.0 25.1 24.7 Highest fifth 43.6 43.9 46.1 42.6 42.3 42.1 41.8 40.9 40.6 41.0 No official government statistics reveal the costs and benefits of government regulation. Private estimates suggest that economic regulation costs the economy about $46 billion annually, and that social regulation (principally environmental controls) costs between $78 billion and $IO7 billion.47 The benefits of economic regulation appear low, but the benefits of social regulation range between $42 billion and $i8i billion.48 No one has fully explored the effects of regulation on GDP. A I990 study suggested that between I973 and I985, the GDP growth rate fell by o.I9 percentage points as a result of environmental controls.49 This study does not, however, include the health benefits of such controls, which probably lead to productivity gains. There are significant disparities in regulatory policy, especially with respect to expenditures per life saved: 
46 The I986-I99I figures are derived from the Statistical Abstract of the United States, which uses a slightly different definition of "after-tax" income than Norman Frumkin's Guide to Economic Indicators. See FRUMKIN, supra note 28, at 75, tbl. I5 (presenting the income before and after taxes for I974-85); STATISTICAL ABSTRACT I993, supra note 7, at 463, tbl. COMMERCE, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 462, tbl. 73I (II2th ed. I992) (presenting the figures for income before and after taxes in I990); U.S. DEP'T OF COMMERCE, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES 449, tbl. 724 (i ioth ed. I990) (describing income before and after taxes for I986). 
47 See Robert W. Hahn & John A. Hird, The Costs and Benefits of Regulation: Review and Synthesis, 8 YALE J. ON REG. 233, 249, 253 (1991). 
48 See id. at 253. I3I8 HARVARD LAWREVIEW [Vol. I07:I303 Unvented Space Heater Ban CPSC 0.1 Underground Construction Standards OSHA-S 0.1 Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard NHTSA 0.4 Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) NHTSA 0.8 Low-Altitude Windshear Equip. & Training Stds. FAA 1.3 Hazard Communication Standard OSHA-S 1.6 Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines EPA 3.4 Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) EPA 6.1 Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) MSHA 9.2 Arsenic/Copper NESHAP EPA 23.0 Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) EPA 32.9 Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-H 63.5 Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-H 106.9 Asbestos Ban EPA 110.7 1,2-Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard EPA 653.0 Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st 3rd) EPA 4190.4 Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit OSHA-H 86,201.8 Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard EPA 92,069.7 Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving EPA 5,700,000.0 
Chemicals 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation compiles statistics showing subjection to violent crime.51 The following table reflects changes over time: 50 See BREYER, supra note 3, at 24-27, tbl. s. 51 See STATISTICAL ABSTRACT 1993, supra note 7, at I89-90. 
Here, then, are some of the most important indicators of social and economic well-being. It should be clear that the system for reporting and disseminating this information is quite ad hoc. There has been no democratic judgment about the ingredients of such key measures as GDP, poverty, and unemployment. There is no effort to put some or many of the indicators into a composite figure, to provide an indication of general changes over time. Nor does the government furnish reports offering a clearly accessible survey of social and economic indicators. 
The United Nations makes what is probably the most influential international effort to measure well-being, though there have been illuminating efforts elsewhere. I summarize several methods here. A key point is that alternative accounts often place a premium on health and education as well as per capita income. 
i. Human Development Index. - The United Nations publishes an annual Human Development Report in order to facilitate comparative assessments of government performance.53 
52 See FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, U.S. DEP'T OF JUSTICE, UNIFORM CRIME REPORTS FOR THE UNITED STATES I992, at 58, tbl. I (I992). 
53 See, e.g., HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990, supra note 2I, at 9. 
(a) Description. - The report ranks I73 countries and contains comparative information on access to health services and safe water; numbers of radios, telephones, and televisions; levels of child immunization and malnutrition; public expenditures on education; malefemale wage gaps; levels of homicide, rape, and drug crimes; population per doctor; numbers of new AIDS cases; population growth; energy consumption; pollution levels; and much more. 
The United Nations approach places particular emphasis on a "human development index" (HDI). This figure is calculated on the basis of longevity, knowledge, and income.54 "Longevity" is determined on the basis of life expectancy at birth.55 "Knowledge" is calculated by a formula based on adult literacy and mean years of schooling, with literacy weighted twice as heavily as mean years of schooling.56 To take account of the diminishing value of income, the "income" ingredient is based on an adjustment of per capita GDP.57 The UN measurement weighs the three variables equally. What follows is the ranking of the first twelve countries in the latest report: The HDI compiles much valuable information and presents it in a revealing way. For instance, the United States ranks first in both per capita GDP and adjusted real GDP; it also ranks first in mean years of schooling and in overall educational attainment. But it ranks 54 See id. at I I-I3. 55 See id. at 12. 
56 See UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME, HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I99I, at 90 (i99i). 
57 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990, supra note 2i, at I2. 58 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I35, tbl. i. 
sixth overall. The reason is that life expectancy at birth stands at 75.9 years, for a ranking along that dimension of sixteenth. 
The UN report demonstrates that there is no necessary connection between GDP and employment levels.59 Moreover, the performance of some countries appears to be quite variable over time. Notably, the literacy rate in the United States increased from a comparatively low 96% in I985 to a very high 99% in i9go.60 
An intriguing question concerns the precise relationship among the HDI's three variables of longevity, knowledge, and income. Some countries with relatively high income ranks (including Algeria, Namibia, and South Africa) have relatively low HDI ranks.61 Other countries have HDI ranks that are well above their income ranks (including China, Colombia, and Uruguay).62 
A key issue is whether significant variations exist among groups within each country. In the United States, for example, whites, standing alone, rank above Japan in HDI; if American whites lived alone in their own country, it would rank first in the world.63 By contrast, African-Americans rank 3ist, and Hispanics 35th.64 In addition, no nation's HDI improves after being adjusted for sex inequalities, which indicates that no nation provides as good lives for women as it does for men.65 But there are important variations. For example, women's wages are 88% of men's in France and 85% in Norway, but only 5I% in Japan and 59% in the United States.66 
Many other questions involve comparative data not directly reflected in the HDI's three principal variables. Between I980 and i986, for example, there were only 3I drug crimes per ioo,ooo people per year in Japan, 25 in Israel, and 38 in the Netherlands, compared with 225 in Canada, 234 in the United States, and 403 in Australia.67 The reported rape rate in the United States is by far the highest - i i 8 per ioo,ooo women between I5 and 59.68 In Japan, the rate is only 5 per ioo,ooo, and in many countries it is somewhere between i8 and 59 For example, Canada had an unemployment rate in I990-9I of I0.2% despite a high per capita GNP. See id. at 20I, tbl. 39. Notwithstanding its considerably lower per capita GNP, Japan's unemployment rate was 2. I%. See id. Switzerland's unemployment rate of I.3% is the lowest among industrialized nations, but its per capita GNP is slightly below that of the United States, which has a 6.6% unemployment rate. See id. 
60 Compare HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I990, supra note 2I, at I29 (listing adult literacy rate in the U.S. for I985) with HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I35, tbl. i (listing adult literacy rate in the U.S. for I990). 
61 See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I36, tbl. i. 62 See id. at I35-36. 63 See id. at i8. 64 See id. 65 See id. at i6. 66 See id. at I96, tbl. 34. 67 See id. at I92, tbl. 30. 68 See id. I322 HARVARD LAWREVIEW 35.69 The United States also has the highest homicide rate, at 8 per IOO,OOO, compared with I.5 for Japan and Sweden and somewhere between 2 and 3 for Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Finland, Austria, and New Zealand.70 It should not be surprising that the United States has the highest rate of prisoners, 426 per ioo,ooo, compared with 94 in Canada, 54 in Switzerland, and 77 in the United Kingdom and in Germany.7 1 
(b) Difficulties. - The HDI approach has important limitations. Any "index" will be controversial, and the equal weighting of the three variables seems somewhat arbitrary. In any case, the three variables are interrelated. Income can "buy" good educational attainment and also longevity; people who are poor tend to live shorter lives. So too, people who are in good health and who are well-educated have a better chance to make money. The use of the three variables is controversial partly because of these complex interrelations.72 
The HDI is also insensitive to ethnic, racial, sex and regional differences. If, for example, there are important differences between men and women, people should know about this fact.73 It is also possible for a country with a high HDI score to have a number of people concentrated toward the bottom of the economic ladder and facing desperate conditions. 
have implemented interesting alternatives to HDI. The Swedish assessment of "standard of living" is more disaggregated and less mathematical than the UN approach. The assessment takes account of health and access to health care; education and skills; housing; security of life and property (including freedom from crime); availability of recreation and cultural resources; employment; income and wealth; and political participation.74 Of special interest is the Swedish rejection of unitary measures of well-being, and the insistence that wellbeing is not to be measured in purely subjective terms.75 A key point 69 See id. 70 See id. 71 See id. 
72 In addition, there is a degree of crudeness in the choice of the three indicators. It might make sense to include poverty level, access to food, employment figures, and more. Moreover, educational attainment is not adequately measured by mean years of schooling. Literacy is a form of educational attainment, but it sets a low floor, and in any case it is far from clear that, in assessing educational attainment, we should count literacy for two and mean years for one in some aggregate figure. Perhaps a composite figure could be developed on the basis of a more precise inquiry into relevant factors. Cf. PARTHA DASGUPTA, AN INQUIRY INTO WELL-BEING AND DESTITUTION 77-78 (I993) (noting the absence of attention to civil and political liberties in conventional measures of well-being, such as the HDI). 
73 The report does, however, try to take distribution into account by using adjusted tables. See HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT I993, supra note I2, at I7, tbl. I.4. 
74 See Robert Erikson, Descriptions of Inequality: The Swedish Approach to Welfare Research, in THE QUALITY OF LIFE 67, tbl. I (Martha C. Nussbaum & Amartya Sen eds., I992). 75 It would be possible to have a purely subjective account, but such an account would be 
here is that people may adjust their expectations in light of a status quo characterized by deprivation and injustice, and for this reason it is important to see what people can have or become, not merely what they think about their situation. 
Another interesting alternative is a comparative survey of Scandinavian countries, initiated by the University of Helsinki.76 In addition to the Swedish factors, the Finnish approach emphasizes the quality of the biological and physical environment, including air and water pollution; the nature of relations with other people in the local community, in the family, and within the workplace; and opportunities to enjoy nature. 7 7 The comparative survey is intended to include both objective and subjective indicators of welfare. 
In the same vein, UNICEF lists a wide range of basic indicators, without attempting to aggregate them. These include male and female adult literacy rates; life expectancy at birth; income shares of the lowest 40% and the highest 20% of the population; GDP per capita; and infant mortality.78 The Netherlands identifies sixteen variables involving quality of life: three each involving housing, health, spending power, leisure, and employment, combined with a single variable for education. 79 There is also an effort to combine these statistics into an aggregate number showing changes over time for different groups in the population.80 An organization in Washington, D.C. attempts to measure human suffering through a scale that takes account of income, inflation, infant mortality, nutrition, access to clean water, literacy, and personal freedom.81 Similar aggregative and separate statistics might be offered for human rights violations.82 
All this has implications for law and policy. A high priority for both domestic and international agencies should be to compile accurate information about quality of life, to allow comparisons across time subject to distortions. See Ian Miles, Social Indicators for Real-Life Economics, in REAL-LIFE ECONOMICS, supra note I5, at 283, 287-88; see also SEN, supra note 27, at 22 (rejecting as inadequate a measure of well-being based on happiness or desire-fulfillment). 
76 See Erik Allardt, Having, Loving, Being: An Alternative to the Swedish Model of Welfare Research, in THE QUALITY OF LIFE, supra note 74, at 88, 88-89. 
77 See id. at 89-90. 
78 See, e.g., UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND, THE STATE OF THE WORLD'S CHILDREN I987, at I28-29, tbl. I (I987). 
79 See Miles, supra note 75, at 290. 80 See id. 
81 See ROBERT V. HORN, STATISTICAL INDICATORS FOR THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL SCIENCES I42-44 (I993). 
82 Note especially the attempt to integrate liberties and economic variables in DASGUPTA, cited above in note 72, at io8-I6. Two efforts at tabulating human rights records in numerical form are FREEDOM HOUSE, FREEDOM IN THE WORLD 572-75, 578-79 (I992); and CHARLES HUMANA, WORLD HUMAN RIGHTS GUIDE passim (3d ed. I992). I324 HARVARD LAW 
REVIEW [Vol. 107:1303 and space, and to ensure that the relevant reports are widely disseminated. 
The American government should compile an annual "quality of life" report. I cannot give a full account of the appropriate ingredients of such a report. But it seems clear that the report should include, among other things, per capita income, poverty, housing, unemployment, average weekly earnings, inflation, child mortality, longevity, subjection to violent crime, literacy, and educational attainment. The report should also specify minimum standards for such things as income, education, health, and housing. The report should allow for comparison across regions, between men and women, and among different racial and ethnic groups. 
These comparisons may spur healthy competition to do well along dimensions that count. If a state knows that it ranks forty-second in, say, unemployment, there will be both local and national pressure to make things better. If a state has an especially high level of violent crime, perhaps priorities can be changed to redress the problem. And if women are doing much worse than men, or blacks much worse than whites, the public can see this fact and perhaps take corrective action. 
The quality of life report should be widely disseminated to the public and, in particular, to the news media. Strong evidence indicates that the media can play a large role in counteracting social problems by focusing public and private attention and by giving government the incentives to respond.83 Instead of attending to anecdotes and sensational scandals - or offering statements about supposed trends - the news media should focus on the quality of life report and thus allow debate to be based on actual evidence. The report may well have an especially important role during elections, but it could affect deliberation and policymaking more broadly as well. 
A quality of life report of the kind proposed here could produce two distinct benefits. First, the report may well have desirable social consequences by facilitating priority-setting, imposing appropriate incentives on governmental officials, and fueling public interest in redressing serious problems. Accurate and widely disseminated information can be an important check on governmental failure to redress such problems.84 Consider the striking fact that in modern times, no 83 See AMARTYA SEN, RESOURCES, VALUES AND DEVELOPMENT 500-03 (I984) (discussing the important role of news media in combatting famines). 
84 See id.; see also Amartya Sen, Freedoms and Needs, THE NEW REPUBLIC, Jan. IO & I7, I994, at 3I, 33-34 (emphasizing the importance of free expression and the press to a government's willingness to address human suffering). 
AND 
country with an active, free, and democratic press appears to have suffered from famine.85 
Second, the very process of compiling a quality of life report would have advantages. We have seen that any conception of what matters is a product of judgments that may be controversial. Human needs have a great deal to do with the facts - do people have jobs? do they have food or housing? - but they are not simply facts. Any conception of needs is a product of human judgments about what matters. Consider, for example, the very definitions of poverty and unemployment, or the decision whether to include comparative data about groups defined in racial, ethnic, and religious terms. The public understanding of social problems should itself be a product, at least in part, of a good process of social deliberation about how needs are best characterized.86 By using GDP as the central indicator of social welfare while publishing a wide array of unorganized and somewhat random indicators, the current system offers no such educational benefits. 
To say all this is not to suggest that such a report would be simple, or that it would not create risks. But most of the information is now compiled and available somewhere; its systematic presentation and dissemination should not be costly. There is of course a risk of error and bias, especially in view of the fact that the fortunes of an incumbent administration may depend on what emerges. Government manipulation of official statistics is hardly foreign to American experience. At the same time, many government agencies have established a reputation for objectivity, and there is no reason to believe that (for example) the statistics relating to literacy, infant mortality, and poverty levels reflect substantial bias. 
To be sure, people have limited information-processing capacities, and these can lead to systematic errors through the use of bad heuristics. Some release of information can actually make things worse. But to some extent the confusion is a result of what has been made public, and careful presentation of the data should help overcome some of the faulty heuristics. One of the most common heuristics, for example, is that of "availability."87 People seem to think that events are more probable if an occurrence can easily be brought to mind. 85 See Sen, supra note 84, at 34. 86 See id. at 32. Sen writes: Political rights can have a major role in providing incentives and information toward the solution of economic privation. But the connections between rights and needs are not merely instrumental; they are also constitutive. For our conceptualization of economic needs depends on open public debates and discussions, and the guaranteeing of those debates and those discussions requires an insistence on political rights. 
Id. 
87 See Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. LEGAL STUD. 217, 241-42 (I993). I326 HARVARD LAW Some of this effect might be counteracted by a report that catalogues a range of events, that allows comparisons, and that shows changes over time. The very need to compile the data would also give desirable incentives to government officials.88 
I have suggested that both personal and social well-being are in important respects a product of law; that is, they are a function of the things to which the law gives people access. The law can give such access in many ways. It may provide guarantees of certain goods (such as housing, food, medical care); it may allow people to sell their labor; it may permit people to own certain things that they produce or inherit; and it may say that people can freely exchange some, but not all, of what they own. People's entitlements are a function of law, and it is their entitlements that enable them to obtain much of what provides for their well-being. We lack a systematic account of the relationship between legal entitlements and the components of well-being. 
These points have general implications. A homeless person, for example, is deprived of shelter in important part through the law; if he tries to sleep in a place with a roof, the law will call him a trespasser and subject him to civil and criminal penalties.89 Whether someone has access to medical care depends on the bundle of legal rights that have been conferred. Property rights as we know them are not brute or natural facts, but a product of laws granting and conditioning entitlements of different kinds.90 It should ultimately be possible to link various coniponents of well-being to different legal permissions and requirements. We could begin to connect deprivations and benefits of various sorts with a range of legal provisions. A quality of life report would help initiate this endeavor. 
Of course, no report can substitute for actual reform. What matters is what is done, not what is said. But in some contexts, what is done is a function of what is said. In the area of risk regulation, for example, there is evidence that disclosure of information can be an important regulatory tool, prompting corrective action by employers, employees, and governments generally.91 In any case, both citizens 88 A similar report should be compiled in other nations and be made available for international comparison and review. See Cass R. Sunstein, Information, Please, 2 E. EUR. CONST. REV. 54, 54 (I993). 
89 See Jeremy Waldron, Homelessness and the Issue of Freedom, 39 UCLA L. REV. 295, 304 (I99I). 
90 Amartya Sen writes: Finally, the focus on entitlement has the effect of emphasizing legal rights. Other relevant factors, for example market forces, can be seen as operating through a system of legal relations (ownership rights, contractual obligations, legal exchanges, etc.). The law stands between food availability and food entitlement. Starvation deaths can reflect legality with a vengeance. 
SEN, supra note 24, at I65-66. 
91 See WESLEY A. MAGAT & W. KiP Viscusi, INFORMATIONAL APPROACHES TO REGULAand public officials are unlikely to know what to do unless they have good information about existing problems and trends. These points have general and complex consequences for the study of law, but I end with a simple claim: Democratic governments could take few more important steps than to initiate a process by which the components of well-being would become a substantial part of political debate. 
TION I86-88 (I992); Cass R. Sunstein, Informing America: Risk, Disclosure, and the First Amendment, 20 FLA. ST. U. L. REV. 653, 662 (I993); W. Kip Viscusi, Wesley A. Magat & Joel Huber, Informational Regulation of Consumer Health Risks: an Empirical Evaluation of Hazard Warnings, I7 RAND J. ECON. 35I, 362 (I986) (concluding, based on empirical study, that warning labels affect consumer behavior). 
