(WITH NOTES ON COGNITION AND VALUATION IN LAW) 
This Article has two goals. The first is to investigate the sources of arbitrariness in punitive damage awards.4 This investigation, which we believe to be the first of its kind, helps to answer an important question: What are the sources of unpredictability in punitive damage awards?5 On the basis of 1 Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
2 Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University. 
3 Professor of Management and William W. Spriegel Fellow, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Austin. The authors are grateful to Exxon Corporation for financial support of the empirical study contained in this Article; Exxon Corporation bears no responsibility for our analysis or our conclusions. We are grateful to Richard Craswell, Richard Epstein, Dan Kahan, William Landes, Tracey Meares, Martha Nussbaum, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for valuable comments. We are also grateful to participants in the rationality workshop at the University of California, Berkeley and the law and economics and legal theory workshops at the University of Chicago. J.B. Heaton provided research assistance and excellent comments. 
4 A technical version of the survey and study, accompanied with more detailed statistical analysis, is reported in Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, J. of Risk and Uncertainty (forthcoming 1998). This paper provides a nontechnical summary of our findings and develops, as that paper does not, its implications for law and legal reform. 
5 We do not contend that we have identified the only source. See TAN infra. There are also questions about the difference between experimental and real-world conditions. See TAN infra. responses from 899 jury-eligible citizens, we estimate the results of deliberations consisting of all-white juries, allAfrican-American juries, all-female juries, all-male juries, allwealthy juries, all-poor juries, and juries of widely diverse degrees of age and education. 
Our principal conclusions, stated briefly, are that people’s moral judgments are remarkably widely shared, but that people have a great deal of difficulty in mapping their moral judgments onto an unbounded scale of dollars. Erratic, unpredictable, and arbitrary awards, possibly even meaningless awards, are a potential product of this difficulty. Since participants in law are frequently asked to map their judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale, this answer relates not only to punitive damage reform but also to a number of other positive and normative questions now faced by the legal system, including the law governing libel, awards for pain and suffering, sexual harassment and other civil rights violations, intentional infliction of emotional distress, administrative penalties, and contingent valuation. In addition to identifying serious problems in current practices, our study points in the direction of a large and potentially fruitful research agenda. 
Our second goal involves what might be called the behavioral analysis of law. In the last three decades, a great deal of progress has come from the application, to legal problems, of a certain understanding of economics.6 Within economics and psychology, but outside law, that understanding has been under sustained attack.7 Within social science generally, the attack has produced insights that supplement, and sometimes undermine, those versions of economics that have undergirded economic analysis of law.8 6 See Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (5th ed. 1997) for a wide range of relevant discussions. 
7 A good recent collection is William Goldstein and Robin Hogarth, Research on Judgment and Decisionmaking (1997). 
8 There are some important exceptions. See, e.g., Edward McCaffery, Matthew Spitzer, and Daniel Kahneman, Framing the Jury, 81 Va. L Rev These insights very much bear on law. Our study helps show what might be missing, impractical, or wrong in standard economic approaches to punitive damage awards, and in a way that bears on a range of additional issues as well.9 
The award of punitive damages has become one of the most controversial and important uses of the tort law, extending well beyond the common law to such statutory areas as environmental protection and employment discrimination.10 Punitive damages are allowed in forty-seven of the fifty states,11 and over sixty federal statutes now permit the award of punitive damages, making judicial review of punitive awards a significant part of federal law.12 
The purposes of such awards are not obscure. Sometimes compensatory awards provide insufficient deterrence of 1341 (1995); Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Amos Tversky, Context-Dependence in Legal Decisionmaking, 25 J. Legal Stud. 287 (1996); George Loewenstein and Linda Babcock, Explaining Bargaining Impasse, 11 J. Econ. Persp. 109 (1997). 
9 See A. Michell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, Harv L Rev (1997) (forthcoming). In brief, the difficulty with the Polinsky/Shavell suggestion— that juries should decide punitive damage problems by reference to the likelihood that the defendant’s acts will go undetected— is that it does not deal with psychological and institutional problems that sharply limit jurors’capacity and willingness to analyze the punitive damage problem in the way they suggest. Thus a reader might conclude from the Polinsky/Shavell analysis that punitive damages should be assessed by an administrative agency, or some other expert body, and not by juries or even judges. See TAN infra. 10 See the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 42 U.S.C. 1977A. 
11 See Richard Blatt et al., Punitive Damages: A State by State Guide to Law and Practice (1991). 
( USC 1681n( 248(cc)(1)(B)); 18 USC 25209(b)( 42 USC 300a-23; 42 USC 1981a; 42 USC 3613; 42 USC 7622; 42 USC 9607; 42 USC 13981. private behavior, simply because injured parties do not detect and seek compensation for all injuries. Punitive damages can, in theory, take account of the infrequency of private suits by penalizing the defendant to the point where it will undertake optimal precautions.13 Moreover, punitive damages may have a retributive or expressive function, designed to embody social outrage at the actions of serious wrongdoers.14 They may reflect the “sense of the community”about the egregious character of the defendant’s action. 
Understood in these terms, however, punitive awards raise several puzzles. Such awards interact in complex ways with public law— with the elaborate network of regulatory requirements and criminal prohibitions that overlap with the tort law. These requirements and prohibitions also have deterrent, retributive, and expressive functions. It is not clear how they can best be brought together with tort law to produce a coherent whole. 
In recent years, the most important concern is that whatever their purposes, punitive damages are unpredictable, even “out of control.”15 One study of 47 counties in eleven states over a several-year period showed a high degree of variability:16 Punitive damages were awarded in about 25% of the successful verdict cases in some counties and not awarded at all in others.17 Median verdicts ranged from less than $10,000 in some areas to as much as $204,000 in San Diego.18 Another study showed increasingly large awards against businesses, from a total of $1.1 million in five large states from 1968 to 1971 to $343 million from 1988 to 1991, an 89-fold increase.19 A recent study finds that in San Francisco, California and Cook County, Illinois, punitive damage awards increased from about $1 million during 196064, to $147 million during 1985-1989, and $215 million during 1990-94.20 
On the basis of evidence of this kind, many people have complained that punitive awards have a “lottery-like” character21 and require legislative or judicial remedy.22 Thus it is said, in well-publicized documents, that the arbitrary character of punitive damage awards is “news to no one,”that they produce an affront to the rule of law by “distributing awards in a random and capricious manner,”23 and that they should be subject to a cap of three times the actual harm.24 Congress continues to debate bills that would limit the availability and amount of punitive damages.25 
It is not difficult to understand the widespread concern with erratic punitive damage awards. If similarly situated people— plaintiffs and defendants alike— are not treated similarly, erratic awards are unfair. As a matter of fairness, the evidence suggests that some awards are too low, while others are too high. From the standpoint of economic efficiency, unpredictable awards need not be troublesome; perhaps individual awards cannot be calculated in advance, but if people can calculate the expected value of the relevant risks, there should be no efficiency loss. If awards are unpredictable, however, resources are likely to be wasted on that calculation, and as a practical matter a risk of extremely high awards is likely to produce excessive caution in riskaverse managers and companies.26 Hence unpredictable awards create both unfairness and (on reasonable assumptions) inefficiency, 27 in a way that may create overdeterrence of desirable activity.28 
25 See, e.g., H.R. 956, 104th Cong, section 2(a) (1995); H.R. 955, 104th Cong, section 8(a), (C) (1995). 
26 See Kenneth MacCrimmon and Donald Wehrung, Taking Risks: The Management of Uncertaity (1986). 
27 These concerns about punitive damage awards have not produced a consensus that punitive damages are unpredictable. Some empirical work suggests that the aggregate data show a reasonably orderly pattern, though the relevant data can be interpreted in different ways. See Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J. Legal Stud. 623 (1997). A response, coming to a different conclusion on the basis of the same data, is A. Mitchell Polinsky, Are Punitive Damages Really Insignificant, Predictable, and Rational?, 26 J. Legal Stud. 663 (1997). 
In their careful analysis, Eisenberg et al. show that the logarithmic transformation yields a distribution that is almost normal. They also show that the log of awards is predicted rather well from a set of objective characteristics of cases in which such awards were made. Eisenberg et al. conclude that the unpredictability of punitive awards has been overstated. We find no inconsistency between their analyses of real jury awards and our experimental data. Indeed, we agree with their conclusion that log 
Our principal interest here is in identifying some of the sources of unpredictability in jury judgments. On the basis of a study of 899 jury-eligible citizens, we offer the following major findings. 
consensus on the degree of outrage and punishment that are appropriate for punitive damage cases.29 At least in the products liability cases we offer, this moral consensus, on what might be called outrage and punitive intent, cuts across differences in gender, race, income, age, and education. For example, our study shows that all-white, all-female, allHispanic, all-male, all-poor, all-wealthy, all-black juries, all-old juries, and all-young juries are likely to come to similar conclusions about how to rank a range of cases. 
dollars as the vehicle to measure moral outrage. Even when there is a consensus on punitive intent, there is no consensus about how much in the way of dollars is necessary to produce appropriate suffering in a defendant. Under existing law, widely shared and reasonably predictable judgments about awards are fairly predictable. But defendants and plaintiffs live in a world of dollars, not of log dollars. In terms of dollars the judgments of our respondents and of the juries examined by Eisenberg et al. are correctly described as erratic and unpredictable, because the severe skewness creates the possibility of either modest or disastrous losses in identical cases. This produces unfairness, because the similarly situated are treated differently, and also might induce risk aversion even in very large firms. 
28 For relevant evidence see Paul H. Rubin et al., BMW v. Gore: Mitigating the Punitive Economics of Punitive Damages, 5 Supreme Court Economic Review 179, 192-96 (1997); Richard L. Manning, Products Liability and Prescription Drug Prices in Canada and the United States, 40 J. L. & Economics 203, 210-34 (1997). 
29 Two qualifications are necessary. First, this conclusion is restricted to the area we investigate, involving products liability suits. It is an open question whether the moral consensus would operate in areas involving, for example, sexual harassment and discrimination on the basis of race. Second, there is a greater consensus on how to rank the scenarios than on the “absolute”numbers for outrage and punishment. See below. punitive intent are turned into highly erratic judgments about appropriate dollar punishment. A basic source of arbitrariness with the existing system of punitive damages (and a problem not limited to the area of punitive damages) is the use of an unbounded dollar scale. 
by the fact that juries have a hard time making appropriate distinctions among cases in what we call “a no-comparison condition.” When one case is seen apart from other cases, people show a general tendency to place it toward the midpoint of any bounded scale. It is therefore less likely that sensible discriminations will be made among diverse cases. This effect is, however, far less important than the effect identified in ( 
The principal purpose of this Article is to set out and to elaborate these findings and to use them to develop some policy reforms in the area of punitive damages. Our basic suggestion is that the legal system should enable juries to engage in tasks that they are capable of performing, and should not require juries to carry out tasks that they cannot perform well. Juries are likely to produce erratic judgments about dollar amounts; their judgments are likely to be much less erratic when they are asked to rank cases or to assess the degree to which a defendant should be punished on a bounded rating scale.30 Thus there is reason to ask whether the civil justice system ought not to be brought more closely in line with the criminal justice system, where juries of course decide questions of liability, and judges decide questions 30 Of course there is a large question about the importance of predictability in an assessment of punitive damage awards. Such awards may be predictable but nonetheless problematic, because (for example) they are too high or too low to produce optimal deterrence, or they do not reflect the right theory of retribution. Our focus here is on the problem of unpredictability, which is an affront to the rule of law and a particular problem under the due process clause and associated principles. See TAN infra. But we discuss below the relationship between unpredictability and other possible problems with damage awards. about punishment, subject to guidelines and constraints. If juries cannot consistently or sensibly “map” their judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale, might it follow that judges, rather than juries, should be making decisions about punitive awards? Should the legal system shift to a system of civil sentencing? Might the same conclusion make sense for compensatory awards in cases in which dollar awards are also likely to be arbitrary? Might the current system of civil liability, both punitive and compensatory, sometimes be displaced by an administrative process, one that can aspire to more in the way of coherence and rationality? 
The choice of reform of course depends on an assessment of precisely what defects ought to be corrected, and thus on a set of normative judgments about the problems with punitive awards in their current form. We attempt to disaggregate three possible judgments here, partly as thought experiments, and partly to raise some questions about the appropriate domain of populist elements in the legal system. 
If the basic problem is simple unpredictability, the legal system might reduce that problem by asking juries not to come up with dollar amounts, but to rank the case at hand among a preselected set of exemplar cases, or by using a bounded scale of numbers rather than an unbounded scale of dollars. A conversion formula, based on previously compiled population-wide data, might be used to generate populationwide judgments about dollar amounts. Through this route, it would be possible to reduce variability and to ensure that jury judgments about appropriate dollar punishments do not reflect the likely unrepresentative views of twelve randomly selected people, but those of the population as a whole. The result would be a form of predictable populism. 
If the basic problem is that people cannot sensibly map their moral judgments onto dollar awards, the legal system should provide a mechanism by which judges or administrators, rather than jurors, can translate the relevant moral judgments into dollar amounts. It is reasonable to question whether ordinary people can know what a given dollar amount would mean for, or do to, the defendant or those in the position of the defendant. On this view, the jury should also rank the case at hand in comparison to preselected cases or come up with a number on a bounded scale. A conversion formula, based not on population-wide data but on expert judgments about what various awards would actually mean or do, would be used to produce rational judgments about dollar amounts. The result would be a form of technocratic populism— populist in the sense that normative judgments of the jury would be the foundation of decision, technocratic in the sense that experts would translate those judgments into legal awards. 
not the proper basis for punitive awards, judges might, in some or all contexts, use those moral judgments as one factor to be considered among others, or the legal system might dispense with jury judgments entirely in some or all contexts. If, for example, it is believed that existing social norms are not the appropriate basis for punishment, or if deterrence rather than retribution is the appropriate goal of punitive damages, an expert body might decide on appropriate awards, or it could offer general guidance to trial court judges. The result would be a form of bureaucratic rationality. 
We discuss these points in some detail. We also compare these reform proposals with other alternatives, including punitive damage “caps,” simple multipliers, greater judicial control of awards, and monetary schedules building on the workers’ compensation model. We suggest that caps and multipliers have serious problems, but that firmer judicial control would likely be a desirable and easily administrable step, at least if judges can produce or work from monetary schedules or otherwise attempt to work from comparison cases. A more radical reform, with much promise but also some risk, would involve a shift from juries to administrators, operating from a set of guidelines produced by specialists in the areas at hand, subject of course to democratic safeguards. 
Both the empirical findings and the policy recommendations have implications well beyond the problem of punitive damages. The problem of “mapping” onto a dollar scale arises not only in the setting of punitive damages, but also in damages for “pain and suffering,” libel actions, sexual harassment cases, intentional infliction of emotional distress, administrative penalties, and judgments about the appropriate focus of the regulatory state. About one-half of tort law involves monetary awards for injuries that are hard to monetize.31 From our findings, it is reasonable to infer that the phenomenon of shared judgments and erratic or arbitrary32 dollar amounts create a serious and unaddressed problem in many areas. Very typically, juries and judge are mapping judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale; the phenomenon of widespread and predictable judgments, combined with the demonstrable cognitive difficulty of translating preferences and values into dollar amounts, has wide-ranging implications for the operation of both private and public law. 
Most generally, our findings raise a simple question: How can the normative goals of the legal system be made to mesh with what is, or might be, known about human psychology? This is a large and unanswered question. We attempt to make some progress on it here. 
This Article comes in six parts. Part II outlines existing understandings about punitive damages, showing how the sources of variable judgments are relevant to constitutional issues and also to existing theories of deterrence and retribution. Part III outlines our study and the basic conclusions. Part IV presents policy recommendations designed to provide a role for community judgments without the “noise” and arbitrariness that accompany the current system. What is important is not the details of the proposals 31 See W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability 102-104 (1993). 32 They may be arbitrary either in the sense of erratic or in the sense of a product of a normatively questionable “anchor” on which the jury has seized. See TAN infra. but their basic goal and direction: to provide juries with an opportunity to do what they are capable of doing relatively well, without requiring juries to do what they are bound to do badly. 
Part V briefly discusses some analogies and implications, dealing above all with the general problem of jury determination of dollar amounts in contexts in which monetization is unfamiliar and difficult. We show how an evaluation of appropriate reforms with respect to compensatory awards call for an ambitious decision about role of populist and technocratic ingredients of “compensation” judgments— or, in other words, a decision about what the vexing idea of “compensation”should be taken to mean. We also outline a possible research agenda to see how actual or potential descriptive findings in psychology might bear on the normative goals of the legal system. Part VI is a conclusion. 
It is not our purpose to resolve the debate about whether and why a court should award punitive damages.33 Our modest goal is to outline some of the relevant arguments by way of introduction. It is important to provide those arguments here, since they provide the foundation for the constitutional law governing punitive damage awards, and because the arguments play a large role in our empirical study. 
33 Relevant discussions include Polinsky and Shavell, supra note; Dorsey Ellis, Fairness and Efficiency in the Law of Punitive Damages, 56 Southern Cal. L. Rev. 1 (1982); Robert Cooter, Economic Analysis of Punitive Damages, 56 S. Cal. L. Rev. 79 (1982); Robert Cooter, Punitive Damages for Deterrence, 40 Alabama L. Rev. 1143 (1989); David Owen, The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40 Ala. L. Rev. 705 (1989); Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice, 42 Am. L. Rev. 1393 (1993). 
The traditional view is that punitive awards serve deterrent and retributive goals. Thus a standard jury instruction says, “In determining whether or not you should award punitive damages, you should bear in mind that the purpose of such an award is to punish the wrongdoer and to deter that wrongdoer from repeating such wrongful acts. In addition, such damages are also designed to serve as a warning to others, and to prevent others from committing such wrongful acts.”34 
(a) Conventional arguments. With respect to the goal of deterrence, there is a simple and standard economic argument for punitive damages: Compensatory damages work well for deterrence if and only if it is easy to identify and to bring suit against the injurer, and to collect full damages. Under these conditions, the wrongdoer faces liability for the full social costs of the wrong. Thus there is no need for additional damages if the probability of detection and successful suit for compensation is 100%. But sometimes it is difficult to identify the injurer, perhaps because the tort has occurred surreptitiously. In such cases, adequate deterrence will not be provided, since wrongdoers will be able to continue to engage in conduct whose social costs exceed social benefits. Punitive damages are necessary to pick up the slack for undetected wrongdoers.35 
Under this view, the goal of punitive damages is to ensure that the award of compensatory damages is supplemented by an amount reflecting the fact that the probability of that award is less than 100%. The simplest conclusion is that total damages should be the harm multiplied by the reciprocal of the probability than the defendant will be found liable when he should be found liable; punitive damages would then consist of the excess of total damages over compensatory damages.36 We will suggest some institutional and psychological reasons to doubt that jurors can or will make judgments of this kind; let us continue the simple account for now. 
With some torts— medical malpractice is an obvious example— it is very plausibly the case that many defendants will be able to avoid compensatory damages. When the defendant has been able to conceal his identity, or otherwise to escape being sued, there is therefore good reason to award punitive damages. Interestingly, this analysis supports a relatively high punitive damages award in the BMW case (discussed below), because it is not easy to detect fraudulent repaintings of cars. But in cases in which the probability of detection and suit is extremely high, punitive damages make far less sense. This may be true, for example, of certain homicides and assaults. 
From the standpoint of optimal deterrence, there is a second possible reason to award punitive damages. There may be cases in which a social judgment has been, and should be, made that certain subjective gains ought not to be allowed to count at all.37 If someone has gained utility from murder, rape, assault, or sexual harassment, it might be thought— reasonably enough— that that gain should not be permitted to count. Of course the argument that such gains should not count is not itself an economic judgment, but it is not hard to imagine defenses of that argument.38 Punitive damages are necessary to offset the utility gain that is judged illicit. Compensatory damages are inadequate, in such cases, 36 See Polinsky & Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, Harv. L. Rev., forthcoming. 
37 Some utilitarians make just this argument. See the discussion of the exclusion of sadistic or malicious preferences in John Harsanyi, Morality and the Theory of Rational Behavior, in Utilitarianism and Beyond 39 (Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams eds. 1982) 
38 See id. because they do not have this effect; they require the defendant to internalize the victim’s costs without also eliminating the hedonic effects of the defendant’s benefits. 
A third possible reason for punitive damages stems from the fact that sometimes compensatory damages may be lower than they should be, and sometimes it is especially costly for courts to calculate compensatory damages. If compensatory awards are systematically low, and if calculation costs are high, the amount awarded for punitive damages may move the legal system closer to optimal deterrence.39 Of course this argument has a degree of speculativeness and also crudeness, because it is unlikely that punitive damages can be calibrated with sufficient precision to make up for the shortfall in compensatory damages. But perhaps it is reasonable to think that punitive damages bring the incentives of wrongdoers closer to where they should be. 
On this view, intentional torts, involving deliberate infliction of an injury, may well provide good cases for punitive damages. Of course it is in such cases that socially illicit gains are most likely to be involved. In such cases, the probability of obtaining damages from the injurer may well be less than 100%; intentional torts frequently (though not always) involve a form of concealment. But an important implication is that punitive damages generally do not make sense for highly visible torts where the probability of detection and compensation is extremely high; there, compensatory damages are all that is required.40 
(b) Puzzles and problems. Even from the economic point of view, these arguments for punitive damages raise some serious puzzles. An important question, not yet taken up in the economic literature, is the relation between this rationale for punitive damages and the existence of other regulatory controls, for example those created by administrative and criminal law. Both administrative and criminal law are often 39 See Landes and Posner, supra note, at 160. 
40 See id.; Polinsky and Shavell, supra note. defended as an effort to compensate for private underenforcement of law;41 if the tort system also attempts to pick up the slack via punitive damages, overdeterrence may well result. A system containing compensatory and punitive damages may be both necessary and sufficient taken by itself, but if it is complemented by administrative and criminal law, it is likely to become incoherent. 
There is an independent point, closely related to our findings here. Even without administrative and criminal law, efforts to impose punitive damages may well misfire because of the inevitable confusion or cognitive and motivational errors of jurors and judges. There is thus a question whether realworld institutions should or can reliably engage in the enterprise of seeking to obtain optimal deterrence even if they seek to do so. That enterprise is very costly, and the costs of decision may argue in favor of some other system for calculating punitive damages. Perhaps juries will not understand the inquiry into optimal deterrence; perhaps it will be too costly to give them the relevant understanding; perhaps they will refuse to undertake that inquiry even if they are asked to do so. We return to these issues below. 
A general problem is that if juries are not thinking in economic terms, they may award large punitive damages in a way that deters desirable activity (or award small punitive damages in a way that produces insufficient deterrence). With large awards, activity that produces benefits as well as costs may be stopped or significantly reduced, with possible adverse effects on safety and health itself.42 It is for this 41 See, e.g., Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 220 (4th ed. 1994). A general discussion is Edward Rubin, Punitive Damages: Reconceptualizing the Runcible Remedies of Common Law, Wisconsin Law Review (forthcoming 1997). 
42 Thus there is a possibility here of health-health tradeoffs, which occur when a strategy designed to reduce health risks actually increases health risks. Some punitive damage awards may actually have adverse health effects, if they serve to increase prices. For a recent discussion, see Richard L. Manning, Products Liability and Prescription Drug Prices in reason that the strongest cases involve intentional torts, and the weakest case involves negligence. In cases involving negligence, punitive damages would be likely to reduce desirable activity. This is much less likely for intentional wrongdoing, where desirable activity by hypothesis is not at issue. Reckless behavior is of course an intermediate case. 
For those interested in optimal deterrence, a particularly important dispute is whether, on economic grounds, the wealth or income of the defendant should matter.43 As we will explain, our findings suggest that the defendant’s wealth is likely to be an important variable in actual damage awards, though it plays little or no role in people’s judgments about outrageousness or appropriate punishment on a bounded numerical scale.44 The Supreme Court has said that wealth and income can be taken into account.45 On a conventional view about optimal deterrence, however, wealth and income is irrelevant. Properly calculated by reference to the probability of punishment and the need to counteract illicit gains, a punitive damages award should encourage a defendant to Canada and the United States, 40 J. L. & Economics 203, 210-34 (1997). For general discussion, see John Graham and Jonathan Weiner, Risk vs. Risk (1996); Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs, 63 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1533 (1996). Evidence of such effects, in the particular context of punitive damages, can be found in Paul Rubin, John Calfee, and Mark Grady, BMW v. Gore: Mitigating the Punitive Economics of Punitive Damages, 1997 Supreme Court Review 179, 192-96. 
43 For the view that wealth should be irrelevant, see Kemezy v. Peters, 79 F.3d 22 (7th Cir. 1996); Kenneth Abraham and John Jeffries, Punitive Damages and the Rule of Law, 18 J. Legal Stud. 415 (1989); Ellis, supra note, at 61-63; Polinsky and Shavell, supra note. For an argment the other way, see Jennifer Arlen, Should Defendants’ Wealth Matter?, 21 J. Legal Stud. 413, 414 (1992) (discussing deterrence of riskaverse people). 
44 See TAN supra. Compare Robert MacCoun, infra note 45. 45 See infra. Cf. Robert MacCoun, Differential Treatment of Corporate Defendants by Juries, 30 Law & Society Review 121, 133-39 (1996) (finding effects from corporate identity and commercial activity, but not from wealth per se). engage in optimal behavior, whatever its wealth (assuming risk neutrality).46 But there is a question whether this is realistic; we take up this issue below. 
Thus far we have spoken in terms of deterrence; but under conventional noneconomic analysis, punitive damages also have an expressive or retributive purpose. They are designed to punish as well as to deter. Juries believe that such awards express the community’s outrage at certain forms of behavior, and judges’instructions encourage juries to think in precisely these terms. In fact empirical evidence, including that provided here,47 suggests that juries are not attempting to promote optimal deterrence but instead to punish wrongdoing with, at most, a signal designed to ensure that certain misconduct “will not happen again.” 
Regrettably, the legal culture lacks a careful normative account of the relationship between retributive goals and punitive damages. Those who emphasize retribution are seeking to ensure that the community’s outrage about certain acts is reflected in punishment. Probably the retributive idea would focus on two principal factors: the defendant’s state of mind and the degree of harm actually caused or likely to be caused by defendant’s behavior. The first point is especially important. Retributists who are moral egalitarians48 attempt, through civil or criminal punishment, to capture the intuition that certain intentional states are especially bad because they reflect abhorrent and false views about the moral worth of persons.49 In cases where one person murders another, or 46 See Landes and Posner, supra note, at 163-64; Polinsky and Shavell, supra note. 
47 See TAN infra. 
48 Of course retributivists need not be egalitarians; we could imagine retributists who thought that harms against some persons deserve less punishment than harms against other persons. 
49 See Jean Hampton, The Retributive Idea, in Jean Hampton and Jeffrie Murphy, Forgiveness and Mercy 111 (1988). acts with gross negligence that produces another’s death, the wrongdoer reveals a belief that some people do not matter very much.50 Public outrage is the appropriate response. 
In this sense retribution, properly understood, embodies a principle of moral equality. The award of punitive damages can also be taken to have an expressive function; it expresses the community’s outrage at certain kinds of conduct, in a way that is intended both to reflect and to entrench the relevant social norms. This idea connects the award of punitive damages with their historical origins in affronts to the honor of the victims.51 With this understanding it is not surprising that punitive damages have come to be awarded for sexual harassment and for other violations of civil rights statutes;52 the relevant community now believes that these kinds of illegality reflect an especially bad state of mind, and hence that punitive damages are a necessary supplement to other sanctions. The defendant must be punished accordingly. In any event the retributive idea suggests that the most serious cases for punitive damage awards thus involve harms that are both grave in degree and affirmatively desired by the defendant, as, for example, in examples of homicide or assault. 
We connect these factors to the psychology of punitive damage awards in the discussion below. The central point is that if retribution is the goal of punitive damage awards, it is important to ensure that juries are asked questions that allow them to express, in a rational and coherent manner, their comparison cases219— especially because, as we have shown, the dollar awards of any particular jury are not likely to reflect the population’s judgment about appropriate dollar awards. A more dramatic approach— probably the best for the long term, though not without risks of its own— would involve the development of a system of administrative penalties for serious misconduct, based on judgments made in advance and subject to democratic control. 
Our findings have implications well beyond the area of punitive damages. Three implications are of special importance. First, there is, in the personal injury cases studied here, a high degree of agreement within diverse demographic groups with respect to both outrage and punishment. It is possible that there is a similar consensus across other domains; thus ample room remains for further related work. It would be valuable to see, for example, whether such a consensus exists across gender with respect to compensatory damage awards, or punitive damage awards, for pain and suffering or sexual harassment; it would be valuable too to see whether there are substantive areas in which race, education, age, and wealth have measurable effects. Relatively simple studies could produce evidence on some much-disputed questions. 
Second, our study raises serious doubts about whether jurors are able to make sensible judgments about dollar 219 See Klein v. Grynberg, 44 F. 3d 1497 (10th Cir. 1995); Stafford v. Puro, 63 F.3d 1436 (7th Cir. 1995): Allahar v. Zahora, 59 F.3d 693 (7th Cir. 1995): Ross v. Black and Decker, Inc., 977 F.2d 1178 (7th Cir. 1992): Vasbinder v. Scott, 976 F.2d 118 (2nd Cir. 1992); Kimzey v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 107 F.3d 568 (8th Cir. 1997): Lee v. Edwards, 101 F.3d 805 (2nd Cir. 1996): King v. Macri, 993 F.2d 294 (2nd Cir. 1993): Michelson v. Hamada, 36 Cal.Rptr.2d 343 (Cal. Ct. App. 1994): Wollersheim v. Church of Scientology, 6 Cal.Rptr.2d 532 (Cal. Ct. App. 1992): Baume v. 212 E. 10 N.Y. Bar Ltd., 634 N.Y.S. 2d 478 (N.Y. App. Div. 1995); Parkin v. Cornell University Inc., 581 N.Y.S.2d 914 (N.Y. App. Div. 1992). As noted, our evidence suggests that if community-wide judgments are the goal, it is important to have a mechanism for additur as well as remittitur. awards in cases in which market measures are unavailable, and it throws into sharp relief the question whether this task should not be given to judges or to some other institution. The legal system is not occasionally but pervasively in the business of requiring people to map their judgments onto dollar amounts, and outside of the context of punitive damages, the translation is likely to suffer from the same problems found here. In particular, difficulties with mapping probably affect jury awards of damages for libel, pain and suffering, sexual harassment and other civil rights violations, and intentional infliction of emotional distress— all of which notoriously suffer from unpredictability, in part, we believe, as a result of unbounded dollar scales. The consequence is that rule of law values are badly compromised. Reform proposals might ensure against unfairness (in the form of dissimilar treatment of the similarly situated) and unpredictability for both individuals and firms, plaintiffs and defendants alike. More particularly, reforms involving “compensatory”awards in these controversial areas must be evaluated by an assessment of the appropriate place of purely factual judgments, for which juries are not especially well-suited. Thus the three kinds of punitive damage reforms may well have parallels in each of these areas. 
Third, our findings support the general proposition, on which there is growing consensus, that both values and preferences are often constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations.220 In their various social roles, people lack a preexisting “master list”of values and preferences from which to make selections in situations of choice. This is true for consumer choices, which depend on context and alternative options, as well as for medical decisions,221 politics, and law.222 It is true as well for judgments made by jurors, judges, representatives, and citizens generally. Rather than emerging from some menu in the mind, these judgments are a function of procedure, description, and context. In the legal context in particular, participants are pervasively in the business of constructing procedures, descriptions, and contexts. Frequently they have not been self-conscious about that point. 
To be sure, there is no uncontroversial way to develop the context and frames for eliciting, or constructing, social preferences and values. But some ways are worse than others, because they make people perform tasks for which they are ill-equipped— or, more specifically, produce poor translation of some plausible “bedrock” set of normative judgments, generate arbitrariness, aggravate the problem of selective attention, exploit heuristic devices that produce error, or provide people with too little understanding to yield sensible or consistent decisions. We have suggested some ways to handle these problems with the award of punitive damages, where bedrock judgments do seem discoverable through the right methods, and where the legal system allows those judgments to be transformed into dollar amounts in erratic ways. Both the problem and the potential solutions bear on many issues now facing the legal system. 
In this study we would like you to imagine that you are a juror for a legal case in a civil court. Civil law suits can involve disputes between private individuals, companies, or individuals and companies, in which the plaintiff alleges that the defendant harmed them or their property in some way. A civil suit is brought by a plaintiff for the purpose of gaining compensation from the defendant for the alleged harm. 
could be imposed upon a defendant that is found liable for damages. Compensatory damages are intended to fully compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered as a result of the defendant’s actions. Punitive damages are intended to achieve two purposes: (1) to punish the defendant for unusual misconduct, and ( committing the same actions in the future. 
In the cases you will consider, the defendant has already been ordered to pay compensatory damages to the plaintiff. This does not necessarily mean that punitive damages must also be awarded. Whether or not punitive damages should be awarded and, if so, how large they should be, is completely separate from compensatory damages. 
Punitive damages should be awarded if a preponderance of the evidence shows that the defendants either acted maliciously or with reckless disregard for the welfare of others. Defendants are considered to have acted maliciously if they intended to injure or harm someone. Defendants are considered to have acted with reckless disregard for the welfare of others if they were aware of the probable harm to others but disregarded it, and their actions were a gross deviation from the standard of care that a normal person would use. 
Civil suits differ from criminal cases, in which the government prosecutes an individual or a company for alleged violations of the law. Plaintiffs in a civil trial must prove their claim by “a preponderance of the evidence,”which means that it is more likely than not that the plaintiff’s claim is justified. This differs from criminal trials, where the prosecution must prove the defendant’s guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
In each of the cases you will consider, the jury (of which you are a member) has already decided to accept the plaintiff's claim. As a consequence the jury has ordered the defendant to pay $200,000 in compensatory damages to the plaintiff as full compensation. The defendants are large [medium-sized] companies with profits of $100-200 [$10-20] million per year. 
Mary Lawson, a manufacturing worker, developed chronic anemia. Although after a hospital stay she is now better, the condition has not been fully cured. She believes that exposure to benzene in her work place caused the condition and sued her employer, TGI International. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered TGI International to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
TGI International is a large company (with profits of $100200 million per year) that manufactures high-tech machine parts. Some years ago the scientists at TGI International discovered that manufacturing workers at Mary Lawson’s plant were often exposed to benzene, a substance that can cause anemia, leukemia and cancer. Internal documents show that the top management at TGI International decided not to do anything about the problem, because benzene levels in the plant were slightly below the maximum level allowed by OSHA regulations. They thought that the risk was worth taking and that “with any luck no one will get sick”. They also decided against warning the workers, because “warnings would just create panic”. 
Frank Williams suffered serious internal injuries when the braking system on his motorcycle failed to work at a traffic light. He felt that that the brakes were defective, and sued National Motors, the company that manufactures and sells his motorcycle. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered National Motors to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
National Motors is a large company (with profits of $100200 million per year) that makes motorcycles, scooters, and other motorized single person vehicles. The evidence showed that the braking system used by National Motors has a basic design defect. National Motors was aware that “there might be a problem with our brakes,” because in pre-market tests, the defect appeared on several occasions. But the pre-market tests were not extensive, despite the fact that auto industry regulations require elaborate testing. Internal company documents show National Motors’belief that “it would be quite expensive for us to do much more now, we can't be certain we have a serious problem here, and anyway we can fix the problem afterwards if it really does turn out to be serious.” 
While he was visiting the circus, Thomas Smith was shot in the arm by a security guard who mistakenly thought that Smith had threatened another customer with bodily harm. The security guard was drunk at the time. Smith sued Public Entertainment, the company that operates the circus. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Public Entertainment to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
Public Entertainment is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) which operates circuses and public fairs. Fred Williams, the security guard who was involved in the incident, is an alcoholic with a history of incidents of drunkenness on the job. During one of these incidents Williams took out his gun and started waving it around wildly, but he did not shoot anyone. Public Entertainment had repeatedly warned Williams to “clean up his act” but took no other action. In his company personnel file Williams was described as “basically a good guy with a bit of a drinking problem, but not enough of a risk to fire him.” 
Susan Douglas suffered significant injuries to her legs and neck when an airbag in her car opened unexpectedly while she was driving the vehicle. She believes that the airbag was defective and sued the manufacturer, Coastal Industries. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Coastal Industries to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Coastal Industries is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in parts and accessories that can be added to existing vehicles, such as adding the latest safety equipment to older cars. While its airbag conforms to the requirements stated in government regulations, it does not include certain additional “fail-safe” systems that are used in other airbags to ensure against accidental opening. Internal documents show that most but not all of the Coastal Industries designers believed that their system “is certainly safe enough, even if it does not include all possible safeguards”and that their marketing department said that “there will be no market for our airbag if we raise its price by adding more safety bells and whistles.” 
Carl Sanders used Nalene, an over-the-counter baldness treatment available at drugstores. While a small amount of hair did grow back, he also developed severe side-effects, including open sores on the scalp and permanent brown spots over his forehead. He sued the manufacturer, A&G Cosmetics. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered A&G Cosmetics to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
A&G Cosmetics is a large company (with profits of $100200 million per year) that sells many different cosmetic products, including wigs, “weaves” and chemical solutions designed to combat baldness. Nalene has proven effective in promoting hair growth in 30% of people in clinical trials. However, Nalene caused unpleasant side effects in some cases, although none were as severe as those Carl Sanders experienced. When marketing Nalene, A&G Cosmetics did not fully disclose these findings. It only said “minor side effects have been observed in a very small number of people tested.” While this amount of disclosure was within legal limits, other companies that make hair products voluntarily disclosed more about their products. 
Sarah Stanley, a seventy-five year old woman, suffered serious back injuries as a result of following an exercise video, “Good Health For All,”that she purchased through her local community health center. When Stanley attempted to perform the exercises, she found herself unable to do so, but she pressed on beyond her physical capacities. She claimed that she was not adequately warned of these dangers and sued the producer of the video, Gersten Productions. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Gersten Productions to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Gersten Productions is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that produces informational materials in health-related fields, including videos on many topics concerning healthy lifestyles. The “Good Health for All” video contains a series of exercises suitable mostly for people in good shape and good health. The exercise coaches and models in the video are all relatively young, and no federal or state law requires exercise videos to come with any special warning for elderly people. The witnesses in the case testified that Gersten Productions believed that most people would be able to tell when the exercises were beyond their capacities, that Good Health for All has produced good results for almost all people who have seen it, and that very few people had reported injuries of any type from doing so. 
Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy. His parents sued the manufacturer of the pajamas, Novel Clothing. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Novel Clothing to pay the Newtons $200,000 in compensation. 
Novel Clothing is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in making clothes for children. Before marketing the pajamas, Novel conducted the tests normally used in the industry for problems like flammability, and observed no incidents like the Newtons experienced. Companies in the industry as well as federal regulators have known for a while that it is possible to add extra fire-retardant chemicals to their fabrics (in addition to those specified in current regulations), but these extra measures are not required. The process is very expensive, and no other manufacturers currently use it. Internal documents show that the management of Novel Clothing had decided that “when it comes to costly safety innovations we will follow our competitors. We don't want to be less safe than anyone else but we don't have to lead the way either.” 
Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular professional medical treatment for several weeks. 
Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number of pills of Allerfree, a non-prescription allergy medicine, and required an extensive hospital stay. The overdose weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life. The Allerfree bottle used an inadequately designed child-proof safety cap. The Glovers sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $200,000 in compensation. 
General Assistance is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of nonprescription medicines. A federal regulation requires “childproof”safety caps on all medicine bottles. General Assistance has systematically ignored the intent of this regulation by selling tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with a childproof safety cap that was generally effective, but had a failure rate much higher than any others in the industry. An internal company document says that “this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money”; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree may be punished for violating the regulation but says, “the federal government has many other things to worry about and probably won't bother us on this” and in any case “the punishments for violating the regulation are extremely mild; basically we'd be asked to improve the safety caps in the future.” An official at the Food and Drug Administration had previously warned a vice president of General Assistance that they were “on shaky ground” but the company decided not to take any corrective action. 
Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number of pills of Allerfree, a non-prescription allergy medicine. She had to spend several days in a hospital, and is now deeply traumatized by pills of any kind. When her parents try to get her to take even beneficial medications such as vitamins, aspirin, or cold remedies, she cries uncontrollably and says that she is afraid. 
Martin West, a right-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was seriously injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the top of the stairs and tumbled awkwardly all the way to the bottom landing, damaging his spinal cord in the process. As a result he now has only partial control of his right arm, a condition which doctors believe is permanent. He sued the manufacturer of the lift-chair, MedTech Products. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered MedTech to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
MedTech Products is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures many types of medical equipment, including wheelchairs, car-lifts, and other devices used by the disabled. The lift-chair is a new product for MedTech, and instead of producing a new design, company engineers decided to adapt the design of the hydraulic lifts for cars already on the market. Unfortunately, there are several unique problems in designing a safe and effective lift-chair that are beyond the experience of the company’s engineers. Product managers said that hiring new engineers with the proper expertise was “too expensive, and would take too long” and ordered current engineers to “just do the best you can, but be sure you meet our deadline for announcing the product.” The inexperience of the engineers and the rush to meet the product announcement date led to testing procedures that were less rigorous than those required by federal medical product regulations. 
Martin West, a left-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the bottom of the stairs and tumbled to the bottom landing, injuring his spinal cord in the process. His right arm was paralyzed for several weeks, after which doctors were able to repair most of the injury, and he was able to regain most of the previous range of motion in the arm. 
Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on computer equipment, developed a rare form of skin cancer. After a long course of painful chemotherapy, doctors were able to cure the cancer, although they cannot be sure that it will not return. She believed that it had been caused by the computer monitors that she worked on and sued the manufacturer, International Computers. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered International Computers to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
International Computers is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures components of computer systems. The type of International Computers monitor that Ms. Windsor used emits an unusually high level of radiation compared to other similar monitors, a level that pushes the limit in government safety guidelines. Internal company documents cite experts who concluded that “the evidence that this level of radiation could create any serious risk to health and life is weak and tentative”. The company was not legally required to disclose the unusual level of radiation, and it did not do so. 
Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on computer equipment, suffered from frequent and severe migraine headaches. As a result, for several years she often experienced nausea, insomnia and depression, and missed many workdays and family events. 
Which of the following best expresses your opinion of the defendant’s actions? (please circle your answer) 
In addition to paying compensatory damages, how much should the defendant be punished? Please circle the number that best expresses your opinion of the appropriate level of punishment. 
No Punishmen t 
Punishment 0 1 2 3 4 $ Damages 
In addition to paying compensatory damages, what amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? (please write your answer in the blank below) 
$ _____________________ 
The sample had good representation from various demographic and socio-economic groups. For example, respondents were 44% male; 64% Caucasian, 16% AfricanAmerican, 15% Hispanic; median income = $30K-$50K; median education = some college; median age = 30-39. Thirty-two respondents were dropped from the sample because they gave incomplete responses or failed to understand the task. 
The survey was conducted at a downtown hotel. Participants were run in large groups at pre-arranged times over a four day period. Most respondents completed their task in 30 to 45 minutes. 
instructions and four numbered envelopes. The first three envelopes contained the materials for Parts 1, 2 and 3 of the study, as described below. The fourth envelop contained demographic question and debriefing information. The instructions (which are excerpted in Appendix 1)included (1) an overview of the survey procedure, ( task of jurors in civil (as opposed to criminal) trials, ( definitions of and distinctions between compensatory and punitive damages, including the fact that compensatory damages had already been awarded in the cases they would consider, ( punitive damages (maliciousness or reckless disregard for the welfare of others), and ( evidence required in this situation (preponderance of the evidence). 
Ten scenarios describing personal injury cases were constructed. The first six were used in Parts 1 and 2 of the procedure and the other four in Part 3. Each respondent rated some version of all ten scenarios. Envelope #1 contained material about one of the scenarios. Envelope #2 contained five other scenarios. Envelope #3 contained the four scenarios used in Part 3 of the experiment. 
In Parts 1 and 2, between-subjects manipulations were response mode (Outrage, Punishment or $ Damages) and firm size (annual profits of $10-$20 million (Medium) or $100$200 million (Large)), and scenario sequence, including which scenario was evaluated first, in isolation from the others (in Part 1 of the procedure). Scenario order was counterbalanced using a Latin square so that each scenario appeared in each ordinal position with equal frequency. Table 2 shows the wording of the evaluation questions in the three response modes. Instructions in all scenarios stated that compensatory damages of $200,000 had already been awarded. 
Part 3 had the same structure as Parts 1 and 2, except that the isolation manipulation was replaced by a manipulation in which the degree of harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied. For each of the four scenarios used in Part 3, we formulated a high-harm and a low-harm version. For example, in the case in which a child playing with matches was burned when his pajamas caught fire, the injuries were described as “He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy” (high harm) or “His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular professional medical treatment for several weeks”(low harm). 
(Second Series) Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). (October 1993). (March 1994). the Law (June 1994). (June 1994). from Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
Escrows (August 1994). Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 1994). 
Beyond Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. http://www.jstor.org Bad 
Deaths CASSR.SUNSTEIN UniverosiftCyhicagLoawSchooCl,hicagIoll,ino6is0673 Evidenicsepresenttoesdhowthapteoplaerewillintgopaya premiutomavoi"dbaddeath-sd"eaththsaatre especiadllryeadeudn,controllianbvloel,untianrciluyrraendd,inequitadbilsytribuPtuedb.ljiucdgmeonfttshis kindhelpexplaitnhedemanfdorregulatiBount.somoefthesjeudgmendotsnotjustifcyurrepnotlicies, becaustehesytemfro mselectiavtetentaionndconfusiFoenw.causeosfdeatahreentireulnycontrololarble facewd holilnyvoluntatrhieilsys;uiesnotwhethtehrecyanbecontrolbleudtatwhactostB. uthrekeindosf "baddeathds"eservspeeciaalttentitohno:siemposihnigghexternalitthieossp,erecedbeydunusupaalinand sufferainngdt,hosperoducidnisgtributiinoneqaulity. JELClassificatiIoI,nK:2 Manypeoplethinkthatitisbesttodiequicklyq,uietlya,ndinone'ssleepatnightP.eople oftensaytheyhavea specialfearofcertaindeathsi,ncludintghosefromcancerandAIDS. Alldeathsarebad.Butsomedeathsseemworsethanothers. 
Thesepointshaveimporta nimtplicationfsorbothpositiveandnormativweorkabout thevalueoflife.People'sbeliefsaboutthespecialbadnessofcertaindeathshouldhave consequencefsoroccupationaclhoice,lifestylea,ndthedemandforgovernmernetgulation.Ifdeathsfromautomobilaeccidentisnvolveminimaslufferinagn,delicitrelatively littlepublicconcernm,anufacturearnsdrelators willbe undercorresppridinl^evs,s_ intensperessurteomakecarssafe.If,bycontrasAt,IDS deathsa,nddeathsfromairplane accidentsa,reespeciallyadhorrenwt,ecanpredicat strondgemandforAIDS prevention programasndforregulatioonfairlinesT.herearenormati vimeplicationasswell.Ifsome deathsareparticularbl yad,governmesnhtoulddevoteadditionarlesourcetsopreventing them. 
Mypurposeinthisessayis toinvestigatteheplaceofbaddeathsinthevaluationof life.1Muchpsychologicwalorkemphasizeaspparenptublicconcernwith"qualitative" factorasggravatincgertaindeathsI. showhowthisconcernhelpsexplainsomeconspicuousanomalieisncurrengtovernmernetgulatioDne.spiteitsexplanatorpyowerI,conclude thatthepsychologicaelvidencedoes notjustifythoseanomaliesb,ecausethepublic concernprobabldyependsonselectivaettentiomn,istakesa,ndconfusionOs.n theother handI, arguethatfoursourcesofpublicconcernshouldplaya roleinregulatorpyolicy: theseinvolvedeathsaccompaniebdyunusualpainand sufferindge,athsconcentrated amongsociallydisadvantaggedroupsd,eathisnvolvinegspeciallyhighcostsofriskavoidance,anddeathsthatproduceunusuallyhighexternalitieFsu. rtherresearchis necessary to identifytheactualsourcesof publicjudgmentasnd to see ifthosejudgmentscan survivecriticaslcrutiny. 
Whengovernmenist tryingto maximizethevalueof life,what,exactlys,houlditbe maximizingA?nyanswershouldmeettwoconstraintFsi.rsti,tshouldbe acceptablefrom thetheoreticaplointof view.Second,it shouldbe administrablteh,atis, it shouldbe somethintghatreal-worldofficialscan actuallyuse. The twoconstraintasre mutually checkingA. practicalluysefulanswermighbte indefensibfleromthestandpoinotftheory. A theoreticalalpypealinganswermightbe rejectedbecauseitis toocomplexorunwieldy, becauseitimposesunrealistiicnformationdaelmandson governmenotr,becauseitis an invitatiotnointerest-grosutpruggleA.nyjudgmenatboutwhatgovernmenshtouldmaximizemightalsoattempttobe minimallcyontentioutsh, atis,itmighatttempttoputtoone sidethelargesttheoreticdalisputesandtoattracstupporftromwidelydivergensttartingpoints.A degreeof philosophicapl arsimonya,chievedthroughbracketinlgarge-scale controversiews,ouldbe promisinigfitis possible(see Sunstein1,996). 
In recentyearsmanyobserverasndsomeregulatorse,ekinga practicaalnswertothe questionwhattheyshouldmaximizeh,avefocussedon numberosflivessaved(Breyer, 1993).Theydecidehowtoproceedlargelybyexplorintgheaggregatneumberofdeaths tobe preventebdya regulatoriynitiativTe.hisis a promisinsgtartB.utitis increasingly recognizedthattheidea of"livessaved"has considerablcerudenessas theregulatory maximandO.f courseno program"saveslives";at bestit extendsthem.Otherthings beingequal,a regulatiotnhat"saves"100childrenseemsbettetrhanonethat"saves"110 elderlypeople,becauseit savesmoreyearsoflife.Thus,forexample,therecentEPA regulationof particulateesxtendsthelivesof a largenumberof terminalliyll elderly peoplebya shortperiodt;heresultinmgodestgainsshouldnotbe valuedatthesamerate as anylives"saved."Andifgovernmenhtas a choicebetweenpreservinlgivesin a way thatensuresdecentlylivableyearsandpreservinlgivesin a waythatensuresa barely functionalndextremelpyainfuclontinueedxistencei,tshoulddo theformerT.heinfluentialnotionofquality-adjustleidfeyears(ZeckhauserandShepherd1,976)(QALYs) is intendedto accountforthesejudgmentsb,y suggestingthatgovernmensthouldpay attentionnottothenumberoflivessavedbuttoboththenumbearndthequalityofyears saved.Peopleinfacttradeoffthequantityoflifeforthequalityoflife,andvice-versai;t seemsreasonableto saythatgovernmenshtoulddo thesameinallocatingresources. 
The use ofQALYs is controversiapla,rtlybecauseofthedifficultoyfdecidinghow muchtocounta qualitativeliympairedlife,anda widerangeofvariationcsanbe imagined on thebasic notion,to be evaluatedby examiningboththeoreticaalppeal and administrabiliIttym.ay,forexample,be betterto extenda lifefromfiveto twenty-five yearsthantoextendonefromsixtytoeighty-fiyvearsP.erhaposfficialsshouldstartwith a notionof"decentl ylivablelifeyears,"whichis designedtobypasssomeofthemore controversiqaulestionsandto seta floorofbasicfunctioncalapacitya,bovewhicheach life-yeasravedshouldcountforno lessandno morethanone(Sunstein1,997). 
Forpresenpturposesletus puttoonesidetheassociatedcontroversiaensdbeginwith thesimplesuggestionthatgovernmenshtouldattendto life-yearrsatherthanlives,and makeadjustmenitns thatfigurwehenthelivessavedeithercontainseverehealthimpairmentsorfallbelowa certainfloorT. husitwouldbenecessarytoseewhatcausesofdeath aremostcommonandtodevoteresourcetso addressintghemostcommoncauses.(On causesofdeaths,eeAppendixA.) Thequestionthenbecomeshowtheresultinjgudgments mightbe affecteidfwe attendtotheperceivedfactthatsomedeathsareespeciallybad. 
Thereis considerableevidencethatwhenvotingr,espondintgoquestionso,rengagin gin markebtehaviorp,eopleevaluatedifferendteathsdifferentOlyn. thisthereseemstobe generaalgreementI.summarizseomeoftherelevanetvidencehere. partofgovernmenshtowsdramatidcisparitieisnexpenditurpeesrlife-yeasraved(Tengs etal., 1996).Thusthemedianinterventioinnthetransportatisoenctorcosts$56,000/life year,whereasthemedianintheoccupationaslectoris $350,000/lifyeear.Iftheoccupationalinterventioanrsedividedintothosethatprevenftatalinjurieasndthosethatinvolve controolftoxicsubstancest,hemediansareevenmorestrikingdlyifferen$t6:8,000/life yearversus$l,400,000/lifyeear.Agencyperformanrceeflecttshedramaticalldyifferent degreesofattentiogniventodifferendteathsF.ortheFederaAlviationAdministratiotnh,e mediancostis $23,000/lifyeear;fortheConsumePrroducStafetyCommission$,68,000/ lifeyear;fortheNationalHighwayTraffiScafetyAdministratio$n78,,000/lifyeear;for theOccupationaSlafetyandHealthAdministratio$n8,8,000/lifyeear;andfortheEnvironmentPalrotectioAngencyn,o lessthan$7,600,000/liyfear. 
ThesenumberasrehighlysuggestiveT.heyfitwithbothordinaryintuitioanndpsychologicasltudiesinsofaras theyshowspecialconcernwithcancer-causinsgubstances, especiallyintheworkplacaendinairandwaterT.o be sure,thenumbershouldnotbe takentorevealpeople'sactualvaluationosfdifferenktindsofdeath.Governmenptolicy maywellreflecitnterest-gropuopwerm,ediasensationalis mig,norancee,rror-producing heuristicso,rotherfactorbsearingan imperfecctonnectiownithactualpreferenceasnd values.Perhapsmoreinterestingglyo,vernmenptolicymaybe affectebdythelengthof timebetweenlearningof therelevantdiseaseandthetimeof death.If,forexample, peoplewithcancerorAIDS havea longperiodoflifewiththedisease,itis predictable thattheywilllobbyhardforgovernmenhtelp.In anycase itis certainlryevealingthat suddenunanticipateddeaths(typicallyproducedbycarandairplanecrashes)receivefar less attentiotnhancancer-relaterdisks,whichare frequentliynvolvedin theworkof OSHA andtheEPA. thanothersS.everasltudieisndicatee,veniftheydonotprovet,hatpeopleareespecially aversetosomedeathsA. recensttudy(Savage,1993)concludetshatpeoplearewillingto paysignificantmlyoretocontributoelowertherisksofcancerthantheyarewillingto homefiresa,ndaviation(.As notedabove,governmeenxtpenditurpeesrlifeyearsaved correlatwe iththesefindings.) 
cancerh,eartdisease,andmotorvehicleaccident(s 1985 anotheorfthesethreecauses.Nearlythree-quartoerfspeoplerankeda cancerdeathas worsethana deathfromheartdiseaseormotorvehicleaccidentsT.heauthorcsonclude thatpeople"wouldbe willingtopayverysubstantisaul mstoavoidtheprotractepderiod ofphysicaalndpsychologicpaalinpriortocancerdeath"(id.,p. 68).Thesefindinghsave beentakentoshowthatpeoplearewillingtopaynearlytwiceas muchtoreduceheart diseasedeathsas motorvehicledeathsa,ndthattheyarewillingtopaynearlythreteimes as muchtoprevenatdeathfromcanceras a deathfrommotorvehicleaccident(sTolley, Kenkela,ndFabian,1994at339).ConsiderTable1: 
%Ranking disutilhitigyhest 
reduct(iionnmillioonfs£)° Causoefdeath Motoarccidents Heardtisease Cancer 
Usingsimiladrata,privatweillingnestsopaytoavertcancerdeaths(fromS1.5million to$9.5millionh) asbeenfoundtobe systematicahlliyghetrhanprivatwe illingnetssopay to avertunforeseeinnstandteaths(from$1 millionto $5 million)M.orespecifically (TolleyK,enkela,ndFabian,1994,at342)Table2: Tabl2e.Mortalvitayluebsycausoefdeath Catego(rpyerstatistliicfael) Unforesienesntadnetath asthma/bronchitis heardtisease emphysema lungcancer 1 1.3 1.25 1.4 1.5 
Valueestimatinems, illio$n,lowm,ediuamn,dhigh 
Thesefindingsstronglsyuggestthatpeopleviewsomedeathsas worsethanothersb,ut forpurposeosfbothpositivaendnormativweorkt,heyshouldbetakenwithmanygrains ofsalt.Itisnotclearthatpeopleingoodhealthhaveadequateinformatifornomwhichto assessdeathsfromdiversceauses.Thenotionofa "cancerdeath"mayproduceirrational andill-considerfedearp,erhapbsecausepeoplecalltomindespeciallystressfpuelriodosf painandsufferintghatarenotrepresentatiovre,becausethoseincidentmsayassume unduesalience(dwarfintgheveryfactofdeathitselfw)hentherelevanqtuestionisasked. I returtnothesepointsbelow. 
A studyof 1,000randomlcyhosenAmericancitizenshowedrelatedresult(sCropper & Subramanian19,95).Thestudyrevealedsignificadnitfferencienspeoples'preferences amongprogramtshatwouldsaveexactlythesamenumbeorflivesatexactlythesame cost.Thus55% ofrespondencthsosea programcontrolliningdustriailrpollutionover oneinvolvinsgmokingeducation5;4% chosea programreducinwgaterpollutionover oneinvolvincgoloncancerscreening54;%choseonecontrollinaugtoemissionosverone involvincgoloncancerscreening6;3% choseoneinvolvinigndustriailrpollutionover oneinvolvinpgneumonivaaccination6;5% chosea smokinbganintheworkplacoever controlosnradoninhomes;and72% chosena programbanningpesticideisnfruiotver oneregulatinrgadoninhomesA. patterenmergefsromthesechoicesI.mportanvtariables inthedisparitwyeretheeasewithwhichtheriskcanbe avoidedandtheextentowhich beneficiarioefstheprogramweretoblamefortheirdeaths. 
I conductead survey(see AppendixB) of 116UniversitoyfChicagolaw students, designedtoobtainfurtheinrformatioonn"risk-ristkradeoffsS."t2udentwsereaskedhow manyheartattackdeathswouldequal100deathsavedfromcancerS. ixty-thrseteudents answered100;sevenanswereldessthan100;forty-eigohrt4,0.2%,answeremdorethan 100.Studentws erealsoaskedhowmanydeathsfromairplanecrasheswouldequal100 deathsavedfromcancerF.ifty-studenorts4,4.4%,answered100.Thirty-twoor,27.4%, answereldessthan100.Thirty-foourr2,7.2%,answeremdorethan100. 
Studentwserealso askedto chooseamonga setofpolicyoptionsinvolvinhgowto allocate$100millionamongvariouslife-savin"gpolicyoptions.T"hefirsptolicyoption wouldinvolvespendintgheentirseumonAIDS-relatepdoliciesf,ora totalsavingof120 livesT.hesecondoptioninvolvesdpendintgheentirseumonsmoking-relapteodliciesf,or a totalsavingof200lives(thiswasbya significamntarginthebestpolicyintermosftotal livessavedandcostperlifesaved).Thethirdoptioninvolved$50 millionforAIDSrelatedpoliciesand$50millionforantismokinpgoliciesf,ora totalestimatesdavingsof 160lives.Thefourtohptionwasa mixture$:20 milliononAIDS-relatepdolicies,$25 millionon antismokinpgolicies,$20 millionon airportsecurityan,d $10 millionon nuclearpowerplantinspectionfso,ra totalsavingof79.5livesT.hefiftohptioninvolved $50millionforpreventi nlegadingestiobnychildreinntheinnercityand$50millionon smokinpgoliciesf,orestimatesdavingosf150livesT.helastoptioninvolve$d50million forpreventinlegadingestioannd$50millionforAIDS policiesf,orestimatesdavingsof 110lives.Herearetheresults: 
Respondenwtsereaskedf,inallyab,outwhethetrochlorinatderinkinwgaterT.heywere toldthatchlorinatiocnan causea smallcancerrisk,butthatitalso canprevenatcute gastrointestiinllanlessw,hichcanalsobefatalT.heywereaskedwhethetrochlorinatehe waterifthelifetimfeatalitryiskswerethesame.Thirty-nipneercenstaidyes,29.7%said Tabl3e. policoyption livesaved/cost firscthoice 
weighted second rankinofg choice options AIDSprevention 120/51m00illion smokinprgevention200/1$00million AIDSandsmoking 160/$5m0illioonn 
each AIDS,smokinaigr,- 79.5/Sm20illioonn porstecurity, AIDS,$25 nucleaprower millioonnsmokplanitnspections ing$,20million onairport securit$y10,milliononplanitnspection lead 150/S50 ingestion/smokimngillioonneach leadingestion/AID11S0/$5m0illioonn each lastchoice no,and30.5%hadnopreferencTeh.eywerealsoaskedaboutmanydeathsfrommicrobial illnesswouldequal 100deathsfromcancer.Ofthe116respondent5s6,,or47.5%,said 100;31,or25.4%,saidmorethan100; exactlythesamenumbersaidlessthan100. 
ThereareseveranlotablefeatureosfthisstudyF.irstis thefactthatsubstantinalumbers of respondenttshoughtthatcancerdeathswereworsethanheartattacks;substantial numberosfrespondentssaidthesamethingforairplanedeathsB.utmanyrespondents alsothoughtthatairplanedeathswereworsethancancerdeathsT.huswhilecancerdeaths weredisfavorecdomparedto heartattackdeaths,therewas no generalpreferencaes betweenairplaneand cancerdeaths.This maybe becauseairplanedeathsseemmore terrifyinigtm;aybebecauseairplanedeathsseemmorelikelytobefallandmoretangible totherespondenttshemselve(smostofwhomwereintheirtwenties)i;tmaybe because cancerdeathsandheartattackdeathsinvolveo,n average,olderpeople,andthusmore life-yearcsan be savedbysavingpeoplefromairplanedeaths;itmaybe becauseheart attackandcancerdeathsseemmorevoluntarayndcontrollable. 
Perhapsthemoststrikinfgindingof the"policyoptions"studyis thatonlyabouta quarterofstudentcshosetheoptionthatwouldsavethemostlives.Livessavedwasnot evena primaryfactorin choice.Surprisingltyh,ecorrelatiobnetweenthelivessaved numbearndthemeanratingforeachpolicyis only0.512,thatis,livessavedexplainsonly about25% ofthevariancein meanratingsA. correlatiobnetweenlivessavedandeach subject'sratingforthepolicywas small,at 0.159,whichmeansthatonly2.5% ofthe variancein individuaslubjectresponsescanbe explainedbyreferencteolivessaved. 
Itis also interestintgofinda generalconclusionthataddressintgwoproblembsyhalf is bettetrhancuringonlyoneprobleminful-l accompaniebdya judgmentthataddressingtoomanyproblemast smallfractionesach(spreadingtoothin)is worsestill.AIDS policieswereperceivedas importanbtu,tlessimportanthtansmokinga,ndapparentlayre mostattractivoenlyinconjunctiownithsomeotherproblemT.hemostpopularoptio-n combiningsavingchildrenin the innercityand would-besmoker-s mayhavebeen well-regardebdecauseitinvolveda largenumberoflife-yearasndalso reflecteddistributionaclonsiderationAs.IDS-relatedpolicieswerein one sensea distinctluynpopular optiona,s canbe seenfromthefactthatonlyonerespondenftavoreadnAIDS-onlychoice (thoughthischoicewasprettygoodintermsofaggregatleivessavedandalso life-years saved)andthefactthattheinnercitychildrenplusAIDS policiesoptiondidmuchworse, as firscthoice,thattheinnercitychildrenplussmokinpgoliciesoptionO.ntheotherhand, the"lowestlives"optionwas also themostfrequentlcyitedlastchoice,andoptionfive receivedsignificanstupportas a secondchoice.Thereis a greatdealof "noise"in the 
Fromthisdiscussiona generalconclusionemergesM.uchexistingevidencesuggests thatpeopleviewsomedeathsas especiallybadandthatpeoplearewillingtodo andpay a nontrivialmountto avoidsuchdeathsT.hesejudgmentasppearto helpaccountfor currendtisparitieisn expenditurepserlife-yeasraved.Buttheactualgroundsforthese judgmentrsemainuncleara,nditis also unclearwhethetrhosegroundso,nceidentified, can survivescrutinyA. greatdeal ofpositiveandnormativweorkremainsto be done. Withthatqualificationle,tus proceedtoexaminesomeoftheunderlyinqguestions. cues Inidentifyinwghatmakescertaindeathsseemespeciallybad,a naturapllacetolookis in thepsychologicalilteratursehowingvariationbsetweenlayandexperjtudgmentosfrisk. Someofthesevariationsstemfromheuristidcevicesthatmakeordinarpyeoplepeculiarly pronetofactuaelrrorB.utsomeofthesevariation(sitiswidelysaid)comefromthewide rangeofvariabletshatordinarpyeoplethinkrelevanitnassessingriskstolifeandhealth (see,e.g.,Slovic,1991).Expertstendto focuson aggregatleivesorlife-yearast stake. Ordinarpyeople- onthenow-conventionacacloun-t lookata rangeofmorequalitative variablesT.heycarenotsimplyaboutnumberoflivesatriskbutalso aboutwhethetrhe riskis equitablydistributepdo,tentiallcyatastrophico,ntrollablve,oluntariliyncurred, and so forthH.ere is a representativcoempilatio n(developedfromthe summaryin Margolis1,996): 
Atthisstageitisnotclearwhethearndtowhatextenthesefactorasctuallyaccountfor judgmenatndchoice;thepsychologicawl orkshouldbe seenas suggestivheypotheses rathetrhanas demonstrationMso. reoveri,tis readilyapparentthatsomeofthesefactors Tabl4e. 
aggravating familiarity new personcaolntrol uncontrollable voluntariness involuntary mediaattention focussoendbymedia equity unfairdliystributed children childraetnspeciralisk futugreenerations atrisk reversibility irreversible dreadedness especialdlryeaded identifiaboiflviitcytims victimknsown accompanbyeinngefits benefciltesar humaonrnaturoarligin humaonrigin trusintapplicabinlestitutions lackoftrust timinofgeffects delayed understanding mechaniosmrpsrocenssot 
understood pashtistory majoorrminoarccidents mitigating old controllable voluntary ignorbedymedia fairldyistributed childrneontatrisk notatrisk reversible notespeciadllryeaded victimnostidentifiable benefnitostvisible creatbedynature gooddeaolftrust immediate mechanoisrmprocess 
understood nopasatccidents arenothelpfuiln suggestinwghichdeathsshouldbe treatedas especiallybad.On the contrarmy,anyofthemareeasilyaccountedforunderthe"decentlylivablelifeyears saved"criterionM.ediaattentiofno,rexamplei,s closelyconnectewd iththewell-known availabilithyeuristiacn,dthefactthatthemediaarefocussedona certainriskdoesnot suggestthatgovernmesnhtouldgivethatriskspecialattentiotnoo.Pasthistorsyhouldbe similarluynderstooidt;is a roughproxyforfuturperobabilitnyo,ta reliablgeuidetothe futureS.o too withtrustI.f peopledo nottrustan institutiona'sssurancest,heyare thinkintghattheriskismoreseriousthantheyarebeingtold.Andifchildreanndfuture generationarseatriskm,orelifeyearsareatstake. 
Butsomeofthesefactordso suggestreasonswhypeoplemightsee somedeathsas worthoyfmoreattentiotnhanothersD. eathsthatareparticular"lydreadedm"ayhave aggravatincgharacteristidcse;athsthatareconcentrateamdongsociallydisadvantaged groupsmighbte badnotbecausetheyaredistinctblyadtoexperiencbe,utbecausethey reflecpterceiveddistributio ninaljusticetshatpolicymakemrsightrytocounteracTth.e notionosfvoluntarineasnsdcontroml ayalsoberelevanitnsofaars theysuggestthatsome deathsareaccompaniebdyterroro,rareespeciallypoignanotrdisturbinagndtherefore deservinogfunusuaplublicconcern. 
Thereis,howeverr,easontoquestionthenow-conventiovniaelwthatqualitativfeactors ofthiskindinfactexplainpeople'sdisagreemewntithexpertasboutcertainrisksofdeath (see theinstructidviescussioninMargolis1,996,on whichI drawhere).Certainliytis puzzlingto findthatpeopletreatas quiteseriousdeath-riskthsataremicroscopically smallas a statisticmal atterw,hilerisksthatarestatisticalmlyuchlargeraretreatedas "justa partoflife."No doubtitispossiblethatpeople'sjudgmentasboutriskseveritayre a producotfsomeofthemorequalitativceonsideratiolnisstedabove;thisidealeadstothe widespreavdiewthatordinarpyeoplehavea "richerr"ationalittyhando expertss,ince ordinarpyeoplelookatthenaturaendcausesofdeathn,otsimplyataggregatdeeathsat issue.Butitis also possiblethatan apparentl"yrich"conclusionthata certainriskis an absenceofordinarcyontextuaclues,on a failurteosee thattradeoffarseinevitably beingmade,on heuristidcevicesthatarenotwell-adaptetdotheparticulacrontexto,r insteadon a rangeofconfusinogr confuse dideasthatpeoplecannotfullyarticulate. Whenpeoplesay,forexamplet,hattheriskofnuclearpowerisveryserioust,heymaybe respondintgotheirintensevisceralconcernp,ossiblybasedon (uninformesdt)atistical judgmentasboutlikelylivesatriskandontheirfailurteosee(astheydoinothercontexts) thathatriskisaccompaniebdya rangeofsocialbenefitTsh.efactthatnuclearpowera,nd applicatioonfpesticidesp,roducebenefitass wellas risksmaynot"registero"nthelay viewscreenan, dthismayhelpproducae "highrisk"judgmen(tseeAlhakamaindSlovic, 1994). 
ConsidersomeotherexamplesI.tisclearthattheriskofcancerdeathfromtheuseof X-raytechnologdyoesnotnowproducaenintenspeublicoutcryp,erhapbsecausepeople knowthatthetechnologcyontainbsenefitass well;thusit is falseto saythatcancerrelatedrisksalwaysproduceintenspeublicconcernF.orautomobilaeccidentss,imilarly, people'suninformestdatisticjauldgmentmsaynotlead to overestimatoefsriskorto viscerajludgmentosfgreatconcernp,artlybecausepeoplearewellawarethatautomobile travepl roducehsighbenefitass wellas costs.Thusitis possiblethata judgmentthata certainriskofdeathis unusuallbyadis nota "rich"qualitativaessessmenbtutan(unreliable)intuitiobnasedon a rapidbalancingthatprominentilnycludepserceivedlivesat stakeand theperceivedpresenceof smallor no benefitasssociatedwiththeriskproducinagctivityW. henf,orexamplen, uclearpower"codes"as a seriousriskt,hismay be becausethebenefitasreofftheviewscreena,ndthepotentiaflorcatastrophloeoms large,perhapbsecauseofheuristidcevices(suchas availabilityA).ndwhenpeopleare askedtosaywhytheybelievethatsomeriskis especiallybad,theiranswermsaynotbe trulyexplanatorbyu,tinsteadposthocrationalizatioonfsmoreviscerajludgment(bsased partlyon faultyquantitativasesessmentsI)n. otherwords,thereasonsgivenmaynot actuall yliebehindthejudgmentps;eoplearenotalwaysgoodatgivingaccountosfwhat underlietsheirjudgment(sMargolis1,996). 
Allthisraisesthepossibilittyhatpeople'sreferencteos"controla"nd"involuntariness" do notexplaintheactualbasisoftheirjudgmentTs.hispossibilitryemaintsobe investigatedandtestedF. orthemomenltetus putthisissuetoonesideandassumethatthe psychologiceavl idencdeoessuggestthatcertainrisksareperceiveads badverymuchfor themorequalitativreeasontshataretypicalliynvokedT.heimportaqnutestioniswhichof themjustifieas qualificatioonfthebasiccriterioonfdecentlylivablelife-years. Byitselfthefactthatpeopleperceivceertainrisksanddeathsas especiallybadshouldnot be decisiveforpurposeosfpolicyS.uppose,forexamplet,hatordinarjyudgmentsstem fromheuristidcevicesthatproducepredictablfeactuamlistakess,o thatbothprivate intolaw(Sunstein1,993;Bessette1,996). 
Thusthequestionbecomeswhethecritize njudgmenttshatcertaindeathsareespecially badcansurvivea processofreflectioMn.yconclusio nis thatunderstooidna certainway, thenotionsofdreadeddeathsandunfairldyistributeddeathsarefullyreasonablea,nddo deservea roleinpolicy.Butthespecialconcernsaboutdeathsstemminfgrominvoluntarilyrunanduncontrollabrliesksraiseseriousdoubtsa;s frequentliynvokedt,heydo not justifyaccordingadditionacloncerntodeathsthat"code"as a productofinvoluntaroyr uncontrollabrliesksA.tmost,theysuggestthatgovernmenmtightspendmoreresources ondeathswherethecostofrisk-avoidanicseespeciallyhigh,anddevotelessattentiotno deathswherethecostof risk-avoidancise especiallylow.Particularliynterestinigs a questionleftimplicitin thepsychologicasltudiesH:owto handledeathsthathavehigh externalities. 3.1. Dread Itis oftensaid,onthebasisofevidencelikethatoutlinedabove,thatespeciallydreaded deathsdeservespecialattentionD.eathsfromcancerandAIDS fallinthiscategoryT.here isnothinagtallmysterioutosthisidea.Theunderlyinpgointis thattherelevandteathsare especiallygruelingand hencethereis a kindof "pain and sufferinpgremium- "not merelya lifelost,butanantecedenpteriodofintensemotionaalndphysicadlifficultays well.Thisperiodofintensedifficultmyighitmposecostsonthosewiththeillnessandon friendasndfamilymemberass well.Suddenu,nanticipateddeathscanbe dreadedtooconsidertheextremeluynpleasanitdeaofdyinginan airplanecrash.Butthedreadhere stemsfromsomefactor(perhapsterrord) ifferenftromand muchshortetrhantheextendedperiodofsufferintghatprecedessomedeathsT.husit mightbe concludedthat dreadeddeathsdeservespecialattentioinnaccordancewiththedegreeofsufferintghat behaviorand thedemandforregulatorpyrotectioanre affectedC. ertainlygovernment shouldnotincorporatjuedgmentbsasedon mistake-s a pointthatraisesdoubtsabout someusesofwillingnestsopayas a basisforregulatorpyolicyT.o theextenthatWTP is a functioonffactuaelrrorsg,overnmenshtouldnotrelyon it.Theappropriatreemedy is informpeopleof relevantfacts.This generalpointsuggeststhatit is importantto examinenotsimplywhatdeathspeopleespeciallyabhor,butalso whythosedeathsare abhorrenatn,dwhethetrheunderlyinrgeasonscansurvivescrutinyTh.eAmericanpolitical systemaspirestobe a deliberativdeemocracyin,whichcitizenpreferenceasresupposedtobe subjecttoa processofreflectioTnh.eyarenottobe automaticalltyranslated precedesthem. 
A specialproblemwithcancerdeathsisthatpeopleliketohaveupward-slopinugtility. It is particularlbyad to be in a situationin whichthingswill constantlgyetworse (LoewensteinandSicherman1,991).Withcancerdeathst,heslopegoesdownwarfdairly consistentulyntilthepointofdeath.Sincethetimesequenceofdisutilitmy atterasgreat deal,cancerdeathsareassociatedwithespeciallyseverehedoniclosses. 
As reasonsforaccordingspecialconcernto deathsprecededbypainand suffering, theseideasseemsound.ButsomequalificationissnecessaryF.irsts,omerecentworkin psychologhyas shownthatpeopleoftenfearcertainrisksex ante,butwhenthoserisks cometofruitionth,eyareabletoadaptmuchbetterthantheybelievedpossible,andthe utilit yloss is less severethantheyanticipate(dLoewensteinandSchkade,forthcoming; Kahneman1,996;see alsoKahnemanW,akkera,ndSarim,forthcominNg)o.tablyp,eople thinkthattheywillrespondmuchmorenegativeltyoa positiveresultforHIV thanthey do in fact(see Sieff,Dawes,and Loewensteinf,orthcomingT)h. uspeoplemaydread certaindiseasesmorethanthey"should"in thesensethatthelivedexperiencoef the diseaseis less horriblethanwas thoughbteforethefact.If true,thispointmakesit necessaryat leastto questionwhetheerx antefearjustifiesthedegreeofattentiotnhat uninformepdeopleseekfromgovernmenitf,ex postadaptationis possible. 
Second,somepainandsufferinmgaywellbe aninevitablpeartofa desirablpeeriodin whichpeople,includingfamiliesc,anplanandadaptthemselvetsothefactofdeathand achievea measureofpeacewithit.On thiscount,a suddenunanticipateddeathmaybe worse.The desirablefeatureosf a deaththatis notsudden,and forwhichplanning becomespossible,maynotregisterwhenpeopleare asked,in surveyst,o comparean automobildeeathwitha cancerdeath. 
Thirdi,tseemssensibletosaythattheperiodofpainandsufferintghatprecedesdeath ough-t in all butthemostunusualcases- tobe farless importanrte,lativelsypeaking, thanthefactofdeathitselfT.hussomethinagppearstohavegonewrongifpeoplesaythat theywouldliketodevote(say)threetimesas muchtopreventincgancerdeathsas they wouldliketo devotetopreventindgeathsfromautomobilaeccidentsP. erhapstheyare focussingtoointenseloyn certainvividinstanceosfintensesufferinPge.rhapsthevaluationwouldnotsurvivae modestdegreeofinformatioandcriticarleflectioPne.rhaptshe factthattherelevanstcaleis unboundedandin dollarsproducesdistortions. 
Thesepointsuggestthepossibilitoyfrelyinngotonresponsetsosurveyquestionsa,nd perhapsnotevenonmarkebtehaviorb,utinsteadona kindof"deliberativoepinionpoll" thatseekstoinformanswerasndtoallowan exchangeofopinion(seeFishkin1995).On thisview,itis importanntottoaskpeopletooffetrheirquick,likelyuninformredeactions tohypotheticqaulestion(showmuchworseis deathfromcancerthandeathfroma heart attack?)b,utinsteadtooffeurnderlyinfgactsandtotakeaccountofinformeadnswersA. s noted,an extendedperiodbeforedeathcan actuallycontainbenefitss,inceit allowsa periodforgriefandadjustmenMt.uchbetterresponsemsighbte expectedafterpeopleare givena solidbasis forassessingtherelevantdeaths,formakingcomparisonsa,nd for puttintgheperiodthatprecedesdeathincontextwiththedeathitself. 
Somerisksmightbe, orbe thoughttobe, inequitabldyistributeadb,oveall becausethe victimasredisproportionatmeleymberosfsociallydisadvantagegdroupsC.ertaindeaths mightf,orexampleb,e concentrateadmongpoorpeople,African-Americaonrsh,omosexuals.Considertheriskofleadpaintpoisoningsufferebdyinnercitychildreno,rthe riskofAIDS, faceddisproportionatbelyyAfrican-Americaansswellas homosexuals. Citizensor electedrepresentativmesaythinkthatinequitabldyistributerdisksofdeath deservespecialattentiofnromgovernmenHte.retherelevandteathsarebadnotbecause eachoneisespeciallybadtoexperiencbe,utbecausetheriessocialconcernaboutthefact thata certaincauseofdeathfallsdisproportionatoenlmyemberosfcertainsocialgroups. 
Whensuchsocialconcernexistsa,ndwhenitis notobjectionabolenconstitutionoral othergroundsit,is entirellyegitimatfeorofficialtsorespondT.husregulatorshsouldbe permittetdogivedistributionwaelighttsoriskswhosedistributioninalcidencies especiallytroublesomTeh.epointsupportsspecialefforttso controAlIDS; environmental riskslikeasthmaw,hichareconcentrateamdonginnercitychildrena;ndperhapsthe spreadofdiseaseswhoseincidencies concentrataemdongwomen. 
Of coursethisidearaisesfamiliairssuesaboutappropriatreedistributpivoeliciesA. riskpolicywithdistributionwaelightiss an in-kindredistributisvcehemel,ikelymore effectivtehanstrategieosfredistributtiohnrougrhegulationbu,tlesseffectivper,obably, thanredistributivoina cash.It is also possiblethatanydistributionwaelightinwgill subjectthepoliticamlarkettopressurefsromwell-organizgedroupsw,hichwillpredictablyoffeerquitablaergumenftsortheirpreferreodutcomep,erhapasttheexpenseofthe weakestandleastorganizedmemberosfsocieyyF.inallyi,tis hardlyclearthatin-kind benefitsshouldgenerallbyedistributienda waythatbenefitshelesswell-ofIft.doesnot seemto makesenseto saythathomosexualasndwomenf,orexamples,houldreceive bettetrransportatiboent,tedrentaclare,morefoodstampsa,ndbettehrousingthanheterosexualasndmen.In thesecircumstancpesu,blicjudgmentasbouttheneedfordistributionawleightisn riskregulatiomnayneglectthepossibilitayndeventhefactthat redistributeivfefortasrebeingmadethrougohtherroutesM.yminimacllaimis thatif thereis a publicjudgmenitn favorof accordinga distributionwaelightto a certain death-reductpioonlicya,ndifthatjudgmenits notunconstitutioonraoltherwisiellegitimate,policymakershouldnotbe barredfromrespectintghatjudgment. 3.3. Voluntariness Peopleseemtoperceivveoluntariilnycurrerdisksas lesstroublesomtheaninvoluntarily incurrerdisks.Considerdiversepublicreactiontso airplanecrashesand automobile crashesO. rconsidetrhefactthatobaccoisbyfarthelargesstourceofpreventabdleeaths in theUnitedStates.Whydo we notdevotemuchmoreof ourregulatoreyffortto reducingsmokingT?hereasonseemsto lie ina judgmentthatsmokingis a voluntary activityandhencetheresultindgeathsarelesstroublesomtehanothersortsofdeaths. Herepeoplehavevoluntarialyssumedtherelevanrtisks(thereis ofcoursea detailed literaturoenthisgeneratlopic;see,e.g.,Viscusi,1992). 1.Puzzles:highcostofavoidancerathetrhaninvoluntarineIstsi?stemptintgothinkthat theapparenltaypreferencfeoraccordingreaterweightto "involuntarryi"sksto life requiressignificaqnutalificatioonfthecriterioonflivesorlife-yearsasved.Buta simple referencteovoluntarineisfst,akentosuggestsomethinsgpecialabout"layrationality," raisesmanypuzzlesT.hemostimportanprtoblemisthatitis notsimpletoknowwhena riskis voluntariliyncurred".Voluntarinesms"aybe entirelaybsentin thecase of an unforeseeabcleollisionwithan asteroidb; utvoluntarineisssnot,in thecases under consideratioann, all-or-nothimngatterIn.steaditis a matteorfdegreeR.eturnto the conventiontahloughtthatairplancerasheasre"involuntarayn"dautomobilcerashemsore "voluntaryC.e"rtainliytwouldbe possibletoseetherisksfromairtraveals voluntarily run;peoplehavea choiceaboutwhethetroflya,ndwhentheydo flyt,heypaya certain amountfora certainpackage,includingrisksof varioussorts.The sameis trueof automobilseafet-yanditis notinanywaylesstrueh,owevedrisparattehetwokinds ofrisksmay"seem."Perhappseoplearerespondintgotheperceivefdactthattheyhave no controolverthepilot'sbehaviorw, hereastheyhaveconsiderablceontroolverautomobilesafetysincetheyarethemselvedsriversB.utairlinersespondtomarkeftorces, includintghemarkeftorsafetya,ndmanypeopleinjuredinautomobilaeccidentasrenot atfaulta,ndthusalongthedimensioonfvoluntarinetshsisis hardlya crispdistinction. Thedifferenbcetweenthetworisksis hardlyso categoricaals tojustif yan assessment thattheyfallonpolesofsomevoluntariness-involuntadriivniedsesI.ndeedi,tisnotclear evenwhatismeanbtythesuggestiotnhatoneisvoluntarayndtheotherisnot.Something elseappearstounderlitehatsuggestion. considetrhequestionwhethewrorkeresxposedtocancerrisksarevoluntariolyrinvoluntarilsyo exposed.If workerdso notknowaboutsuchrisk-s iftheylackrelevant informat-iowneseemtohaveaneasycaseofinvoluntarinTeshsu.sitmakessensetosay thatrisksareruninvoluntarwilyhenthepeoplerunnintghemdo notknowaboutthem. Lackofadequateinformatiponrovideas legitimatcease fora judgmenotfinvoluntary exposurteoriskB.utofcourseinformatiiotnselfcanbe obtaineadtsomecost,pecuniary orotherwisWe. earethusdealingi,ncasesofthiskindw,ithhighcostsofriskavoidance, inthedistinctivfeormofhighcostsofacquirinrgelevanitnformation. 
Seconds,upposethatpeoplewhoareexposedtoa certainriskareawareoftheriskb,ut arenotina contracturaellationwiththerisk-producMera.nyvictimosfpollutionarein thispositionr;ecallthatinsurveyasirpollutionis a particulasrourceofpublicconcern. Peoplein Los Angelesmaywellknowthattheyfacehighlevelsof smog.Arethey exposedinvoluntariIlfyw?econcludethattheyare,wemaymeanthata riskis incurred involuntarwilyhenandinthesensethatitis typicallvyeryexpensivfeorpeopletoavoid it- andwhensomeonelsecanreducetherisksmorecheaplyH. erea claimthattherisk isfaced"involuntarimlya"ymeanthathosewho"run"theriskcanreduceitonlyatvery highcost,atleastcomparetdothosewho"producet"herisk.(Thequotatiomnarksare necessaryforobviousCoasianreasons.O)ritis possiblethatwemeanthatonnonutilitariangroundst,hepeopleexposedtotheriskhavea moralentitlemetnotbe freefromit, atleastiftheyhavenotexplicitlsyoldit. 
Butturnnowtoa thirdclassofcases,involvinagwagepackageorcontractthatdoes includecompensatiofnortherelevantrisks.Assumingthatpoint,we mightwantto distinguisbhetweentwodifferenptossibilitiesIn. a case ofa high-leveslcientistk,nowledgeableaboutrelevanrtisksandinvolvedinworkthathe findsrewardingp,eoplemay wellconcludethatwe havean instanceofvoluntarines(sIn. thesamecategorycan be foundthecase of an astronautB.)utpeoplemightnotsaythesameabouta low-level workewrhodoesnotlikehisworkatall (cf.Anderson1,993).Whatdistinguishtehsetwo cases?Ifknowledgies presento,rifthecompensatiopnackageincludespaymenftorthe relevanrtisk,itis notclearhowthetwodifferT.heunderlyinjugdgmenmtustbe thatthe compensatioins inadequatep,erhapbsecausebackgrounidnequalithyasproduceda wage packagethatseemsunfairevenifvoluntarilcyhosenbytheparties. 
Fromthisdiscussionitseemsreasonableto speculatethatanyjudgmentthata riskis run"involuntariliys"probablybasedon 1) a lack ofknowledgeof therisk,or,more accuratelyh,ighcostsofobtaininignformatioanbouttherisk,2) a beliefthatinformation tooneside,itwouldbe verycostlyforpeopletoavoidtherisk,or3) a beliefthattherisk is unaccompaniebdycompensatinbgenefitsn,otwithstandianbgeliefthatthecontracits insomesenseworthsigningI.tmayseemhardtomakesenseof3); whatmighbte atwork isajudgmentthatbackgrounidnequalitieasreproducintgherelevanbtargain(notbyitself a goodreasontodisruptthedeal),orperhapsa beliefthatworkerasrecompetintgotheir collectivedetrimenatn,d an agreemenntotto competewouldbe in theirbestinterests (Frank,1983).On thisview,thequestionwhethearriskis runvoluntariloyrnotis often nota categoricaolnebutinsteada matterof degree,associatedwithinformatiocnost, risk-reducticoonst,andtheexistencoernotofaccompanyinbgenefitOs.fcoursethereare interestinbgackgrounqduestionsaboutwhyand whena risk"codes" as voluntaryor involuntaruyn; doubtedltyheanswerdependsa greatdealonheuristidcevicesandselectiveattention. Death-riskms ayseem"voluntarilyru"nwhenobserverdsonotapproveofthepurposefor whichpeopleruntherelevanrtisks,andinvoluntarirluynwhenobservertshinkthatthe purposeforwhichtheriskis runis laudable.Itis predictabltehatpeoplewillnotwantto pourenormoutsaxpayerresourceisntolowerintgherisksassociatedwithsky-divinegv,en ifthedollars/life-yesaarvsedratiois quitegood.By contrastit,is doubtfutlhatpeople thinkthatit is wrongto spendenormousresourceson thepreventioonf deathfrom childbirtohr beinga policeofficere,venthoughthedecisionto havea childis (with appropriatqeualificationvs)oluntaryan,d so too withthedecisionto becomea police officerP.eoplemaythinkthatwhentheappealorpurposeoftheactivitiys associatedwith its veryriskinessr,esourcesshouldnotbe devotedto risk-reductioAnt. leastthisis plausiblewhentheriskis an independengtoodorpartofthebenefiotftheactivityA.nd itis easytoimaginea beliefthatsomeactivitie-sunsafesex,cigarettsemokin-g arelike thesky-divincgase,perhapsbecausetheriskis sometimepsartofthebenefitp,erhaps becausetherisksarenotincurrefdora purposethatobserverfsindworthyorvaluable. 
It mightseemthatthisconsiderati-onthepurposeforwhichtheriskis incurre-d overlapswithor is evenidenticatlo thequestionwhethetrherearehighcostsofriskavoidanceW.henthecostsarelow,as insky-divintgh, epurposemightseeminadequate. Butonreflectiotnhetwoideasarehardlythesame.Itmaywellbe thatfailingtosky-dive, forinadequatpeurposes. 
Relatedlya,irplaneaccidentsmayseem differenftromautomobileaccidentsnotbecausetheformearrelessvoluntarayn,dnotbecauseofhighercostsofriskavoidanceb,ut becausethevictimsofairplaneaccidentsarelessblameworthtyhanthevictimsofautomobileaccidentsi,nthesensethatthedeathis nota producotftheirownnegligencoer misconducItn.thecaseofanairplanedisasterw, eathecronditionms, echanicaflailureo,r piloterrorare likelycauses;in thecase of an automobileaccidenti,t is morelikely (thoughnotof coursecertaint)hatthevictimcouldhaveavoideddeaththroughmore carefudlrivingT.hepointis crude,sincemanyvictimsofautomobilaeccidentsarenot driversa,nd manydriversin accidentsdo notbehavenegligentlyB.ut theperceived differencien,a significanntumberofcases,mayunderliean apparenjtudgmenotf"voluntarinesst"hatis reallya judgmenatboutresponsibilitayndblameworthiness. a riskqualifieass involuntarryaisesmanyofthequestionrsaisedbythequestionwhether governmenshtouldregulatethemarkeatt all.A riskmightbe characterizeads involuntarilyrunbecauseaffectedpeoplelack relevantinformatiobne;causethetransactions costsofbargaininagrehigh;becausetherisksshouldbe seentoamountoexternalities; ample)workerasre in a prisoner'dsilemmabestsolvedthroughlaw; or becausesome motivationaolr cognitivedefectmakessuccessfuslolutionsthroughmarketusnlikely. Theseofcourseareamongtheconventiongalroundfsorregulatioinnthefirsitnstance. Whena riskseemsvoluntarayn,dnotworthyofsubstantiralegulatorryesourcest,heterm "voluntaryis"servingas a placeholdefroran argumentthatthereis no sufficiengtround forgovernmenacttionb,ecausetheaccompanyinbgenefitasrehighortherisk-reduction costsarelow,andbecausemarkeatrrangementtaskeadequateaccountofthesefacts. 
Shouldvoluntarirlyunrisksofdeathreceivenopublicattentionon,thegroundthatthe relevanpteoplehavealreadyreceivedcompensationW?emighitmaginea death-ristkobe incurrevdoluntarilwyhenan informepdersondecidedtoincuritinlightofitscostsand benefitsS.uppose,forexample,thatsomeonepurchasesa smallcarwithfewersafety featureso,rdecidestobecomea boxer,an astronauto,ra policeofficeirn a dangerous neighborhooIdf.a deathresultfsromsucha choice,itmightseemthatthechooserhasno legitimatgeroundforcomplaintt;herehas beenex antecompensatiofnortherisk.But eveninsuchcases,itis notclearthatgovernmenlatcksa role.Ifgovernmencatnreduce a seriousriskatlowcost,andthuseliminatdeeathsi,tshoulddo so eveniftherewas ex antecompensatiofnortherelevanrtiskT.hereisa generaplointhere.Sometimeosbserversconfusetwoquitediffereqnutestions(:1) Shouldpeoplebe bannedfromrunninag certainrisk,whentheyhaverunthatriskvoluntaril(y2?) Shouldgovernmeantttemptto reducea certainrisk,whenpeoplehaverunthatriskvoluntarilAy?negativaenswerto questio n(1) doesnotanswerquestion(2). 
Fromthispointweshouldconcludtehata layjudgmentthata riskis"voluntarysh"ould notbedecisiveA. betteurnderstandionfgwhatfactorusnderliaendsupportthajtudgment shouldbe usedforpurposeosfregulatorpyolicyT.hebasiccriterioonfdecentllyivable lifeyearsmightt,henb, eadjustedupwardwhenthoseatrisklackrelevanitnformatioorn whenthecostsofrisk-avoidanacreeespeciallyhigh- ordownwarwdhenthoseatrisk havetheinformatiaonndwhenthecostsofrisk-avoidanacreelow. 3.4. Control Peoplefindriskslessacceptabliefthoserisksdo notseemtobe withintheircontrol. Automobilaeccidentmsayseemlesstroublesomtehanairlinedisasterpsartlyforthis reason. 
Theperceiveddifferenbcetween"uncontrollabalen"d"controllablde"eathmsaystem froma desiretoreducethefearofdyingP.eoplewhofeelincontroallsofeellessafraid. Thisfeelingmaybe irrationablu,titis notnecessariliyrrationtaoltrytominimizaen irrationfaleelingO.rtheperceiveddifferenmceayinvolvae distinctivuetilitlyossattime ofdeathP.erhapas deathfromanairplancerashisespeciallyhorrifyibnegcauseofone's feelingastthetimethecrashis happeningU.ndoubtedlsyomeofthehorroartairplane crashehsastodowithempathetiidcentificatwiointhpeopleinthatpositionT.husitwould bereasonablteoputa specialpremiu monsomedeathisfinformepdeoplebelievethathe risk-reductiroenducesocialfearina reasonablweay,orthattheterroarndpanicinthe periodprecedindgeathdeservesspecialattentioEnm.piricawl orkwouldbe necessartyo showwhethetrheseareinfactwidelyheldjudgments. 
Thereferencteo controils probablybasedaboveall on theperceivedpossibilitoyf avoidingdeathaltogethetrhoughone'sownacts.Butthisidealinkscontrowlithvoluntarinessa,nd it shouldbe clearfromthepreviousdiscussionthatthequestionis not whetherriskscanbe controllebdu,thowexpensivietis forindividuatlsocontrotlhem. Peoplecancontrotlheirsubjectiotnoairplane-relatreidsksbyrefusintgoflyp;eoplecan controtlheirsubjectiotnorisksfromcoal-firepdowerplantsbylivinginareasservedby solarenergyT.hequestio nisnotwhethearriskcanbecontrolleodrnot,butatwhatcost itis controllablaen,dwithwhatbenefititsis hardtocontrolI.ndividuatlsendto"frame" riskcontroiln"allornothingt"ermsd,ependinogntheparticulatremporealventonwhich theyfocus.Butthisis an obviousformof selectiveattentionA.s withvoluntariness, "controllabilitisya" conclusionmorethanitis an analytitcool.Itis besttolookatthe factortshataccountfora judgmentthata riskis notcontrollable. 
" " 3.5.Highexternalitiecsa,tastroph,easnd meaning Thepsychologiceavlidencesuggestst,houghittdoesnotsquarel yidentifayn, important andrelevanftactS:omedeathpsroducuenusuallhyighexternalitiiens,thesensethatthey generatwe idesprealdosses,includintghosestemminfgromempathayndfeari,na way thatleadstopredictabpleecuniarayndnonpecuniarcyosts(seeZeckhauser1,996,foran illuminatindigscussionofcatastropheCs)o.nsiderf,orexamplet,hedeathofthePresident oftheUnitedStatesa, deaththatimposesa widerangeofcostsandthattaxpayerinsvest significanretsourcetsopreventA. parallelcanbe foundintherelativellyargelevelof resourcedsevotedtopreventtheassassinatioonfmanyimportanptublicofficialBs.utthe pointishardlylimitetdothehighesptublicofficialAs.nairplanheijackinogrcrashp, artly becauseitis likelytobe well-publicizemd,ayproducelargeexternalitiienstheformof empathayndfearI.tmayevendeterairtravebl ymakingpeopleunusuallfyrightenoefd airtravels,implybecauseofheuristidcevices(availabilityan)dotherpredictabfleactors thatmakepeople'sprobabilitayssessmentgsoawryT. hisfearmaybe damaginbgecause it is itselfa utilit yloss andbecauseit maylead peopleto use less safemethodosf transportatisounc,has automobileOs.ran airplanecrashmighbte especiallydisturbing becausethesuddenlossofdozensorhundredosfpeopleseemsso unusuallayndsenselesslytragici,na waythatproducelsargeempathetriceactionso,rbecauseitsignalsthe furtheprossibilitoyfrandoma,pparentliynexplicableeventsinwhichlargenumberosf peopledie. 
Somecatastrophaerseespeciallydisturbinbgecausetheyappeartoproducepointless andespeciallyunnaturadleathsA. recentairplanecrashin Israel,killingoverseventy soldiersi,s an examplep,roducinagn extendepderiodofnationamlournin-gstemming fromtheyouthofthosewhowerekilledt,hefactthattheywereservintgheircountryan,d thehighlyunusuaclharacteorftheaccidenta,pparentlsytemminfgrompreventabhleumanerrorT.heseconsideratiosnusggestthatspecialattentiomnighjtustifiabblyedevoted toairsafet yinthetimefollowinagcrasheveniftherelevanptrecautiondsonotcausea significandrtopindeathsT.hesameideamayjustifyspecialsafeguardosfnucleareactorsE.vena minorandharmlesasccidenmtayproducea kindofday-to-dafyearfulness thatproperlpylacesa roleinanofficiaclalculusa,tleastifeducativeeffortcsannotwork againstpublicfearsto theextenthattheyare irrationaolr basedon error-producing heuristic. 
Specialpublicconcernaboutcatastropheicventsmaythusreflecat judgmentthat certainkindsofdeathhsaveancillareyffectws,ellbeyondthedeathtshemselveCso.nsider inthisregardthe"BuffalCoreekSyndromed,"ocumentesdeveratlimesintheaftermath ofmajordisastersN. earlytwoyearsafterthecollapseofa damthatleft120deadand 4000 homelessp,sychiatrricesearchercsontinuetdo findsignificanptsychologicaanld sociologicaclhangess;urvivorwserecharacterizbedya lossofdirectioanndenergyo,ther disablingcharactecrhangesa,nda loss ofcommunalit(Fyiorino1,989).One evaluator attributtehdislossofdirectiosnpecificalltyo"thelossoftraditionbaolndsofkinshiapnd neighborlines(Rs"obinsonetal. 1983).Thenon-lineariotfylayevaluationosfriskinthe contexotfpotentiadlisastermsaythusreflecathighpremiumonavoidingthedistinctive kindsoflossesdistinctlayssociatedwithcatastropheIfs.so,differencbeestwee nlayand experatssessmentrsestongenuinvealuedifferenc(efsourtimesas manydeathsmaybe muchmorethanfourtimesas bad)rathetrhanonfactuaelrrorisncognitivperocesseosf ordinarpyeople. 
Anothewr aytoputthepointis thatthesociallyperceived"meaningo"fa deatho,ra seriesof deathsm,ayaffectand formpartofpublicjudgmentasboutappropriatreesponsesS.omedeathsaretakento be partoflife,whereasotherseemdisruptivaend terrifyinTgh.epointfollowsfromthefactthatpeopleareselectivelfyatalistica,phenomenonthatbearsonthedemandandsupplyofregulationIf.thesocialmeaningofan airlinedisasteirsthatairtravehl as"becomeunsafe,g"overnmemntayhaveanobligation torespondwithspecialintensitbye,causethesocialperceptiownillproducesignificant sociallossesinvarioussphere(sincludingas, notedn, etmortalitiytselfi,fpeopleshifto moredangeroufsormosftravel)T. hereis a separatpeossibilityP.eoplemaythinkitis worseforanentirfeamily(consistinogf,say,fourpeople)toperishthanforfourmembers offourdifferefnatmilietsoperishi;nthelattercase,atleastsomesiblingasndchildren areleftA. distinctivperoblemofa catastrophisethatitdestroywsholefamilies. 
Thesevariouspointsraisea numberofquestionsW.e do notyethavea fullunderstandinogfthebasisforspecialpublicconcernwithcatastropheMs.oreoverth,eargument fordevotinsgpecialresourcetsodeathswithexternalitiessstrongewsthentheexternalitiesdo notreflecitrrationaliotrycannotbe reducedthrougohthermeans.Forexample, someofthefearthatfollowscertainwidelyreporteddeathsis basedon confusioonr ignorancaeboutactualprobabilitieisf; it is possibleto dispeltheconfusiont,hefear shoulddissipataes well.Herethequestio niswhethegrovernmecnatnlegitimateslpyend extraresourcetso averttheharmsassociatedwithirrationaplublicattitudePs.erhaps information-bassterdategiews ouldbe preferablteo allocatingadditionarlesourcetso deathswhoseoccurrencperoduceswidespreapdanic.On theotherhand,thereareundoubtedliynstanceisnwhichinformatiiosnineffectivane,dtherearealsocasesinwhich highexternalitiienst,heformofspecialfeara,renota producotffactuailgnorancIen. such casesgovernmeinstjustifieidngivingadditionarlesourcetsodeath-prevention. Conclusion Peopledo notconsiderall death-relateevdenttsobe thesame.Somedeathseemespeciallybad.Itfollowtshatvaluationoflifeshouldnotbe basedona unifor mnumbeprer lifeor lifeyearsaved,butshouldinsteadincorporatdeifferensotcialjudgmentasbout differeknitndsofdeatht,otheextenthatthesejudgmentcsansurvivceriticaslcutiny. 
Somesuchjudgmentdso notreallytreatsomedeathsas worse,in themselvest,han otherdeathsT. heyarebasedon{hefactthatdeathsofsomekindsoccurveryearlya,nd thusa largenumberof life-yearasre lost.Thispointcan easilybe incorporatebdy referencteothecriterioonflife-yearrsathetrhanlivessaved.Moreoverju,dgmentbsased onpre-deatphainandsufferindgonottreadteath-evenatssthemselvedseservindgifferent levelsofattentioBnu.twhena deathis precededbya periodofpainandsufferinigti,s appropriatteo makespecialefforttso guardagainstit.Muchfurthewrorkremaintso determintheeappropriat"ebaddeathpremiumt"obe placedon suchdeathsa; special problemstemsfromthefactthatpublicjudgmentosrprivatweillingnestsopaymaybe ill-informWedh.enpeoplebelievethatdeathsareinequitabldyistributeidtm,aywellbe sensiblteomakeparticulaerffortsopreventthema,tleastifthejudgmentasboutwhatis inequitabalerelegitimatFei.nallya,ndperhapmsostimportanitti,s appropriattoedevote unusuallhyighlevelsofresourcetsopreventindgeathsaccompaniebdyhighexternalities, atleastifthoseexternaliticeasnnotbe reducedthrougehducationandinformation. 
Farhardepruzzlesareposedbythefamiliairdeathatsomedeathsareespeciallybad becausetheyinvolvea lackofcontroalndinvoluntarineIsfst.hepointis thatthereis a specialhedoniclossatthepointofdeath- a specialfeelingofpowerlessnessperhaps thatlossdeservecsonsideratioinresourcaellocationO. ritmaybe thatsomerisksare accompaniebdyespeciall yloworespeciallyhighcosts,informationanaldotherwisoef, mortalitayvoidanceI.n suchcasesthoseespeciallyloworhighcostsmightqualifythe startinpgointdefinedintermosfdecentllyivablelifeyearssaved. 
CausoefDeath NumboefrDeaths 
Total 
Male 
Female 
Total Male 
Female Allages 2,268,5531,161,7917,106,756 880.0 923.5 Leadincgauseosfdeath: 
Heardtisease 743,460 367,479 375,981 288.4 292.1 Malignannetoplas(mcasncer) 529,904 279,375 250,529 205.6 222.1 Cerebrovasdciusleaarse 150,108 59,048 91,060 58.2 46.9 (stroke) Chronoibcstrucptiuvlemonary 101,077 54,371 46,706 39.2 43.2 disease Accidents 90,523 60,117 30,406 35.1 47.8 Pneumonia 82,820 37,996 44,824 32.1 30.2 Diabetes 53,894 23,430 30,464 20.9 18.6 HIVinfection 37,267 32,093 5,174 14.5 25.5 Suicide 31,102 25,007 6,095 12.1 19.9 Homiciadnedlegailntervention26,009 20,290 5,719 10.1 16.1 TablBe.Age-adjusdteeadtrhatebs,yselectceaduses1:980to1993[Ratepser100,00p0opulation] Causoefdeath TablCe.Acquiriemdmunodefiscyienndcryo(mAIeDSd)eathbsy,selectcehdaracteritshtirc1us9:95 
Number Total 305,84132,49236,35529,93344,65318,81431,07473,97531,256100.0100.0 Age: 13to29yearosld 53,6322,5584,9245,4276,0596,4816,8156,9305,10516.3 16.2 30to39yearosld138,6605,71412,05163,69155,58127,43718,54280,03714,08345.1 45.3 40to49yearosld 77,4252,7266,2057,3298,94310,33910,97151,9218,54327.3 27.0 50to59yearosld 25,3831,1042,2182,4332,8223,1753,3893,7212,572 8.2 8.3 60yearosld& over 10,743 391 952 1,0501,2451,3811,3501,366 953 3.0 3.2 
Questionnaironekindsofdeath numbeorfpossibleregulatorayctivitieTs.hepossibilitieisnclude: annualsavings1:20lives. annualsavings1:0lives($5 millionperlifesaved). annualsavings0: lives.Manymemberosfthepublicare,howeverm, uchconcerned aboutnuclearpowerplantsafetya,ndaredemandinggreatearttentiotnosafetyrisks. 0.5lives.Butrecenth,ighlypublicizedaccidenthsaveproduceadmuchgreateprublic demandforsecuritaytairports. vigorouasnti-smokincagmpaigni,nvolvinegducationr,estrictionofssalestominorsa,ndhighetraxesontobaccoproductEs.stimatesdavings: 200 lives. savings5: 0 lives. 
Youradviserhsavenarrowetdhelistof"policyoptionst"othefollowing: totalestimateadnnualsavingsof160lives. millionon toxicairpollutant$s,20 millionon airporstecurityan,d$10 millionon safetyinspectionfsornuclearpowerplantsf,ora totalestimateadnnuaslavingosf79.5 lives. annualsavingsof150lives. annualsavingsof 110lives. 
Whichis yourmostpreferrepdolicy?Markhere: Whichis yoursecondmostpreferrepdolicy?Markhere: 
Whichis yourleastpreferrepdolicy?Markhere: 2.a. HowmanyliveswouldyouneedtosavefromHeartDiseaseso thatyouwouldfind itequallyimportantotsavethoselivesandtosave100livesfromCancer? 
(Note:Ifyoufinditequallyimportantot savelivesfromCancerandlivesfromHeart Disease,thenumbeyroureporsthouldbe 100.Ifyouwouldprefetro savelivesfrom CancerrathetrhanfromHeartDisease,thenumbeyroureporsthouldbegreatetrhan100. IfyouwouldprefetrosavelivesfromHeartDiseaserathetrhanfromCancert,henumber youreporsthouldbe smallerthan100.) b. Howmanyliveswouldyouneedtosavefromairlinecrasheso thatyouwouldfind itequallyimportantotsavethoselivesandtosave100 livesfromcancer? Livessavedfromairlinecrashe-s ManycommunititerseatheirdrinkinwgaterwithchlorinteoreducemicrobiaclontaminatioMn.icrobiaclontaminatiionndrinkinwgatercancauseacutegastrointestinalillnessw,hichinsomecasesisfatalB.utby-producotfsthechlorinatiponrocess (suchas trihalomethalnikesechloroformm)aycreatea cancerrisktothosedrinking thewater. 
Assumethatchlorinatiocnompletelpyreventms icrobiaclontaminatioann,dthatthe lifetimfeatal-cancerriskfromchlorinatioinsequalto thelifetimfeatalityriskfrom microbiaclontaminatiwonithoucthlorinatioWn.ouldyouprefetrhatyourtown'sdrinking waterbe chlorinateodrnot? 
Forevery100deathsduetocancerfromchlorinatiownh,atis thenumbeorfdeaths frommicrobiaillnesssuchthatyouwouldfindtherisksequallyserious?(Note:Ifyou findtheriskofchlorinatiomnoreseriousy,ournumbewrillbe greatetrhan100;ifyou findtheriskofnotchlorinatinmgoreseriousy, ournumbewrillbe lessthan100.) 
Acknowledgment I am gratefutlo RichardCraswellG,ertrudFeremlingJ,ohnLott,MarthaNussbaum, RichardPosnerM,arkRamsayerD,avidStraussW,.KipViscusia,ndRichardZeckhauser forveryhelpfuclommentIs.amalsogratefutloJonathaWneinerforhelpfudliscussion andtoChristophHeroustonforexcellenrtesearchassistance. Notes welbleapproprtiaotdeevotsepeciaalttenttiodneathssoproduc(eAdnderso1n99,2N). ordoI discustshe distinctqiuveestiornasisebdydeathinsthecoursoefwar. character-isatbicosuwthethfeorr,examplaes,ignificpaenrtcentawgeersemokerAss.a kindofcontrol, parotfthesurveayskedstudenatsstandaqrudestioinvolvifnagirneusss,edinpsychologsitcualdieAs: storseellsnowshovfeolr$s10;aftearstor mitr,aisetshepricteo$15R.espondewnetrsaeskedtodescribe thiosutcomasecompletuenlyfaiarc,ceptabulen,faiorr,extremuenlyfaiIrn.somsetudie8s0%ofrespondentcsonsidtehriosutcomunefaoirextremuenlyfaAirm.onCghicagloawstudenotnsly18.2%considered thisoutcomuenfaiorrextremuelnyfaiTrh.isresulctertainslhyowas degreoefdistinctivetnoetshse samplIet.connecwtsithworskuggestitnhgaetconomimcsajorhsavedifferiennctlinatiaobnosuwthether tocooperaitneprisonedrisl'emmsiatuatioSnese.FrankG,ilovicahn,dRegan1,993)I.traisetshefurther questiownhethtehreffeocbtserviendmystudiysa lawschooelffecatU, niversoiftCyhicagloawschool effecotr,anefferctelatetdosomterainiinngeconomics. falolf1996d,ealinwgithcomparatriivsekanalysiasn,dcirculataincgomparatriivseksurveoynwhicIh drewforthe"cancedreathsa"nd"chlorinatqioune"stionTsh.eresultosfthesurvehyeldtherweillbe reportienda papebryJameHsammitt. SavagIea,n(.1993").AnEmpiriIcnavl estigaitnitotonheEffeocftPsychologPiecracleptioonnthsWeillingness toPaytoReducReiskJ."o.fRiskandUncerta6in:7t5y-90. 
SieffE,.M.,RobinM.DaweasndGeorgLeoewenst"eAinn.ticipavteerdsuAsctuaRleactiotnoHIVTest 
ResultFs.o"rthcomAimngericJaonurnoafPlsychology. 
SlovicP,aul(.1991").BeyonNdumbeArsB:roadPererspectoinvReiskPerceptainondRiskCommunication." 
InDeboraMhayaondRachelHleolland(eedrs.A). cceptaEbvleidenNcee.wYorkO:xforUdniversPirteyss. SunsteCina,ssR.(1996L).egaRleasonianngdPoliticCaolnfliNcte.wYorkO:xforUdniversPirteyss. SunsteCina,ssR.(1997").WhicRhiskFsirstU?"niversoiftCyhicagLoegaFlorum(forthcoming). SunsteCina,ssR.(1993)T.hePartiCalonstituCtiaomn.bridHgaer:vaUrdniversPirteyss. 
TengTs,ammeyta,l.(1995)".Five-HundLrifeed-SavIinntgerventainodnTsheiCrost-EffectivRenisekss," 
Analys1i5s:369-384. 
TolleyG,eorgDeo,nalKdenkaenldRoberFtabian(1.995)V.aluiHngealtFhorPolicyC.hicagUo:niversoifty 
ChicagPoress. 
ViscusWi,.Kip(1992S).mokinNge.wYorkO:xforUdniversPirteyss. 
ZeckhausReirc,haarnddShepar(1d9.76)".WheNreowForSavinLgives?L"aw& ContemPrpob4s0:5-41. ZeckhausReirc,har(1d9. 96)".TheEconomoicfCsatastropJheosu.r"nofaRliskandUncertai1n2t:1y13-140. 
The future of economic analysis of law lies in new and better understandings of decision and choice.' 
In the last two decades, social scientists have learned a great deal about how people actually make decisions.' Much of this work calls for qualifications of rational choice models.3 Those models are often wrong in the simple sense that they yield inaccurate predictions. Cognitive errors and motivational distortions may press behavior far from the anticipated directions; normative accounts of rational choice should not be confused with descriptive accounts.4 But it does not follow that people's behavior is unpredictable, systematically irrational, random, rule-free, or elusive to social scientists. On the contrary, the qualifications can be described, used, and sometimes even modeled. Those qualifications, and the resulting understandings of decision and choice,5 t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, The University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to J.B. Heaton, Judith Avrahami, Dan Kahan, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, Richard Posner, Eldar Shafir, and Richard Thaler for valuable comments, and especially to Thaler and Daniel Kahneman for helpful discussions of many relevant topics; none of the aforementioned people is responsible for mistakes and misconceptions. Some of the ideas developed here are discussed in more detail in Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (forthcoming Yale L J); Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, BehavioralLaw andEconomics (forthcoming). 
' These understandings sometimes go under the name of behavioral research or behavioral decision theory. 
2 I draw here on Richard H. Thaler, Quasi Rational Economics (Sage 1991); John Conlisk, Why Bounded Rationality?,34 J Econ Lit 669 (1996). 
There is of course much controversy in specifying what rational choice models require. Some of the evidence I discuss shows how people react to the presence of decision costs, and it is far from irrational to take those costs into account. It may also be fully rational to consider the effects of social norms on choice, since norm violations can count as costs. It is far less important to struggle over whether the evidence shows violations of"rationality" than to be as clear as possible on how human beings actually behave; it is the latter issue that I am concerned with here. 
' This is a prominent theme in the work of Amos Tversky, taking "normative accounts" to refer to expected utility theory; Tversky's emphasis here is on cognitive errors. See, for example, Amos Tversky, Rational Theory and Constructive Choice, in Kenneth J. Arrow, et al, eds, The RationalFoundationsofEconomic Behavior 185 (St. Martin's 1996). 
See, for example, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, ProspectTheory: An Analysis of DecisionUnder Risk, 47 Econometrica 263 (1979); Graham Loomes and Robert Sugden, Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice Under Certainty,92 Econ J 805 (1982). 
1175 are playing a large and mounting role in many fields within economics and other social sciences. 
Oddly, the relevant research has yet to find a significant place in the economic analysis of law.6 An enormous gap remains to be filled. This gap is especially important for economic analysis of law, which is concerned in significant part with nonmarket behavior. It is here that deviations from the conventional model are-it is generally conceded-most likely to occur.' 
Much behavioral work suggests that preferences and values are sometimes constructed rather than elicited by social situations.8 "[O]bserved preferences are not simply read off some master list; they are actually constructed in the elicitation process.... Different elicitation procedures highlight different aspects of options and suggest alternative heuristics, which may give rise to inconsistent responses."' People do not generally consult a freestanding "preference menu" from which selections are made at the moment of choice; preferences can be products of procedure, description, and context at the time of choice. "Alternative descriptions of the same choice problems lead to systematically different preferences; strategically equivalent elicitation procedures give rise to different choices; and the preference between x and y often depends on the choice set in which they are embedded."" What has been learned about human behavior and choice should be linked, at the theoretical and empirical levels, with analysis of the legal system. 
6 Much ofthe relevant research involves experiments and survey data, and hence it is possible to question whether the findings are reliable in the real world. There is of course a possibility that experiments, particularly in the form of answers to questionnaires, are imperfect predictors of actual behavior. By this stage, however, there is adequate basis to conclude that the findings I describe are replicated in the real world; in fact many of them are based on real world evidence. See, for example, Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, ExperimentalTests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J Pol Econ 1325 (1990) (cataloguing evidence from experimental and real world settings). On the general topic, see Colin Camerer, Individual Decision Making, in John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, eds, The Handbook ofExperimentalEconomics 587 (Princeton 1995); Richard H. Thaler, The Psychologyand Economics Conference Handbook,in Thaler, QuasiRationalEconomics 189 (cited in note 2). 
' See the revealing remarks to this effect in Jason F. Shogren and Dermot J. Hayes, Resolving Differences in Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept: Reply, 87 Am Econ Rev 241, 243 (1997) (criticizing general claims about endowment effects but acknowledging their importance in nonmarket settings). 
' See Paul Slovic, The Construction of Preference, 50 Am Psych 364, 364-65 (1995); Tversky, RationalTheory, in Arrow, et al, Economic Behavior (cited in note 4). 
' Amos Tversky, Shmuel Sattath, and Paul Slovic, Contingent Weighting in Judgment and Choice, 95 Psych Rev 371, 371 (1988). 
z'Tversky, Rational Theory, in Arrow, et al, Economic Behavior at 186 (cited in note 
This is so especially because the legal system is pervasively in the business of constructing procedures, descriptions, and contexts for choice. Of course the legal system creates procedures, descriptions, and contexts in the course of litigated cases. For example, the alternatives (selected to be) placed before the jury or judge may matter a great deal; liability or conviction on some count A may very much depend on the nature of counts B, C, and D.n In this respect the preferences and values of judges and juries may well be constructed, not elicited, by the legal system. This is certainly true for the awarding of damages, where special problems may arise. But similar points hold outside of the courtroom. The allocation of legal entitlements, and the structures created for exchange (or nonexchange) by law, may well affect both preferences' and values. Thus law can construct rather than elicit preferences both internally, by affecting what goes on in court, and externally, by affecting what happens in ordinary transactions-market and nonmarket. 
For purposes of analysis, we might distinguish among three different tasks: positive, prescriptive, and normative. Positive work is of course concerned with predictions. If, contrary to conventional assumptions, people dislike losses far more than they like equivalent gains, predictions will go wrong insofar as they rest on these conventional assumptions. As we will shortly see, this point has important implications for positive analysis of law, prominently including the Coase Theorem. 
Prescriptive work is concerned with showing how society might actually reach shared goals; this is a central purpose of economic analysis of law. Consider the following information campaigns, which conventional analysis deems equivalent: (a) if you use energy conservation methods, you will save $X per year; (b) if you do not use energy conservation methods, you will lose $X per year. It turns out that information campaign (b) is far more effective than information campaign (a).3 Some features of human judgment, properly understood, undermine conventional economic prescriptions about what will work best; they help explain, to take just one example, precisely why the public service advertising slogan "drive defensively; watch out for the other guy" is particularly ingenious. 
"See text accompanying notes 29-31. 
It may well be desirable to disaggregate this vexing idea into various component parts; in fact this is one of the themes of this essay, which I leave mostly implicit. See Cass R. Sunstein, SocialNorms and SocialRules, 96 Colum L Rev 903, 931-39 (1996). "See Elliot Aronson, The SocialAnimal 124-26 (Freeman 6th ed 1996). 
Normative work is of course concerned with what the legal system should do. Recent revisions in understanding human behavior greatly unsettle certain arguments against paternalism in law. They certainly do not make an affirmative case for paternalism; but they support a form of anti-antipaternalism. If, for example, people use heuristic devices that lead to systematic errors, their judgments about how to deal with risks may be badly misconceived.' 4 If people are unrealistically optimistic, they may run risks because of a factually false belief in their own relative immunity from harm, even if they are fully aware of the statistical facts. And if people's choices are based on incorrect judgments, at the time of choice, about what their experience will be after the choice, there is reason to question whether respect for choices rooted in these incorrect judgments is a good way to promote utility or welfare. None of these points makes a firm case for legal paternalism, particularly since bureaucrats may be subject to the same cognitive and motivational distortions as everyone else. 5 But they do suggest that objections to paternalism should be empirical and pragmatic, having to do with the possibility of education and likely failures of government response, rather than a priori in nature. 
Now let me offer a few details, tracing some of the principal findings 6 that emerge from behavioral research, and showing " Thus the literature on heuristics and biases helps support the analysis in Stephen Breyer, Breakingthe Vicious Circle:TowardEffective Risk Regulation(Harvard 1993) (favoring technocratic assessments of risk). 
" See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilitiesfor Risk (Oxford 1992). 
1 The discussion is illustrative, not exhaustive. Other examples are plentiful. For example, people appear not to ignore sunk costs. See Thaler, QuasiRationalEconomics at 11-13, 148-49 (cited in note 2). This point bears on predictions about the behavior of contracting parties. Nor do I provide an exhaustive discussion of framing effects. For example, if told that of 400 people who undergo a certain operation, 350 are alive after five years, many more people will undergo the operation than if they are told that of 400 people who undergo an operation, 50 are dead after five years. See Donald A. Redelmeier, et al, UnderstandingPatients'Decisions2,70 JAMA 72, 73 (1993). This effect may reflect not confusion about expected value, but instead the social meaning of the statement; when a person says that a certain number will die, he may be signaling something about the nature of the option, and the signal may be different from the (mathematically equivalent) statement that a certain number will live. For a contrasting view, see Willem A. Wagenaar, Gideon Keren, and Sarah Lichtenstein, Islandersand hostages:Deep and surface structuresof decision problems, in William M. Goldstein and Robin M. Hogarth, eds, Research onjudgment and decision making: Currents,connections, and controversies552, 552-64 (Cambridge 1997) (discussing differences among mathematically equivalent situations). 
People also make different judgments of probability after different descriptions of the same problem, partly because a description that stresses the components of a category (how likely is it that X will die from cancer, heart disease, or other natural causes?) produces higher numbers than one that refers to the category itself (how likely is it that X law. how they bear on positive, prescriptive, and normative work in 17 
People are especially averse to losses. 8 They are more displeased with losses than they are pleased with equivalent gainsroughly speaking, twice as displeased. 9 Contrary to economic theory, people do not treat out-of-pocket costs and opportunity costs as if they were equivalent. 
Loss aversion has important implications for positive analysis of law. It means, for example, that the Coase Theorem is in one respect quite wrong." The theorem is wrong because the allocation of the legal entitlement may well matter, in the sense that those who are initially allocated an entitlement are likely to value it more than those without the legal entitlement. Thus workers allocated a (waivable) right to be discharged only for cause may well value that right far more than they would if employers were allocated a (tradable) right to discharge at will; thus breathers of air may well value their (tradable) right to be free will die from natural causes?). See Amos Tversky and Derek J. Koehler, Support Theory:A Nonextensional Representation of Subjective Probability,101 Psych Rev 547, 550 (1994). There is also a recent finding of a "focusing illusion," by which people, focusing on a component of well-being, think that it is far more important to well-being than it is in fact. See David A. Schkade and Daniel Kahneman, Would You Be Happy If You Lived in California? A FocusingIllusion in Judgments of Well-Being 17 (unpublished manuscript). See also Richard H. Thaler, The Winner's Curse:Paradoxes andAnomolies of Economic Life (Sage 1994), for an instructive collection. 
" An interesting question is whether these various effects vary across cultures and (relatedly) whether they might be changed through education. There is evidence that the results of the ultimatum game are not culturally variant, see Colin Camerer and Richard H. Thaler, Anomalies: Ultimatums, Dictators and Manners, 9 J Econ Persp 209, 211-19 (Spring 1995); Alvin E. Roth, BargainingExperiments, in Kagel and Roth, eds, Handbook ofExperimentalEconomics at 282-88 (cited in note 6). But this is at most a start. 
Of special interest is the fact that pigeons and rats appear to behave in accordance with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory! See John H. Kagel, Raymond C. Battalio, and Leonard Green, Economic Choice Theory: An ExperimentalAnalysis of Animal Behavior 162-67 (Cambridge 1995). 
18 Kalmeman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 98 J Pol Econ at 1328 (cited in note 6); Thaler, Quasi RationalEconomics at 143 (cited in note 2); Camerer, IndividualDecisionMaking, in Kagel and Roth, eds, Handbook of ExperimentalEconomics at 665-70 (cited in note 6). Loss aversion is an aspect of prospect theory. See Kahneman and Tversky, 47 Econometrica at 274-89 (cited in note 5). On policy implications, see Jack L. Knetsch, Reference States, Fairness,and Choice of Measure to Value Environmental Changes,in Max H. Bazerman et al, eds, Environment,Ethics,and Behavior13 (New Lexington 1997). 
' ahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 98 J Pol Econ at 1339 (cited in note 6) (reporting data showing that the median value of an object was twice as much for a person acting as a seller than a person acting as a buyer). 
' Id at 1344-45. The theorem remains current insofar as it suggests that the legal entitlement will not, under the stated conditions, affect efficiency. from air pollution far more than they would if polluters had been given a (tradable) right to emit polluting substances into the air. The legal entitlement creates an endowment effect, that is, a greater valuation stemming from the mere fact of endowment. This effect has been observed in many contexts. 1 
There is a further point. People are averse to losses, but whether an event "codes" as a loss or a gain depends not on simple facts but on a range of contextual factors, including how the event is framed. The status quo is usually the reference point, so that losses are understood as such by reference to existing distributions and practices;' but it is possible to manipulate the frame so as to make a change "code" as a loss rather than a gain, or vice versa. Consider a company that says "cash discount" rather than "credit card surcharge"; or a parent who says that for behavior X (rather than behavior Y) a child will be rewarded, as opposed to saying that for behavior Y (rather than behavior X) a child will be punished;"3 or familiar advertisements to the effect that "you cannot afford not to" use a certain product. In environmental regulation, it is possible to manipulate the reference point by insisting that policymakers are trying to "restore" water or air quality to its state at date X; a proposal to "improve" air or water quality from date Y may "code" quite differently. The restoration time matters a great deal to people's judgmentM.' 
For present purposes, the most important source of reference points is the law: Where has the legal system placed the initial entitlement? Much research remains to be done on the effects of this initial allocation. The point bears, for example, on the distinction between "subsidies" and "penalties" that has proved so " See id at 1325-29; Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences,EnvironmentalLaw, in Cass R. Sunstein, FreeMarketsand SocialJustice 245 (Oxford 1997). 
' See William Samuelson and Richard Zeckhauser, Status Quo Bias in DecisionMaking, 1 J Risk & Uncertainty 7, 9 (1988). Status quo bias is related to the phenomenon of "commission bias": people would much prefer to make an error of omission than one of commission, even in the context of vaccinating their children, where commission bias can greatly increase risks to children. See Ilana Ritov and Jonathan Baron, Reluctance to Vaccinate: OmissionBias and Ambiguity, 3 J Behav Decision Making 263, 263 (1990). Compare the finding that the status quo becomes more attractive when there are two alternatives rather than one. Thus doctors, policymakers, and ordinary people, in situations of choice, may be ambivalent between a status quo option (stay home and study tonight, prescribe the ordinary course of treatment, do not depart from existing policy) and a single option; the introduction of a new alternative makes the status quo more appealing. See Amos Tversky and Eldar Shafir, Choice Under Conflict: The Dynamics of Defined Decisions, 3 Psychol Sci 358 (1992). 
' Personal experience suggests that this works! "See Robin Gregory, Sarah Lichtenstein, and Donald MacGregor, The Role of Past Status in DeterminingReference Pointsfor Policy Decisions, 55 Organizational Behavior and Human Decisions Processes 195 (1993). crucial to the law governing unconstitutional conditions." This distinction can be understood as responsive to the phenomenon of loss aversion, and framing effects very much influence judgments about whether a measure constitutes a subsidy or a penalty." 
Loss aversion also raises serious questions about the goal of the tort system. Should damages measure the amount that would restore an injured party to the status quo ante, or should they reflect the amount that an injured party would demand to be subject to the injury before the fact? Juries seem to believe that the amount that would be demanded pre-injury is far greater than the amount that would restore the status quo ante. The legal system appears generally to see compensation as a mechanism for restoring the status quo ante, although it does not seem to have made this choice in any self-conscious or systematic way. Loss aversion also has large implications for the choice between liability rules and property rules. Property rules allow a taking based on the entitlement holder's "willingness to accept"; liability rules frame the question in terms of "willingness to pay." The economic literature on the choice between the two generally does not recognize that the resulting valuations may be dramatically different.8 
Consider too the fact that people may well choose A over B when asked the question "which of two options do you accept," but B over A when asked the question, "which of these two options do you reject," at least if A has both more positive and more negative features than B. In the "accept" frame, the positive features stand out; in the "reject" frame, the negative features stand out.29 This point bears on legal strategy before both juries and judges. 
People are averse to extremes. Whether an option is extreme depends on the stated alternatives. Extremeness aversion gives rise to compromise effects. As between given alternatives, people seek a compromise. In this, as in other respects, the framing of choice matters; the introduction of unchosen, apparently irrelevant alternatives into the frame can alter the outcome. When, for example, people are choosing between some small radio A and a mid-size radio B, most may well choose A; but the introduction of a third, large radio C is likely to lead many people to choose B instead. ° Thus, the introduction of a third, unchosen (and in that sense irrelevant) option may produce a switch in choice as between the two original options. Almost everyone has had the experience of switching to (say) the second-most expensive item on some menu of options, and of choosing that item partly because of the presence of the most expensive item.31 
Extremeness aversion suggests that a simple axiom of conventional economic theory-involving the irrelevance of added, unchosen alternatives-is wrong.2 It also has large consequences for legal advocacy and judgment, as well as for predictions about the effects of law. How can a preferred option best be framed as the "compromise" choice? When should a lawyer argue in the alternative, and what kinds of alternative arguments are most effective? This should be a central question for advocates to answer. Juries and judges may try to choose a compromise solution, and what "codes" as the compromise solution depends on what alternatives are made available. In elections, medical interventions, and policymaking, compromise effects may matter a great deal. 
OVERCONFIDENCE 
People's judgments about fairness are self-serving; people also tend to be both unrealistically optimistic and overconfident about their judgments.3 In any random couple, it is highly likely that addition of answers to the question, "what percentage of the domestic work do you do?" will produce a number greater than 100 percent. The point bears on the otherwise largely inexplicable phenomenon of bargaining impasses. Why don't more cases settle? Why does the legal system spend so much on dispute settle 
See Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Amos Tversky, Context-Dependence in LegalDecisionMaking, 25 J Legal Stud 287, 288 (1996). 
" Compare the phenomenon of"tradeoff contrast": the introduction of a third alternative may make some characteristic of the choice especially salient and thus affect judgment. See id. 
See Amartya Sen, InternalConsistencyof Choice,61 Econometrica 495 (1993). 
See Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, ConflictResolution:A CognitivePerspective, in Kenneth J. Arrow, et al, eds, Barriersto Conflict Resolution 44, 46-50 (Norton 1995). ment? Part of the answer lies in the fact that self-serving bias-a belief that one deserves more than other people tend to think-affects both parties to a negotiation, and this makes agreement very difficult3. 4 
Unrealistic optimism and self-serving bias bear on individual risk-bearing, and hence on the role of the regulatory state, especially in the area of dangers to life and health. Even factually informed people tend to think that risks are less likely to materialize for themselves than for others. Thus there is systematic overconfidence in risk judgments, as the vast majority of people believe that they are less likely than others to be subject to automobile accidents, infection from AIDS, heart attacks, asthma, and many other health risks.35 In one survey, for example, 90 percent of automobile drivers considered themselves to be above-average drivers.36 In another survey, students asked to envision their future said that they were far less likely than their classmates to be fired from a job, to have a heart attack or get cancer, to be divorced after a few years of marriage, or to have a drinking problem." 
Unrealistic optimism appears to characterize people in most social categories." People systematically underestimate the extent to which they are at risk, and perceptions of relative invulnerability affect preventive health practices. A random community-wide survey of attitudes toward health risks found systematic belief of above-average immunity from risk.4 ° Older people underestimate the likelihood that they will be in a car accident or contract major diseases.4' Gay men appear systematically to underestimate the chance that they will get AIDS, even though they do not lack information about AIDS risks in general.42 Consider as well recent empirical evidence that workers have little under' See id; Linda Babcock and George Loewenstein, Explaining BargainingImpasse: The Role ofSelf-Serving Biases, 11 J Econ Persp 109, 119-21 (1997). 
See Neil D. Weinstein, OptimisticBiases About PersonalRisks, 246 Science 1232 (1989). 
Shelley E. Taylor, PositiveIllusions: Creative Self-Deception and the Healthy Mind 10-11 (Basic 1990). 
Id at 33. 
' Laurie J. Bauman and Karolynn Siegel, MisperceptionAmong Gay Men ofthe Risk for AIDS Associated with Their Sexual Behavior, 17 J Applied Soc Psych 329, 330-31 (1987). 
' Neil D. Weinstein, UnrealisticOptimism About Susceptibility to Health Problems: Conclusions from a Community-Wide Sample, 10 J Behavioral Medicine 481, 497-98 (1987). 
'1 Taylor, PositiveIllusionsat 33 (cited in note 36). 
Bauman and Siegel, 17 J Applied Soc Psych at 331 (cited in note 39). standing of the existence of an "at-will" rule for employment, believing instead that workers have strong legal protections against arbitrary firings.43 This evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that people are systematically optimistic; it may suggest a pervasive phenomenon with respect to popular understandings of the law. 
Unrealistic optimism and self-serving bias are relevant to the positive and prescriptive tasks of law. Efforts to educate people about risk may run afoul of unrealistic optimism; hence mere statistical knowledge may fail to produce adequate information. Moreover, efforts to increase consensual solutions must take account of self-serving bias; problems with negotiated rulemaking, one of the most popular new developments in administrative law, may have self-serving bias at their roots. Evidence of self-serving bias also complicates the widespread view that people often overstate low-probability events. While people may sometimes think that low-probability events have higher probability than they in fact do," many individual agents think that they personally are peculiarly less susceptible to such events, which may lead them to underestimate rather than overestimate probabilities. Note also the possibility of debiasing strategies; it appears possible to reduce self-serving bias by requiring people to list the weaknesses in their own view or case.' 
In economics, it is often assumed that the utility of experience is best measured by the anticipated utility shown by people's decisions. But a good deal of recent research" shows that there may well be systematic differences between the utility expected at the time of decision and the utility actually experienced as a result of decision. People's judgments about their experience at the time of decision can be mistaken; they may have a hard time assessing what the experience will actually be like. 
There are many examples of this divergence between decision utility and experience utility. We can infer from the phenomenon of loss aversion that people value goods more when they own them than when they do not. 7 This "endowment effect" has been observed in many settings.48 But in recent experiments, people have been unable to predict the endowment effect, and thus unable to predict their own tastes.49 This finding is paralleled by many studies showing that people do not accurately predict the consequences of certain major events, such as winning the lottery or becoming paraplegic. (Winning the lottery produces much lower hedonic gains than expected, and people adjust to becoming paraplegic much more easily than expected.)0 
An especially important example of inaccurate anticipated utility comes from a study dealing with HIV testing. People are quite terrified of their reaction if they find that they are HIVpositive; they predict a high degree of panic and depression. But evidence suggests that people are able to adapt fairly well to the bad news, and their panic and depression are far less severe than they feared. 1 Pessimistic expectations about how they would react to a positive result might therefore lead people to "undertest"; people are likely to be especially averse to undergoing a process of which they are very fearful. It might follow that regulatory approaches-education, persuasion, financial incentives, conceivably coercion-would make a good deal of sense. 
Some economists have urged that people have adequate information about the risks of smoking and that additional regulation is therefore inappropriate.52 Perhaps most people do know many of the basic "facts." But a study of high school students suggests a problem. About one-third of adolescent smokers believed that there was no risk from smoking a pack of cigarettes daily for the first few years after starting to smoke. Young people who smoked believed that they were personally less at risk from smoking. And 85 percent of high school teenagers who smoked occasionally believed that they would not be smoking in five years, whereas only 58 percent had actually quit after five years, and 37 percent had increased their consumption. About 32 percent of , See Part L 
See Thaler, QuasiRationalEconomics at 167-86 (cited in note 2). 
See George Loewenstein and Daniel Adler, A Bias in the Predictionof Tastes, 105 Econ J 929, 935-36 (1995); Loewenstein and Schkade, Wouldn't it be nice? (cited in note 46). 
ActualReactionto HIV Test Results (forthcoming Am J Psych). 
See W. Kip Viscusi, Smoking: Making the Risky Decision(Oxford 1993). those who smoked one pack daily believed that they would quit in five years, but only 13 percent did in fact.53 
When people's decisions mispredict their experience, a common argument against paternalism-to the effect that ordinary people choose what will promote their welfare-is no longer plausible. Perhaps it will ultimately be possible to be systematic about issues of this kind-to know, with some precision, when people's decisions will produce bad experiences. 
V. COOPERATION, FAIRNESS, AND THE APPEARANCE OF FAIRNESS 
Economists sometimes assume that people are selfinterested. This may well be true, and often it is a useful simplifying assumption. But people also may want to act fairly and, perhaps more importantly, they want to be seen to act fairly, especially among nonstrangers. For purposes of understanding law, what is especially important is that people may sacrifice their economic self-interest in order to be, or to appear, fair. 
Consider, for example, the ultimatum game.M' The people who run the game give some money, on a provisional basis, to the first of two players. The first player is instructed to offer some part of the money to the second player. If the second player accepts that amount, he can keep what is offered, and the first player gets to keep the rest. But if the second player rejects the offer, neither player gets anything. Both players are informed that these are the rules. No bargaining is allowed. Using standard assumptions about rationality, self-interest, and choice, economists predict that the first player should offer a penny and the second player should accept. But this is not what happens. Offers usually average between 30 percent and 40 percent of the total. Offers ofless than 20 percent are often rejected. Often there is a 50-50 division. These results cut across the level of the stakes and also across diverse cultures.5 
The results of the ultimatum game are highly suggestive. Perhaps people will not violate norms of fairness, even when doing so is in their economic self-interest, at least if the normviolations would be public. Do companies always raise prices when circumstances create short-term scarcity? For example, are there social constraints on price increases for snow shovels after a 
See Paul Slovic, What does it mean to know a cumulative risk? (forthcoming J Behavioral Decision Making). 
" See Roth, BargainingExperiments, in Kagel and Roth, eds, Handbook ofExperimentalEconomics at 282-88 (cited in note 6), and Camerer and Thaler, 9 J Econ Persp at 20918 (cited in note 17), for a general discussion. 
' Camerer and Thaler, 9 J Econ Persp at 210-11 (cited in note 17). snowstorm, or for umbrellas during a rainstorm? It may well be that contracting parties are reluctant to take advantage of one another's misfortunes, partly because of social constraints on selfinterested behavior. Here there is much room for future work. 
Experimental work similarly shows a high degree of cooperation in prisoners' dilemma situations, especially when people are speaking with one another.56 There is now a good deal of evidence about the mechanisms by which cooperation is produced or sustained.57 Group identity appears to be important, as does the practice of norm-enforcement in the private sphere.58 These points are especially important to law and, in particular, to the relationship between law and "norm cascades," producing largescale behavioral shifts. In some contexts, the mere announcement of a legal requirement can yield such shifts, especially when one person's violation can be observed by others, and thus private enforcement becomes possible through the imposition of reputational sanctions.59 
People make judgments about probability on the basis of heuristic devices, responsive perhaps to high costs of inquiry and decision, that work in many cases but that tend also to lead to systematic errors. 0 This work bears on the demand for (and hence also the supply of) government services, including regulation. It also has implications for the jury system-suggesting that juries are likely to make many mistakes in terms of probability assessments and that correction of those mistakes is a large task of the legal system. Here is a very brief description of several heuristics of particular relevance to law, and of some possible responses. 
People tend to think that risks are more serious when an incident is readily called to mind or "available.""' If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. Assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. "Availability cascades" can produce a large demand for law, as in the familiar "pollutant of the month" syndrome in environmental law. We lack a firm understanding of how availability cascades occur and of how institutions might be designed to produce appropriate responses.' 
Often people make probability judgments on the basis of an initial value, or "anchor," from which they make insufficient adjustments.63 The initial value may have an arbitrary or irrational source. When this is so, the probability assessment may go badly wrong, as will all future assessments based on the original anchor. This point bears on jury deliberations reconstructing the facts; an original "anchor," based on certain evidence at trial, may be hard to dislodge. The point also suggests pervasive problems with damage determinations, where arbitrary anchors may loom large. For example, in the case of punitive damages or damages for pain and suffering, libel, or intentional infliction of emotional distress, an enormous amount is likely to turn on the plaintiff's original demand. 
Judgments about probability are in large part judgments about whether some process A will bring about some event B. For example, under what circumstances will driving produce significant increases in air pollution or fatal accidents? When will airbags produce risks to children? Do disposable diapers cause pollution problems? In answering such questions, people ask about the extent to which A is representative of B in the sense that it resembles B. This point suggests that people will be insensitive to " See Kahneman and Tversky, Conflict Resolution, in Arrow, et al, eds, Barriers to ConflictResolution at 47-48 (cited in note 33); Viscusi, FatalTradeoffs (cited in note 15). 
' Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation (work in progress), is an effort to deal with these issues. 
' See Kahneman and Tversky, Conflict Resolution, in Arrow, et al, eds, Barriers to ConflictResolution at 54-55 (cited in note 33). the sample size, misunderstand the phenomenon of regression to the mean, have excessive confidence in their own judgments, and misconstrue the effect on probability of base-rate frequency.' As a result, people may systematically misunderstand risk levels. Consider, as an example, the question whether exposure to pesticides is likely to cause cancer. If "pesticides" are taken to be representative of cancer, people will judge the probability of causation to be quite high. But this judgment may well be mistaken. 
Heuristic devices are often used when the costs of deliberation are high; in such cases, second-order decisions, operating as default rules, can make particularized assessments less necessary. An important way of reducing decision costs is to make assessments on the basis of previous cases rather than through particularized assessments of relevant costs and benefits.65 People often reason in this way, calling to mind particular cases and seeing how the problem at hand compares with those cases; this can be an important method of reducing decision costs. 
A view of case-based decisions as a way of minimizing decision costs-while producing acceptably low error costs-has significant consequences for the understanding of law. Of course, adjudication is a form of case-based reasoning. And we may be able better to understand its nature, and thus its vices and virtues, if we see it as an alternative to both expected utility theory and rule-bound decisions. This alternative responds to the distinctive characteristics ofjudicial institutions6.6 
Of related interest are findings about the consequences of basing choice and decision on reasons." An important result is that many decisions (and, in particular, nonintuitive violations of value-maximization) are better understood if one envisions decision makers as resorting to and relying on compelling reasons for Id at 46. 
Itzhak Gilboa and David Schmeidler, Case-Based Decision Theory, 110 Q J Econ 605, 608-10 (1995). 
Identification of the settings in which case-based decisions make sense is a complex matter. Case-based decisions are better than decisions based on expected utility theory when the latter imposes excessive cognitive demands. Case-based decisions are better than rule-bound decisions when particularistic judgments involve fewer errors without imposing high decision costs. It is possible that for the legal system, case-based decisions are often best, because judges can reduce their cognitive burdens in this way without producing the errors of (crude) rules. Of course rules are often best. For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, LegalReasoning andPoliticalConflict 161-64 (Oxford 1996). 
See Shafir, Simonson, and Tversky, Reason-basedchoice, in Goldstein and Hogarth, eds, Judgmentat 89-92 (cited in note 29). their decisions, rather than focusing on the options' value. This perspective is highly relevant to the law, and to the "constructive" approach to decision making emphasized here. 
Despite the possible advantages, in some settings, of casebased decision theory, an understanding of heuristic devices suggests that single-shot, intuitionistic judgments are frequently less accurate than judgments based on statistical regularities." This is particularly true of probabilistic judgments, for which people tend to have great confidence in their particular assessments. 'People are overconfident in evaluating the accuracy of their beliefs one at a time."9 The point is important to law, since participants in law often rely on projections of probability based on a highly particularistic understanding of a fact pattern. How likely is it, for example, that a certain course of action would cause harm? And how likely is it that a particularistic judgment, from a court, will perform better than a rule? 
Recent research suggests that in matters relevant to law, statistical judgments should receive greater attention. Experts in medical care, for example, responded to questionnaires with optimistic and inaccurate judgments about the median time between triage in an emergency department and administration of antibiotics in children with meningitis.0 It is interesting but perhaps not surprising to find that an expert witness in a malpractice case much understated the median time; but it is more surprising that the spectrum of opinions among doctors as a whole differs significantly from the statistical reality. The phenomenon appears to be attributable to certain biases affecting anecdotal recall-bias toward the perceived outcome and hindsight bias, by which people believe that an outcome that occurred was highly likely to do so." In medical malpractice cases, and perhaps a wide range of other cases involving questions of negligence founded on judgments of ordinary practice, the legal system would do well to move from anecdotes and experts to statistical data. "Medical expert testimony that differs significantly from these values has no basis in reality and ought not to be credited."72 
See Daniel Kahneman and Dan Lovallo, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts:A Cognitive Perspectiveon Risk Taking, 39 Management Science 17, 19-20 (1993). 
Id at 26. 
See William L. Meadow, et al, Ought "StandardCare"Be the "Standardof Care?, 147 Am J Diseases of Children 40 (1993). 
" Id at 43. 7 Id at 44. 
Here we are dealing not with factual errors, but with "tastes" or preferences that lead people to favor certain approaches to risk. Probability related tastes present hard questions for the policy analyst. These tastes matter to law insofar as they bear on the demand for legal regulation and insofar as they are highly likely to affect judgments of both juries and judges. 
People do not weight probabilities in a linear fashion. Most importantly, they greatly prefer the elimination of a risk over the diminution of a risk. Thus, it appears that people would much rather see a risk of .001 reduced to zero than a risk of .002 reduced to .001." It is not clear whether this preference should be characterized as irrational. Perhaps people receive a great deal of peace of mind from an eliminated risk, and a risk of reduced probability still creates residual fear. The point appears to be reflected in law. For example, the Clean Air Act speaks in terms of ensuring safe levels of air quality, admittedly a highly misleading way to set up the problem. 4 
A closely related "taste" is the avoidance of ambiguity. 5 At least when they lack relevant knowledge, and know that they do, people prefer situations of risk (in which probabilities can be assigned to outcomes) over situations of uncertainty (in which probabilities cannot be assigned). Thus people are averse to situations of uncertain probability and try to avoid choices that place them in such situations. Risk regulation is, of course, often undertaken when probabilities cannot be assigned. If people are averse to ambiguities, they may produce an incoherent pattern of regulation, perhaps based on an illusory perception, related to all-ornothing judgments, that some things are "safe" and others are "dangerous." 
As noted, people evaluate situations largely in accordance with their relation to a certain reference point; gains and losses 
See Redelmeier, et al, 270 JAMA at 73 (cited in note 16). "See 42 USC § 7409(b)(1) (1994). 
See Craig R. Fox and Amos Tversky, Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance, 110 Q J Econ 585 (1995). from the reference point are crucial. An ordinary reference is the status quo, which produces status quo bias.76 The legal system is certainly responsive to this kind of bias.77 
A simple and apparently uncontroversial assumption of most economists is that money is fungible. But the assumption is false.7" Money comes in compartments. People create "frames" that result in mental accounts through which losses and gains, including losses and gains in simple monetary terms, are not fungible with each other. A glance at ordinary practice shows that people often organize decisions in terms of separate budgets and accounts. Thus some money is for retirement; some is for vacation; some is for college tuition; some is for mortgage or rental payments. Mental accounting is an important aspect of financial self-control. 
The practice of mental accounting has a range of implications for law and policy. It suggests, for example, that government may be able to create certain mental accounts by creative policymaking. And it suggests that there may be a demand for publicly created mental accounts, perhaps as a self-control strategy, as for example with Social Security and other programs with an apparent paternalistic dimension. Some statutes that appear to prevent people from making choices as they wish may be best understood as responsive to the widespread desire to have separate mental accounts. Of course, there are private mechanisms for accomplishing this goal; but lawyers will not understand these mechanisms well unless they see that money itself is not fungible. 
IX. THE DIFFIcuLTY, OUTSIDE OF MARKETS, OF MAPPING 
NORMATiVE JUDGMENTS ONTO DOLLARS 
Often the legal system requires judges or juries to make judgments of some kind and then to translate those judgments into dollar amounts. How does this translation take place? Can it be done well? Research suggests that in many contexts, normative judgments are both predictable and nonarbitrary.79 When 76 See note 22 and accompanying text. 
.See Sunstein, EndogenousPreferences,in Sunstein, FreeMarkets at 252-53 (cited in note 21). 
" See Thaler, QuasiRationalEconomics at 26, 92 (cited in note 2); see also Viviana A. Zelizer, The SocialMeaningofMoney (Basic 1994). 
' See Daniel Kahneman and flana Ritov, Determinantsof Stated Willingness to Pay asked to assess bad behavior that might produce punitive damages on a bounded numerical scale, people come up with relatively uniform judgments. Similar uniformity has been found in contingent valuations of environmental amenities.8 oBut the act of mapping those normative judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale produces considerable unpredictability and arbitrariness. When people are asked how much they are willing to pay to protect two thousand birds, or how much a defendant should be punished for reckless conduct leading to personal injury, the numbers they generate seem to be stabs in the dark. The legal system, however, frequently relies on just such stabs. Thus, the award of damages for libel, sexual harassment, and pain and suffering are infected by severe difficulties, as is the award of punitive damages in general. An understanding of these difficulties may well lead to concrete reform proposals. Perhaps the "mapping" can occur by a legislative or regulatory body that decides, in advance, on how a normative judgment made on a bounded numerical scale or by comparison to preselected scenarios can be translated into dollars. 
A conventional assumption of economics is that people will discount both costs and benefits to present value." A thousand dollars today is worth more than a thousand dollars a year from now, because the future amount cannot be invested or used. But to what extent do people behave in accordance with this understanding? Sometimes people appear to have negative discount rates.82 Thus, teachers often choose to be paid in twelve monthly installments (September-August) rather than nine (SeptemberJune); and people often receive tax refunds from the government in lieu of adjusting the withholding rate, thus providing interestFor Public Goods: A Study in the Headline Method, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5, 28-30 (1994); Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with notes on cognition and valuation in law) (cited in note t). The latter paper, based on 900 subjects, discusses computer construction of 120 million juries, including (for example) all white juries, all male juries, all poor juries, all female juries, all Hispanic juries, well educated juries, poorly educated juries. It finds that these disparate juries evaluate outrageousness and appropriate punishment in similar ways when using a bounded numerical scale of 1 to 6. The story is much more complex for an unbounded dollar scale. 
o See Kahneman and Ritov, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty at 28-30 (cited in note 79). 8' See Daniel A. Farber and Paul A. Hemnersbaugh, The Shadow of the Future,46 Vand L Rev 267 (1993); George Tolley, et al, Valuing Health for Policy 130-33, 310-12 (Chicago 1994). 
See George Loewenstein and Richard H. Thaler, IntertemporalChoice, in Goldstein and Hogarth, eds, Judgment 365 (cited in note 16), on which I draw for this section. free loans to the government.83 There is also evidence that workers prefer to have increasing wage rates, in which weekly wages increase each year, even though (in the aggregate equivalent) decreasing wage rates would provide more money quickly.M Loss aversion may help explain this phenomenon; a decreasing wage reflects constant losses from the reference point. 
But sometimes people are myopic, in the sense that their behavior reveals extremely high positive discount rates. Studies of teenagers and purchasers of energy inefficient appliances suggest a large and puzzling willingness to disregard future costs and benefits.85 The line between absence of information and myopia may be thin in practice, but it appears that well-informed people sometimes treat the future as if it barely mattered. 
These findings have many implications for law and policy. Environmental protection, for example, requires development of an appropriate discount rate for both costs and benefits.86 It is not clear that regulators should base their decisions on people's intertemporal tastes;" but if they do, the conventional economic understanding, embodied in current policy, may be wrong. Calculation of damages in cases of future losses may well require a discount rate; here people's tastes probably matter a great deal, and use of a conventional discount rate may produce errors. Myopia bears above all on the prescriptive and normative tasks of law. Where people are myopic, information may not be enough to produce optimal behavior. And on the normative side, the existence of myopia may support paternalism, or at least antiantipaternalism. 
Economic analysis of law has proceeded on the basis of inaccurate understandings of decision and choice. For the last generation those understandings have proved fruitful in spite of their flaws. Before economics became part of the study of law, people analyzed law without having much, if any, sense of how to explore its effects on behavior. Better understandings were not yet available, and simplicity has its virtues. But it is past time to see what can be learned-whether positive, prescriptive, or normative-from bringing to bear more accurate understandings about human behavior. 
Id at 366. 
See id at 373. 
Id at 366. 
See Peter S. Mennell and Richard B. Stewart, EnvironmentalLaw and Policy 10911, 114 (Little, Brown 2d ed 1994). 
See Tolley, et al, ValuingHealth at 130-33, 310-12 (cited in note 81). 
In this essay I have at most sketched those understandings. A large question involves the extent to which education and "debiasing" can counteract cognitive and motivational distortions, so as to eliminate some of the effects described above. 8 Despite large recent advances, behavioral research remains in an early stage. An understanding of its implications for law and policy will take a long time. Let's go to work. 
' Some of these effects, such as a taste for fairness, should not be characterized as distortions; on the contrary, such tastes may help prevent unfortunate outcomes in prisoners' dilemma situations. See Robert H. Frank, Thomas Gilovich, and Dennis T. Regan, Does Studying EconomicsInhibitCooperation?,7 J Econ Persp 159, 163-67 (Spring 1993). 
Cass R. Sunstein 
I. THE PHILOSOPHERS' BRIEF 
The assisted suicide cases are the most dramatic to come before the Supreme Court in recent years, and one of the most striking (and certainly well-publicized) documents before the Court is widely known as The Philosophers' Brief.' The Brief bears Ronald Dworkin's distinctive mark, and indeed Dworkin is listed as lead counsel, though the Briefis also signed by Thomas Nagel, Robert Nozick, John Rawls, Thomas Scanlon, and Judith Jarvis Thompson. The Philosophers' Brief offers an ambitious and highly theoretical argument. It says that some "deeply personal decisions pose controversial questions about how and why human life has value. In a free society, individuals must be allowed to make those decisions for themselves, out of their own faith, conscience, and convictions." 2 The Brief urges that distinctions between "omissions" (failing to provide continued treatment) and "acts" (providing drugs that will produce death) are "based on a misunderstanding of the pertinent moral principles. "3 Drawing on the abortion cases, the Brief says that every person "has a right to make the 'most intimate and personal choices central to personal dignity and autonomy,'" a right that encompasses "some control over the time and manner of one's death." 4 The Brief thus urges the Court to declare a constitutional right to physician-assisted suicide. Dworkin's personal gloss on the Brief says that the requested right "defines a very general moral and * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Larry Lessig, Martha Nussbaum, David Strauss, and Richard Posner for helpful comments and discussion. 
Ct. 2258 (1997), reprintedas Ronald Dworkin et al., Assisted Suicide: The Philosophers' Brief, N.Y. REV. OFBOOKS, Mar. 
constitutional principle-that every competent person has the right to make momentous personal decisions which invoke fundamental religious or philosophical convictions about life's value for himself."6 
As a matter of political morality, the argument in the Philosopher's Briefis certainly reasonable, and it cannot easily be shown to be wrong. But I do not think that the Supreme Court should declare a right to physicianassisted suicide, and this disagreement helps get to the heart of my disagreements with Professor Dworkin. I believe that the Court should generally be reluctant to invalidate legislation on the basis of abstract philosophical arguments, because the Court is poorly equipped to evaluate those arguments, and because predicted consequences, on which philosophical arguments tend to be silent, matter a great deal to law. By contrast, Dworkin appears to think that the Supreme Court should not much hesitate to find a constitutional right of some kind if it is presented with (what judges can be persuaded to find) convincing philosophical arguments for that right, at least if the right "fits" with the rest of the legal fabric. Thus while Professor Dworkin and I do not much disagree on what justice requires, we do disagree, hardly all the time but I suspect not rarely, about the appropriate path of the Supreme Court of the United States. 
Yet I find much to accept, and to admire, in Professor Dworkin's essay here.7 Dworkin's attack on modem challenges to "objectivity" strikes me as right and convincing. Skepticism about moral truth is indeed incoherent-hopeless for law or for anything else. An argument for incompletely theorized agreements cannot sensibly be rooted in skepticism. (Hence there is all the difference in the world between skepticism and a recognition of cognitive or motivational limitations on the part of certain people engaged in distinctive social roles.) As an abstraction or a creed, "antitheory" makes no sense. The notion of "justificatory ascent" rightly signals the fact that a judge may have to get ambitious in order to think well about some cases. 9 Dworkin is correct to say that "there is no a priori or wholesale test for deciding when [such an ascent] will be required. A lawyer or judge must be well along in thinking about an issue before he knows 
ought not to be taken to represent pragmatism. John Dewey, for example, had no problem speaking in terms of objectivity; and the same is true for Hilary Putnam, whose self-described pragmatism is, I think, close to Dewey's version. 
AND POLITICAL CONFLICT 50-53 (1996) [hereinafter SUNSTEIN, LEGAL REASONING]. whether he will be tempted or drawn into a more theoretical argument than he first thought or hoped.""0 
It is also true that any analogical argument depends on an argument of some kind, and hence on a theory of some kind. The distinction between metaphysical and professional grounds for distrusting philosophical abstractions is quite important. Dworkin's suggestion that my own argument rests on "professional" (or role-dependent) grounds is entirely right. And Dworkin has described my own position with both courtesy and care; for that I am extremely grateful. It may even be right to say, with Dworkin, that those who celebrate incompletely theorized agreements in a qualified way are, in important respects, in the same basic camp as Dworkin." And it is nice to see an essay praising theory begin with the suggestion, "Examples are better than anything ....".12 
With all this agreement, why might anyone be reluctant to join a chorus of praise for abstraction in law? There are three reasons. The first is mostly a matter of emphasis; the second is more substantial, though in the end it may be a matter of emphasis too; the third involves the limited role of the Court in the constitutional system, and it lies at the heart of my disagreement with the Philosophers' Brief. My basic suggestions are that Dworkin places too little emphasis on the need to attend to facts, which are crucial to law, and gives too little attention to issues of institutional role, which are a central part of constitutional law, Dworkin's particular concern. 
II. INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS AS ORDINARY PRACTICE 
Judges ordinarily work with principles of a low level of theoretical ambition. Conceptual ascents are relatively rare in law. Like all of us, judges have limited time and capacities, and like almost all of us, judges are not trained philosophers. They know that if they try to resolve large philosophical issues, they may blunder badly. In these circumstances judges try, to the extent that they can, to bracket large-scale issues of the good and the right, and to decide cases on grounds that seem reasonable to those who have diverse views on those issues, and (perhaps even more important) to those who have little idea what, on those issues, their views are. 
should be decided on the basis of some "original meaning," to be invoked and characterized without reference to moral or political arguments at all. See generally ANTONIN SCALIA, A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION: FEDERAL COURTS AND THE LAW (1997). 

This point helps explain the legal culture's distrust of philosophical abstractions and its comparative fondness for both rules and analogies. Many rules can attract support from plural foundations-consider a speed limit law, or liability for intentional torts-and hence rules help possible a form of cooperation that is indispensable to a pluralistic sociemtya.k1e3 A great virtue of analogical thinking is that it often assists in this same endeavor, for people who are uncertain about large-scale issues can often conclude that, whatever they think, they agree that X is like Y, for a relatively lower-level reason on which they can converge. To engage in analogical thinking, we need not, much of the time, attempt to think in highly ambitious terms. 
This idea of course has a resemblance and owes a great deal to John Rawls' idea of an overlapping consensus.14 But there is a difference. The overlapping consensus is itself highly theorized and a matter of abstractions. Rather like Dworkin, Rawls is concerned to show that when people disagree on particulars they can make progress by ascending to a level of greater theoretical ambition.' 5 This is true; it helps explain the role of conceptual ascent inboth politics and law (and science too). But something different is also true: People can often agree on particulars when they disagree about or are uncertain on abstractions. Conceptual or justificatory descents may well work best. 
This point is particularly important for law within a highly pluralistic culture. It is important because it is a way of promoting stability, reducing strains on time and capacities, and demonstrating mutual respect; it is not very respectful to take on other people's most fundamental commitments when it is not necessary to do so.? 6 We might even think that those who stress incompletely theorized agreements believe that ordinary law and politics bear the same relation to political liberalism as political liberalism bears to the great questions in moral metaphysics. Just as Rawls aspires to "leave philosophy as it is," by bracketing the large questions in general philosophy, so participants in law and politics seek, if they can, to leave political philosophy very much as it is, by bracketing the large disputes in political philosophy, such as the dispute between political liberalism and perfectionist liberalism. 
In much of his work, Dworkin has emphasized the value of abstract theorizing in law, and he invokes abstractions to assist in the decision of 
(1996), for the important idea of economizing on moral disagreement. particular constitutional cases; but it is not clear whether and how he disagrees with what I have said thus far. 17 His principal qualification (an important and in my view an unexceptionable one) is that a justificatory ascent cannot be ruled out in advance. I agree. It may well be, then, that our difference on the subject of abstraction and particularity is really one of emphasis. I can think of only one reason why the difference may be more than that. It may be that Dworkin thinks (as many do) that theories and abstractions have a kind of reliability that particular judgments lack, whereas I think (with Rawls) that neither particular, nor general judgments should be treated as foundational for law or morality. In moral thinking, everything (concrete and abstract) is subject to potential revision as we deliberate, and in both morality and law, theories have no special priority simply because they are general and abstract. But it is not at all clear that Dworkin disagrees with this point. 
If our difference is only one of emphasis, why might it matter? To take a large example, the difference bears on the whole idea of substantive due process and thus on the dispute over Roe v. Wade, 18 whose basic outcome Dworkin enthusiastically defends. Unlike Dworkin, those who favor incompletely theorized agreements are uncertain about the very idea of a "right to privacy." They seek more cautious grounds; they are reluctant to invoke large-scale abstractions about any such right in order to invalidate the outcomes of political processes. And if courts had sought incompletely theorized agreements, they would have proceeded very differently. For example, they might have been moved to decide Griswold v. Connecticut19the beginning of the modem excursion into substantive due process-not on the basis of that highly contentious right, but on some more modest ground. They might, for example, have emphasized the peculiar history and provenance of the ban on the use of contraceptives within marriage, a ban that left most women unaffected and operated only to prevent poor women from getting contraceptives from clinics. 20 - Thus it might be concluded that the statute was a largely irrational and discriminatory means of promoting its own asserted goals. A fact-driven opinion, bracketing the most controversial questions, would have said little about a right whose scope need not have been much defined in Griswold itself. Or the Court might have decided the case on the narrower and democracy-reinforcing ground that a provision of about the extent to which an appreciation of incompletely theorized agreements counts as a criticism of Dworkin). 
the criminal law lapses when that provision appears to lack any real support from its own citizenry, so much so that it has not, in many decades, been invoked by any prosecutor in any prosecution. 2 1 
Professor Dworkin appears to celebrate Roe v. Wade; he thinks that the decision reflects the right conception of constitutional liberty under law, and that (for that reason) the case was rightly decided. I think that the decision has created unnecessary problems for the Court and the nation. It did so because in its (wholly unnecessary) breadth and in its blindness to matters of fact and institutional role (on which more below), the Court did too much too soon, in a way that has had enduring harmful effects on American life (emphatically including that part of American life that involves equality on the basis of sex 2 3). 
I am not arguing that Roe v. Wade should have been decided the other way; but the Court ought not to have invoked ambitious abstractions about privacy or liberty to resolve so many issues so quickly. A court that favored incompletely theorized agreements would have decided Roe v. Wade quite narrowly. The Court might have said, for example, that the Texas law was unconstitutionally vague (as Justice Blackmun's initial draft in fact argued). Or it might have said that someone who alleges (as did Roe herself) that she was raped may not be required to bring the child to term. Or-if the Court eventually was forced to think more ambitiously-the Court may have bracketed issues involving the political and moral status of the fetus and argued that if men are not obliged to devote their bodies to the protection of tahirddegpraeretieosf, wthoemoreenticmaalyanmobt itbieons,o obbultigpeedrheaitphser.it24 isThleisssviceowntaelnstoioruesquiifreist AT THE BAR OF POLITICS 145-56 (2d ed. 1986); cf. Guido Calabresi, Foreword: Antidiscrimination and ConstitutionalAccountability (What the Bork-BrennanDebate Ignores), 105 HARV. L. REV. 80, 80-86 (1991) (describing various approaches to the relationship between majoritarian preferences and the judicial branch of government). Of course there is a degree of theoretical ambition in the notion of desuetude, and it is probably unproductive to debate in what sense that notion calls for more or less ambition than the notion of privacy. In my view, the more difficult and contentious questions raised by a right to privacy could have been bracketed through this democracy-promoting device. What is crucial is that the notion of desuetude (which creates a kind of "remand" to the public) leaves much undecided and is less of a displacement of democratic prerogatives than the right of privacy. 
ABORTION, EUTHANASIA, AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM (1993). 
CHANGE? 173-265 (1991). Rosenberg argues-to summarize a complex discussion-that Roe v. Wade helped demobilize the women's movement, created the Moral Majority, and ruined the prospects for the Equal Rights Amendment-ironic consequences for a decision meant in part to promote equality of the sexes. 
succeeds in putting to one side any view about the moral or political status of the fetus.25 
It does not much matter if any of these particular claims is convincing; I offer them simply for purposes of illustration. What matters is that those who stress incompletely theorized agreements on particulars are likely to seek to avoid conceptual ascents if (and only if) they can, especially when courts are asked to invalidate legislation on constitutional grounds. This idea leads in directions that Professor Dworkin appears to reject. But perhaps this point is really about institutional issues-or about professionspecific norms-on which more in a moment. 
III. FACTS 
My second difference with Professor Dworkin-and I am not sure that it is a disagreement-involves the role of facts. In my view, the greatest achievement of the well-known Chicago School (and an incompletely theorized agreement may be possible on this point) has been to draw attention to the central importance of facts to an understanding of law. What does law actually do? This is a question on which the content of law must (at least partly) depend, and it is a question that lawyers and judges ask too infrequently, and answer with inadequate tools. What, for example, are the effects of laws calling for minimum wages, rent controls, implied warranties of various sorts, liability for drug manufacturers? Philosophy alone will not tell us; we need to investigate facts. And much of normative jurisprudence, with its heavy philosophical bent, continues to operate in a factual vacuum. 
If normative jurisprudence is intended to produce not only illumination but also answers to legal questions, this is beyond unfortunate, for problems involving libel law, sexual privacy, homosexuality, and the right to die depend in large part on underlying issues of fact. I do not know how to approach the product liability questions that Professor Dworkin raises without investigating a range of factual details; judicial assessment of philosophical claims-figuring out what is "fair"-is at most a start. If courts imposed liability on DES manufacturers without a demonstration of causation, would there be adverse consequences on the pharmaceutical market? Might such liability result in systematically higher prices, which 
Justice Brennan a few years ago. See Calabresi, supra note 21, at 89-90, 109-110, 134-43. would increase burdens on and ill-health among poor people?27 Might such liability produce sharply diminished incentives to produce new medicines? These questions can hardly be irrelevant. What policy for products liability will best promote human health? Indeed, the whole area of product liability seems poorly suited to judicial (not to mention jury) capacities. Partly for this reason, the topic is increasingly removed from the judiciary and placed in the hands of people who know much more about underlying facts and also have a better democratic pedigree. The Consumer Product Safety Commission ("CPSC") does not spend most of its time on philosophical issues; surely the CPSC would do better if it were both concerned with and capable of philosophical analysis, but it would be a stretch to say that philosophical confusion is the principal source of existing problems with the 28 CPSC. 
This general movement-away from courts and toward administrative regulation-may well be the most important institutional development of the twentieth century. Because it is a sensible response to institutional limitations of the judiciary-limitations involving not theory (as Dworkin understands it) but understandings of fact and consequences-that movement is (mostly) to be celebrated. Of course Professor Dworkin is aware of the development, but in his work on legal interpretation he does not much discuss it. The gap is notable in light of the fact that, in what is by far the most important case on legal interpretation in the last two decades, the Supreme Court ruled that precisely because interpretation involves judgments of policy and principle, ambiguous statutes will be interpreted by the regulatory agencies entrusted with their implementation.2 9 
Now of course any assessment of facts is theory-laden; as Dworkin rightly stresses, we do not know what and how facts count unless we have a (normative) account. Nothing I have said here denies this point. But many legal debates are sterile-conceptualistic, terminological, interminableprecisely because the participants do not investigate facts, when it is facts on which they may be able to make some progress. Perhaps most important, an understanding of the facts may well equip people with different theoretical positions to converge on the same judgment. If, for example, an increase in rent control can be shown to diminish the available housing stock, in a way that particularly hurts the poor, perhaps people can reject rent control whatever they think about liberty and equality. Thus an assessment of facts may well aid in the achievement of incompletely theorized agreements. 
The point bears on approaches to legal interpretation as well, where an assessment of relevant facts can be quite important. To see the point, let us turn to two cases of considerable interest to Professor Dworkin. In Riggs v. Palmer, the New York Court of Appeals held that a nephew, who had murdered his uncle in order to inherit from him, could not receive his inheritance, notwithstanding the fact that the language of the statutes governing wills made no exception for murderers. 31 The Court carved out an exception from the apparently plain language of the statute. In Tennessee Valley Authority ("TVA ") v. Hill,32 the Supreme Court held that the Endangered Species Act prohibited the government from completing a dam, because completion would endanger the snail darter, a fish of little ecological interest. 33 The Court refused to carve out an exception from the apparently plain language of the statute. Professor Dworkin thinks that Riggs was rightly decided and TVA v. Hill wrongly decided, because the court's task is tcoallmedakfeorthjuedgbmesetnctsonasgtaruincsttivtehesnenepseheowf aandpafsotr ltehgeisTlaVtiAve. 34event, a task that 
I do not disagree so much with the proposed results as with this manner of approaching the cases. In my view, a great deal depends on issues involving incentives and comparative competence, and these have a large empirical dimension. On this count there are many relevant questions. What incentives would be created for legislatures by decisions like Riggs v. Palmer, or by judicial insistence (as the dissenting judge urged) on mechanical application of the apparently unambiguous text? Would the latter course lead legislatures to be more careful in advance, and might they enact exceptions after the fact when exceptions make sense? Would the costs of decision, including the problem of legal uncertainty, much increase if courts were willing to decide cases the way Professor Dworkin wants? What is the likelihood that judges would blunder if they made exceptions from apparently plain language in the interest of the best constructive they depend on aTssheesssemqenutesstoiofnisnsatirteutiuonnlaikleclyapatocithieasveancdopneterxfot-rfmreaencaen.s3w5ers; interpretation? 
EXAMINATION OF RULE-BASED DECISION-MAKING IN LAW AND IN LIFE (1991), from which I have learned a great deal. We may be able to make the point more vivid with an example from the world 
For what it is worth, I believe that Riggs v. Palmer was right (and thus I agree with Dworkin), because (to make a long story short) no reasonable person could want a murderer to inherit, and because this easilycontained exception from the statute would cause little increase in legal uncertainty. And I believe that TVA v. Hill was also right (and I disagree here with Dworkin), because reasonable people could seek to protect the snail darter under the circumstances of the case and because this (hard to confine) exception from the statute would create a great deal of doubt about the future meaning of the Endangered Species Act. But these conclusions are far less important than the claim that an assessment of the underlying issues requires not only conceptual analysis about what makes something "law," or some particular law the best it can be, but also a set of predictions, largely factual in character, about the consequences of alternative interpretive approaches in light of the capacities and likely performance of relevant institutions. 
Some members of the most prominent Chicago School, and here I happily join that School, may be against (some kinds of) theory in the (very limited) sense that they are pro-facts. To the extent that there is a single message in Judge Posner's Overcoming Law, I think that this is it. In this respect Professor Dworkin's emphasis on the (occasional) need for good theory strikes me not so much wrong-indeed it is not wrong at all-as misdirected. It suggests that a better legal system will come from a legal system that is better at philosophy-as if the real flaw of American law is inadequate philosophy. This, again, is not without truth; better philosophy might well make law better-more fair, coherent, less confused-in some contexts. But any claim of this sort should be supplemented by an emphasis on the need for a better sense of underlying facts. Does the problem with of sports. In the 1997 playoffs, five New York Knicks players left the bench during a fight on the court, and National Basketball Association officials suspended the players in accordance with a rule that calls for an automatic suspension whenever players leave the bench during a fight. One of the suspended players, Patrick Ewing, left the bench but did not get close to the melee. Did the NBA officials properly interpret the rule? Professor Dworkin thinks not. He says, "You don't punish people for acts that not only don't cause harm, but aren't even of the kind to cause the harm that the statute was designed to prevent." See Asking Around, NEW YORKER, June 2, 1997, at 35. But an important question is whether attention to the purpose of the rule ("the harm that the statute was designed to prevent") significantly increases the costs of decision (and uncertainty)-and also introduces risks of error of its own, partly because of bias, partly because of difficulties in accurately characterizing the purposes of the rule. Hence Dworkin-a New Yorker and perhaps a Knicks fan?-seems to me not to have come to terms with the best arguments on behalf of the officials' mechanical and on one view extremely wonderful interpretation of the rule. (On the other hand, candor compels the perhaps unsurprising confession that the present author tends to favor the World Champion Chicago Bulls.) the Environmental Protection Agency, or courts reviewing EPA rules, lie (principally) in inadequate normative theory? Exactly how valuable would a conceptual ascent be to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and to courts assessing their activities? The answer is not that it would have no value at all. But it is only part of the picture, and the remaining part helps show the limitations of theory to an understanding of law. 
The same basic point applies to the law of tort as tort law is developed by judges; it bears on constitutional law too, emphatically including the right to physician-assisted suicide. This point-I have saidmay not amount to a disagreement with Professor Dworkin, but it has concrete consequences for how to do and to think about law. For example, the philosophical abstractions offered in the Philosopher'sBrief seem to me reasonable; certainly it cannot easily be shown that they are wrong. But (even putting the institutional issues to one side), do they make out a case for a constitutional right, invalidating enacted law in almost all states? I do not believe that they do. 37 Even if the theoretical claims are right, much depends on empirical projections. 
For example, a crucial question is whether, in practice, a right to physician-assisted suicide may actually reduce patient autonomy, by leading doctors to bring about involuntary or nonvoluntary suicide; by decreasing autonomy especially among people who are poor or ill-educated, who may become unduly vulnerable to doctors; or by discouraging patients, families, and doctors from coming to terms with the fact of death. These questions have important philosophical dimensions, but they are not ones that philosophy alone can answer; they are insistently empirical. Some students of the Dutch experience believe that a right to physician-assisted suicide has, in practice, promoted the autonomy of doctors and decreased the autonomy of patients, leading patients to take their lives when far better alternatives were available. 38 Perhaps this is not the best understanding of the Dutch experience, 39 but even if it is not, what would a right to physician-assisted suicide mean in America, with its very different norms? (Majorities, and majorities of groups, cannot decide on the content of rights. But it is not entirely irrelevant that substantial majorities of African-Americans, fearful of RICHARD A. POSNER, AGING AND OLD AGE 235-61 (1995). 
what a right to physician-assisted suicide would mean in practice, oppose any such right.) 
In my view, the Philosophers' Brief is not convincing (a normative as well as empirical claim) largely because it does not sufficiently explore institutional issues or concerns of the sort just raised-the inevitable focus of the Court itself4°-and mostly relies instead on a combination of (reasonable) philosophical abstractions and passages from Supreme Court decisions. To be sure, the Brief is not oblivious to the underlying problems, and it makes a reference in this regard to the need for procedural safeguards to counteract those problems. But such safeguards, however well-designed they may be on paper, cannot alleviate the underlying concerns, which are (it is necessary to emphasize) empirical rather than a priori in character. A possible conclusion is that the federal system is admirably well-adapted to deal with this issue, for it can engage in a range of experiments. Indeed, Oregon is now embarking on such an experiment, and other states will undoubtedly follow. We should know what such a right would mean in practice before we insist that it should exist in law. 
IV. JUDICIAL CAPACITIES AND THE JUDICIAL ROLE 
Who could possibly object to the adoption, by judges or anyone else, of a good theory about the right or the good? If judges are able to identify the appropriate category of rights, shouldn't they? If a conception of rights embodies the appealing notion that a heterogeneous society consists of a community of equals, why shouldn't the Court identify that (by hypothesis) very appealing conception? Dworkin, asking such questions, is puzzled about why anyone would want our judges to be ostriches. Isn't an antipathy to theory a kind of willful blindness, or a form of philistinism? 
Judges are not ostriches, and their caution about theory stems from the distinctive place where they stand, which requires an understanding of the particular role of judges in the American political system. Cognitive limitations, accepted as such by participants in all social practices, are a central part of any account of the responsibilities of those who find themselves in a particular role. Judges are not (let us repeat the point) trained as philosophers, and judges who make theoretically ambitious arguments may well make mistakes that are quite costly, especially in constitutional cases, where their arguments are (at least theoretically!) final. We can find many instances of (what Professor Dworkin and I would agree to be) ambitious error from judicial philosophers; consider Dred Scott v. Sanford,41 Lochner v. New York, 42 Buckley v. Valeo,43 and Richmond v. Croson.44 In all of these cases, courts invoked theoretically ambitious claims about liberty and equality to invalidate legislation. In the first two cases, the nation lived with the consequences for a very long time. In the second two cases, the nation lives with the consequences still. 
But these cases are aberrations, and thankfully so. A large part of the distinctive morality of adjudication is role-morality, and it involves the presumptive avoidance of theoretically ambitious arguments as a ground for invalidating enacted law. Thus courts generally seek, because of their own understanding of their limited capacities, to offer low-level rationales on which diverse people may converge. This is so especially when the consequence of theoretical ambition would be to invalidate the outcomes of democratic processes; it is here that the Court properly proceeds cautiously, again because of its understanding of its limited capacities in thinking about philosophical abstractions. And it is notable that an emphasis on these points focuses attention on institutions and practices that Dworkin's enthusiasm for philosophical argument tends to obscure: administrative agencies, state-bystate experimentation, and legislative rather than judicial solutions. 
An analogy may be helpful here. Of course there is a sense in which philosophy is foundational to law, just as theoretical physics is in some sense foundational to the construction of airplanes. And at times those who build airplanes need to know something about theoretical physics. But in ordinary practice, those confronted with the problems produced by the construction of airplanes are not assisted by accounts of the foundations of physics; such accounts may be confusing to people of limited time and capacities, and attention to the accounts may divert the builders from successful performance of the tasks at hand. The same goes for ordinary judges and lawyers. The issues raised by the asserted right to physician-assisted suicide require, among other things, intense focus on particulars and (especially important) close attention to facts. Would such a right, in practice, undermine the autonomy of those approaching death, and give excessive power to doctors, in a way that threatens to produce nonvoluntary and involuntary death? Would such a right undermine many particular practices now taken as legitimate (consider the activities of the Food and Drug Administration), and if so how might that fact count against the right? 
60 U.S. (19 How.) 393 (1856). 198 U.S. 45 (1905). 425 U.S. 946 (1976). 488 U.S. 469 (1988). 
Questions of this kind suggest that the Court was correctly wary about accepting the argument in the Philosophers' Brief, not because the argument is necessarily wrong, but because judges, in light of their limited role in the constitutional structure, should be cautious about accepting abstract arguments on behalf of rights whose real-world consequences are hard to predict. 
I am speaking of a presumption, or a mood, and not of a rule. Three qualifications are worth mentioning. First, it is possible that an incompletely theorized agreement might be reached on the presumption, but outside observers might well attempt to offer a more ambitious argument on its behalf. The presumptive argument for incompletely theorized agreements, in its fullest form, depends on some (controversial) abstractions. Second, exceptions to the presumption might be made when the abstractions are clearly right; consider Brown v. Board of Education4. 5 Sometimes a period of common-law development can show that an ambitious argument is too insistent to be ignored. This was the case in Brown, and it may eventually be the case in the context of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Third, the grounds for judicial humility-for judicial reluctance to disturb the results of democratic processes on the basis of philosophical abstractionsare undercut when it can be shown that political processes are defective from the standpoint of what we might consider the internal morality of democracy.46 Thus courts should be less reluctant to invoke abstractions as a basis for invalidating enacted law when the relevant law excludes people from political participation, or when it undermines the right to freedom of political speech. 
Of course these conclusions raise many questions, and they are themselves theory-laden.47 Most of the ordinary work of law is incompletely theorized, and hence courts have not self-consciously adopted theoretical arguments on behalf of the latter two qualifications, even though the law generally seems to follow them. To defend the qualifications, it would be necessary to make some claims about institutional capacities and the nature and primacy of democratic self-government. And the view that the judicial role is properly aggressive when democratic obstacles beset ordinary politics may itself have to be theorized, both in defending the general claim and in specifying it by giving content to the notion of democratic obstacles. 
REVIEW (1980); see also SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION, supra note 24, at 162-94. 
I think that these theoretically ambitious arguments should be accepted by courts, as indeed they largely have been, because and to the extent that they can be shown to be clearly true. What must be emphasized is that these arguments suggest-and there really is no contradiction herethat the distinctive morality of adjudication in a pluralistic society calls for a presumption in favor of theoretical modesty, especially when courts are asked to invalidate legislation. 
It is here that my difference from Professor Dworkin has some consequences. In the context of the right to physician-assisted suicide, an incompletely theorized agreement in favor of invalidation seems hard to obtain. 8 Judges who sit on the Supreme Court are rightly reluctant to reject the considered moral judgments of their fellow citizens. The reluctance might be overcome if those moral judgments were plainly wrong, or if there was a problem in the system of democratic deliberation that has produced barriers to physician-assisted suicide. But the moral issues are complex, in large part because reasonable people believe that in practice a right to physician-assisted suicide would undermine patient autonomy, rightly understood. In these circumstances courts should be cautious about invoking philosophical abstractions to invalidate the outcomes of democratic processes .49 
Dworkin responds to the plea for judicial modesty largely by invoking the fact that the Court has been invested with the power of judicial review. He thinks that I have confused the question of jurisdiction with the question of justification. But I wonder whether the confusion is not his rather than mine. The existence of jurisdiction-of judicial review-is quite 731-43 (2d Cir. 1996) (Calabresi, J., concurring). 
the Court had been able to suspend judgment on the issue of physician-assisted suicide, at least for a time; it is most unfortunate that American law lacks an explicit doctrine of timing, allowing suspension of a constitutional decision until the nation has had more experience with the underlying practice. Id. at 2275. Because of the importance of facts, and the complexity of the moral questions, more practice would be desirable before the Court comes to closure. I therefore agree with Professor Dworkin's suggestion-intended as a second-best substitute for invalidation-that the Court might have done well to think seriously about techniques for suspending judgment on the constitutionality of physician-assisted suicide. Alternatively, the Court might, in cases of this kind, attempt an incompletely theorized agreement in the form of a "remand" of constitutionally sensitive issues to the public, as, for example, through a ruling that the criminal law may not be invoked in certain areas without a focused, recent democratic judgment that it ought to be. Two prominent enthusiasts for incompletely theorized agreements-Professor Bickel and Judge Calabresi-are associated with Yale, but they may well be taken as charter members of the Chicago School insofar as they have sought ways to enable judges to bracket high-level moral questions in the interest of ensuring more in the way of democratic deliberation. 
ARIZONA STATE LAWJOURNAL uninformative on the standard of review or the occasions for deference. American judges have a wide range of devices by which to counteract their own distinctive limitations; the preference for incompletely theorized agreements is one of those devices. As Dworkin ably shows, there is no (good) abstract argument against abstractions. But there are reasons, both concrete and abstract, both empirical and theoretical, to think that judges in a deliberative democracy do best if they (usually) avoid the most contentious abstractions when they can, especially if they are asked to invalidate enacted law. 
How Law Constructs Preferences 
INTRODUCTION 
In the last two decades, social scientists have learned a great deal about how people actually make decisions and choices.' Much of this work requires qualifications of rational choice models.2 Those models are often wrong in the simple sense that they yield inaccurate predictions. Decisions are affected by cognitive limitations and motivational distortions that press choices in unanticipated directions. It follows that a normative account of rational choice (such as expected utility theory) may well lack descriptive accuracy. 3 But it does not follow that people's behavior is unpredictable, systematically irrational, random, rule-free, or elusive to social scientists. On the contrary, the departures from rational choice can be described, used, and sometimes even modeled, at least in broad outline. One of the most important findings-and the one I will emphasize here-is that preferences and values often do not predate the moment of choice. Often preferences and values are constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations.4 People do not generally consult a freestanding "preference menu" from which selections are made at the moment of choice; preferences can be a product of procedure, description, and context, and * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. This essay was the basis for the Ryan Lecture, delivered at Georgetown University Law Center on October 8, 1997. It draws on Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages: (with Notes on Cognitionand Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071 (1998); Cass R. Sunstein, BehavioralAnalysis of Law, 64 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1997); Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, & Richard Thaler, A BehavioralApproach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming May 1998). The author would like to thank the members of the Georgetown community for their extraordinary hospitality on that occasion. The reader is asked to make allowances for remarks originally written for oral presentation. I am also very grateful to Christine Jolls, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Richard Thaler for their help with joint work and for many discussions; none of them is responsible for errors here. 
Rationality?, 34 J. ECON. LITERATURE 669 (1996); Matthew Rabin, Psychology and Economics, 36 J. ECON. LITERATURE 11 (1998). 
the evidence I discuss shows how people react to the presence of decision costs, and it is far from irrational to take those costs into account. It is also fully rational to consider the effects of social norms on choice, since norm-violations can count as costs. It is far less important to struggle over the question of whether the evidence shows violations of rationality than to be as clear as possible on how human beings actually behave-it is the latter issue that I am concerned with here. 
FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR 185 (Kenneth Arrow et al. eds., 1996). 
supra note 3. 
2637 all three of these may take different forms. "Alternative descriptions of the same choice problems lead to systematically different preferences; strategically equivalent elicitation procedures give rise to different choices; and the preference between x5 and y often depends on the choice set within which they are embedded.", 
This point is especially important for law. The legal system is pervasively in the business of constructing procedures, descriptions, and contexts for choice. Of course the legal system creates procedures" descriptions, and contexts in the course of litigated cases. For example, the alternatives (selected to be) placed before the jury or judge may matter a great deal. Because people seek to avoid the extremes, liability or conviction on some count A may very much depend on the nature of counts B, C, and D. In this respect the preferences and values of juries and judges may well be constructed by law. But similar points hold outside of the courtroom as well. The allocation of legal entitlements and the structures created for exchange (or nonexchange) by law may well affect both preferences and values. 
For purposes of analysis we might distinguish among three different academic tasks: positive, prescriptive, and normative. Positive work is concerned with predictions. If, contrary to conventional assumptions, people dislike losses far more than they like equivalent gains, predictions will go wrong insofar as they rest on conventional assumptions. Law can play a constructive role in helping to establish whether to frame something as a loss or as a gain. This point has important implications for positive analysis of law, prominently including the Coase theorem; 6 as we will see, it suggests that in one respect, the Coase theorem is quite wrong. We will also see that if people are averse to extremes, a problem will arise for a simple axiom of revealed preference theory.7 
Prescriptive work is concerned with showing how society might actually reach shared goals; this is a central purpose of economic analysis of law. Consider the following information campaigns, which conventional analysis deems equivalent: (a) If you use energy conservation methods, you will save $X per year; and (b) If you do not use energy conservation methods, you will lose $X per year. It turns out that information campaign (b) is far more effective than information campaign (a). 8 Some features of human judgment, properly understood, undermine conventional economic prescriptions about what will work best; they help explain, to take just one example, precisely why the public service advertising slogan "drive defensively; watch out for the other guy" is particularly ingenious. 

(1938). 

Normative work is concerned with what the legal system should do. Recent revisions in understanding human behavior, especially insofar as they suggest the constructed character of preferences and values, greatly unsettle certain arguments against paternalism in law. They do not make an affirmative case for paternalism, but they support a form of anti-antipaternalism. If people are unrealistically optimistic, they may run risks because of a factually false belief in their own relative immunity from harm, even if they are fully aware of the statistical facts. If people's choices are based on incorrect judgments about their experiences after choice, there is reason to question whether respect for choices, rooted in those incorrect judgments, is a good way to promote utility or welfare. If, for example, people use heuristic devices that lead to systematic errors, their judgments about how to deal with risks may be badly misconceived. If preferences do not predate situations of choice, and emerge in different forms depending on procedure, description, and context, it becomes harder to fathom what it even means to "override" a "preference." If this notion becomes unclear, the meaning of paternalism itself requires a great deal more thought. 
None of these points makes a firm case for legal paternalism. But they do suggest that objections to paternalism should be empirical and pragmatic, having to do with the possibility of education and likely failures of government response; such objections should not be a prioriin nature. 
A. PUNITIVE DAMAGES 
My principal emphasis here is on the broader implications of a recent empirical study of punitive damages, undertaken by Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and me.9 Our study involved about 900 jury-eligible citizens in Texas; each was asked to evaluate punitive damage cases, by saying: (a) how outrageous the defendant's conduct was, on a bounded scale of 0 to 6; (b) how much the defendant should be punished, on the same bounded scale; and (c) how much in the way of punitive damages the defendant should be expected to pay on an unbounded scale of dollars. There were twenty-eight total scenarios. The questions allowed measurement of the effects of the defendant firm's size (which was varied), the effects of harm (in all cases, compensatory damages were $200,000, but in some, the harm seemed qualitatively worse), and the effects of context (all participants read one case in isolation, others together). 
Here was the basic puzzle that we sought to explore: Frequently the legal system requires judges or juries to make (normative) judgments of some kind and then to translate those judgments into dollar amounts. This is of course the task of juries who impose punitive damages. How does this translation take in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071 (1998). The full study, with accompanying statistical analysis, appears in Daniel Kahneman et al., SharedOutrageand ErraticAwards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, 16 J. RiSK AND UNCERTAINTY 49 (1998). My discussion of our findings is my own, and Kahneman and Schkade should not be blamed for errors. place? When the translation occurs, what is it that the legal system is doing? Can the task be done well? 
Our basic findings were as follows: of outrage and punishment that is appropriate for punitive damage cases.' ° At least in the personal injury cases we offered, this moral consensus, on what might be called outrage and punitive intent, cuts across differences in gender, race, income, age, and education. For example, our study shows-through the construction of "synthetic juries"-that all-white, all-female, all-Hispanic, allmale, all-poor, all-wealthy, all-black, all-old, and all-young juries are likely to come to similar conclusions about how to rank and how to rate a range of cases. 
There is one exception to this generalization. Though women and men rank cases in the same way, women tend to rate cases more severely on the bounded scales, and this effect is heightened when the plaintiff is female. (It could as accurately be said that men tend to rate cases more leniently than women, and this effect is heightened when the plaintiff is female.) But this modest difference does not undermine our basic finding, which involves a striking consensus. 
to measure moral outrage. Even when there is a consensus on punitive intent, there is no consensus about the dollar amount that is necessary to produce the appropriate suffering in a defendant. Under existing law, widely shared and reasonably predictable judgments about punitive intent are turned into highly erratic judgments about appropriate dollar punishment. A basic source of arbitrariness with the existing system of punitive damages (and a problem not limited to the area of punitive damages) is the use of an unbounded dollar scale. 
juries have a hard time making appropriate distinctions among cases in what might be called a "no-comparison condition." When one case is seen apart from other cases, people show a general tendency to place it toward the midpoint of any bounded scale. It is therefore less likely that sensible discriminations will be made among diverse cases. This effect is, however, far less important than the effect identified in (2) in producing arbitrary awards. 
constant. The degree of outrage evoked by the defendant's behavior was not affected by the harm that occurred, but varying the harm had a limited but statistically significant effect on punishment ratings; defendants who had done more harm to the plaintiff were judged to deserve greater punishment. Thus low harm produced an average award of $727,599 and high harm an average award of $1,171,251-a substantially greater amount. 
involving personal injury suits. It is an open question whether the moral consensus would operate in areas involving, for example, sexual harassment and discrimination on the basis of race. Second, there is a greater consensus on how to rank the scenarios than on the absolute numbers for outrage and punishment. outrage nor punitive intent, but that the same degree of punitive intent would be translated into a larger amount of damages when the firm is larger than when it is smaller. As expected, we found no statistically significant effects of firm size on either outrage or punishment judgments. But large firms were punished with much larger dollar awards (an average of $1,009,994) than medium firms ($526,398). This is substantial evidence that equivalent outrage and punitive intent will produce significantly higher dollar awards against wealthy defendants. 
The most basic finding that emerges from this study is that outrage and punitive intent are shared, but judgments about dollar awards are not. This is because the legal system gives people no "modulus," or standard, by which to assess different possibilities along the unbounded scale of dollars. If, for example, $2 million in punitive damages were associated with a particular, specified action, juries would have a "modulus" around which to organize their intuitions. The legal system constructs jury's preferences for punitive awards by asking them to come up with a number along the unbounded scale of dollars, subject to instructions that are usually open-ended. 
How might this problem be handled? Once we see that punitive awards are constructed by the legal system's particular response mode--dollars-we can specify the basis of complaints about the status quo, and generate appropriate reforms. I consider three possible approaches. 
If the basic problem is simple unpredictability, the legal system might reduce that problem by asking juries not to come up with dollar amounts, but to rank the case at hand among a preselected set of exemplar cases, or to use a bounded scale of numbers rather than an unbounded scale of dollars. A conversion formula, based on previously compiled population-wide data showing how punitive intent corresponds to dollar awards, might be used to generate population-wide judgments about dollar amounts. Through this route, it would be possible to reduce variability and to ensure that jury judgments about appropriate dollar punishments do not reflect the likely unrepresentative views of twelve randomly selected people, but those of the population as a whole. The goal of this approach would be to come up with the community's, rather than the isolated jury's, judgment about appropriate dollar awards. This approach is highly populist, because it seeks to obtain popular convictions. The result would be a form of predictablepopulism. 
If the basic problem is that people cannot sensibly map their moral judgments onto dollar awards, the legal system should provide a mechanism by which judges or administrators, rather than jurors, can translate the relevant moral judgments into dollar amounts. It is reasonable to question whether ordinary people can know what a given dollar amount would mean for, or do to, the defendant or those in the position of the defendant. On this view, the jury should also rank the case at hand in comparison to preselected cases, or come up with a number on a bounded scale. A conversion formula, based not on populationwide data but on expert judgments about what various awards would actually mean or do, would be used to produce rational judgments about dollar amounts. This approach is a mixture of populist and technocratic elements. It is populist insofar as it relies on the community's punitive intent; it is technocratic insofar as experts come up with the relevant conversion formula. The result would be a form of technocraticpopulism. 
If the basic problem is that people's moral judgments are not the proper basis for punitive awards, judges might, in some or all contexts, use those moral judgments as one factor to be considered among others, or the legal system might dispense with jury judgments entirely in some or all contexts. If, for example, it is believed that existing social norms are not the appropriate basis for punishment, or if deterrence rather than retribution is the appropriate goal of punitive damages, an expert body might decide on appropriate awards, or offer general guidance to trial court judges. Because this approach reduces or eliminates the jury and relies instead on specialists, it attempts a form of bureaucratic rationality. 
For present purposes it is unnecessary to choose among these three approaches. My basic claim is that punitive damages reflect outrage that is often widely shared, but dollar awards that can be quite variable. There are different ways of handling that problem, from the most populist to the most technocratic. The legal system inevitably constructs the preferences, or values, that emerge from juries. The question is what normative judgments ought to inform the choice of methods of constructing the relevant preferences and values. 
B. COMPENSATORY DAMAGES 
Awards for compensatory damages raise many of the same questions as punitive damages. Consider, for example, the issue of pain and suffering. To be sure, such awards are nominally compensatory rather than punitive; they ask the jury to uncover a "fact." But they also involve goods that are not directly traded on markets, and they require a jury to convert into dollars a set of judgments that are, at the very least, hard to monetize. In the absence of uncontroversial market measures to make the mapping reliable,' l the resulting verdicts are notoriously variable, in a way that raises questions'very much like those in the punitive damages setting.1 2 Similar issues arise in the law of libel, which notoriously lacks clear measures of damages.13 Here the jury is likely to be mapping a complex judgment, about the quality of the harm and perhaps the nature of the plaintiff and the defendant, oito an unbounded dollar scale. 4 
The latter half of the twentieth century has also witnessed the rise of two important new torts: intentional infliction of emotional distress 15 and sexual harassment.' 6 Both of these torts are accompanied by damage remedies. With respect to such remedies, the basic story should be familiar. Monetization is extremely difficult. Significant arbitrariness is entirely to be expected; similar cases may well give rise to dramatically different awards. With sexual harassment, variable awards are pervasive, and it is likely that some plaintiffs are receiving too much and others too little. 17 How does a jury know what amount would provide an employee, or a student, with adequate compensation for quid pro quo or hostile environment harassment? What does compensation mean, in practice? In both of these contexts, compensatory and punitive damages are likely to be entangled, in the sense that juries probably do not sharply separate the one from the other. 
In the areas of intentional infliction of emotional distress and sexual harassment, there may well be a relatively uniform set of underlying judgments among different demographic groups, though with sexual harassment it would be most interesting to see whether there are differences between men and women or among other groups. This is an intriguing and entirely feasible empirical project along the lines of the study I have described here. A principal source of unpredictability is likely to involve the translation of the underlying moral judgments into dollar amounts. Hence reform strategies, here as elsewhere, might be based on a particular conclusion about what is wrong with the outcomes of jury deliberations-unpredictable awards, inadequate understanding of the effects of dollar amounts, or a reliance on improper factors. The legal system might restrict, or contruct, jury "preferences" in many different ways. 
We can bring together these various grounds for compensatory awards by noting how the reform proposals discussed above may or may not bear on compensatory damages awards that are especially likely to be erratic. The most important feature of compensatory damages is that they are intended to restore the status quo ante.' 8 Punitive damages, by contrast, are intended to reflect a normative judgment about the outrageousness of the defendant's conduct (together with a judgment about deterrence). Thus the compensatory decision, far more than the punitive decision, reflects an assessment of fact (at least in theory).1 9 At first glance this is a sharp distinction between the two. In this light, would it make sense to consider reforms designed respectively to (a) capture a population-wide judgment about appropriate compensation, (b) capture a "compensatory intent" that would be mapped, by experts, onto dollar amounts, and (c) dispense partly or entirely with juries on the ground that juries are unlikely to have the competence to make accurate judgments about the factual questions involved? 
To answer this question, it is necessary to ask why juries are now charged with the task of making judgments about appropriate compensation in cases in which that inquiry strains their factual capacities. The most straightforward answer is self-consciously populist. In cases involving libel, pain and suffering, sexual harassment, and the intentional infliction of emotional distress, no institution is likely to be especially good at uncovering the "fact" about compensation, if there is indeed any such "fact." Moreover, it is appropriate (on this view) to let the underlying decision reflect not merely facts but also judgments of value that are held by the community as a whole. 20 Whatever fact-finding deficiencies the jury may have (as compared to, say, a specialized agency) are overcome by the value of incorporating community sentiments into the decision about appropriate compensation for injuries that are not easily monetized. On this view, compensatory judgments, at least in these contexts, are not so different from punitive judgments after all; both of them have important normative components. 
Thus the simplest argument on behalf of jury judgments about compensation is that any such judgment is-perhaps inevitably and certainly appropriatelynot solely compensatory. It has evaluative dimensions, both in deciding what compensation for. If someone has suffered a month of pain, is compensation supposed to restore the plaintiff hedonically? To give dollar equivalents for injury to capabilities and functionings, to be assessed in part objectively rather than subjectively? Because the idea of "compensation" does not answer such questions, the jury's assessment inescapably creates normative issues. There is much room here for further descriptive work (what are the components of that assessment, in fact?) and normative work as well (what should the question of compensation be taken to mean in these various contexts?). See AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES (1985) (defending a "capability" approach to an assessment of well-being). 
should be person-specific. Suppose, for example, that an especially sensitive plaintiff has suffered an especially severe hedonic loss as a result of libel or sexual harassment-or, by contrast, that an especially tough-skinned plaintiff has suffered an unusually small hedonic loss as a result of the same torts. Should a jury consider the extent to which the plaintiff's injury was objectively reasonable, independent of purely hedonic factors? Officially, tort law incorporates a reasonable person inquiry at the level of liability, but once the defendant has been found liable, the defendant must take the plaintiff as the plaintiff experienced the injury. In other words, damages determinations are supposed to be person-specific -but we do not know if juries are willing to think in these terms, and it is also unclear that they should. compensation properly includes and in imposing burdens of proof and persuasion and resolving reasonable doubts. The evaluative judgments, it might be thought, should be made by an institution with populist features and virtues. The point may well apply to judgments about compensation for pain and suffering, libel, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and sexual harassment. A populist institution, on this view, should be permitted to undertake evaluative judgments about what amount would compensate someone who has suffered as a result of an improper medical procedure, a lie about his private life, or an unwanted sexual imposition by an employer or teacher. 
In many cases involving compensatory awards, however, the problem of erratic judgments, emerging from scaling without a modulus, remains. This problem would not be severe (indeed, it would not be a problem at all) if what appeared to be erratic judgments were really a product of careful encounters with the particulars of individual cases, producing disparate outcomes that are defensible as such because they are normatively laden. But the study I have described suggests grave reasons to doubt that this is in fact the case. Thus there is a serious question of reform strategies. 
How would the proposals discussed in Part IIA work here? Notice that for compensatory damages, ranking is far preferable to rating along a bounded scale. It is certainly useful to see how a jury believes that the injury at issue compares with other injuries, but less useful, when punishment is not involved, to get a sense of the jury's numerical rating. A ranking might be used in various ways. If the basic problem is erratic judgments in the context of compensatory damages, it might be desirable to use a conversion formula to obtain a populationwide judgment about appropriate compensation. A problem with this approach is that a population-wide judgment about appropriate dollar compensation might be ill-informed-it might not reflect "true" compensation. If the normative dimensions of that judgment seem to deserve a good deal of weight-if we see the jury's judgment about compensation as appropriately reflecting considerations not involving the apparently factual question of compensation-this approach might well make sense. But if the factual dimensions deserve to predominate, the jury's ranking might be understood as a kind of "compensatory intent," to be converted to compensatory awards not by population-wide data but instead by an administrative or legislative conversion formula rooted in a judgment of the appropriate treatment of the cases against which the case at hand has been ranked. This kind of reform seems somewhat awkward, for the notion of "compensatory intent," supposedly rooted in a judgment about the facts, is less straightforward than that of "punitive intent," which is an unmistakably normative judgment. But it would mix populist and technocratic elements in a way that is mildly reminiscent of the treatment of social security disability cases-though there the jury is not of course given a role, displaced as it is by an administrative law judge.2' 
If the social security disability cases are really taken as a good analogy, technocratic considerations should predominate, and the third kind of reform proposal might seem best. In this view, an administrative or legislative body might create a kind of "pain and suffering grid," "libel grid," or "sexual harassment grid," combining the basic elements of disparate cases into presumptively appropriate awards. A judge would produce a dollar award by seeing where the case at hand fits in the grid and perhaps by making adjustments if the details of the case strongly call for them. A technocratic approach of this kind could eliminate or at least greatly reduce the problem of erratic awards.2 2 Whether such an approach is desirable depends on the value of incorporating populist elements in the way that the more modest reforms promise to do. 
Elements of these various approaches can be found in reform proposals, thus far restricted to the pain and suffering context, that attempt to cabin the jury's judgment by requiring it to decide in accordance with damage schedules and to place the case at hand in the context of other cases.23 In view of the fact that similar problems beset other areas of the law, there is no reason not to consider similar reforms in the contexts of libel, sexual harassment, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. A key issue is the appropriate role of technocratic and populist elements in the compensatory judgment. A judgment about that issue will go a long way toward shaping reforms. 
I now turn to two human aversions with special relevance to law's constructive character: aversion to losses and aversion to extremes. 
A. LOSS AVERSION 
People are especially averse to losses. They are more displeased with losses than they are pleased with equivalent gains-very roughly speaking, twice as displeased.24 Contrary to economic theory, people do not treat out-of-pocket costs and opportunity costs as if they were equivalent. Here the constructive effect of law is extremely important, because law may frame consequences as a loss or instead a gain, not least by creating the legal entitlement in the first instance. agencies impose civil and criminal penalties, and they are also in a position to scale without a modulus. It would be extremely valuable to have a sense of their practice, and to know whether they have created some of the same kind of variability discussed here. 
particularistic judgment. Standards laid down in advance may leave room for erratic particularistic judgments if they are open-ended; but if they are rigid and rule-like, they may prevent the reasonable exercise of discretion to adapt to the particulars of the individual case. One issue here is how to minimize both decision costs and error costs, and in the abstract it is hard to know how much constraint on particularistic judgment will accomplish that task. For a good discussion, see generally Louis Kaplow, Rules Versus Standards:An EconomicAnalysis, 42 DUKE L.J. 557 (1992). 

THAYER, supra note 1, at 167, 175. 
Loss aversion has important implications for positive analysis of law. It means, for example, that the Coase theorem is in one respect quite wrong.25 Contrary to the Coase theorem, the allocation of the legal entitlement may well matter in the sense that those who are initially allocated an entitlement are likely to value it more than those without the legal entitlement.2 6 The legal entitlement may well create an endowment effect, that is, a greater valuation stemming from the mere fact of endowment.27 This effect has been observed in many contexts.28 Thus workers allocated a (waivable) right to be discharged only for cause may well value that right far more than they would if employers were allocated a (tradable) right to discharge at will. 
There is a further point. Whether an event "codes" as a loss or a gain depends on a range of contextual factors, including how the event is framed. The status quo is usually the reference point, so that losses are understood as such by reference to existing distributions and practices; 29 but it is possible to manipulate the frame so as to make a change code a loss rather than a gain, or vice-versa. Consider a company that says "credit card surcharge" versus "cash discount;" or a parent who says that for behavior X (rather than behavior Y) a child will be rewarded, as opposed to saying that for behavior Y (rather than behavior X) a child will be punished; 30 or familiar advertisements to the effect that "you cannot afford not to" have a certain product. In environmental regulation, it is possible to manipulate the reference point by insisting that policymakers are trying to "restore" water or air quality to its state at time X; the restoration time matters a great deal to people's choices.3 ' But for present purposes, the most important source of reference point is the law-where has the legal system placed the initial entitlement? Much research remains to be done on the effects of this initial allocation. It bears, for example, on the distinction between "subsidies" and "penalties" that has proved so crucial to the law governing unconstitutional conditions; 32 that distinction can be understood as responsive to the phenomena of loss aversion and framing effects, which very much affect different judgments about whether someone has been subsidized or instead penalized.3 3 
Loss aversion also raises serious questions about the goals of the tort system. Should damages measure the amount that would restore an injured party to the J. POLT. ECON. 1325, 1343-44 (1990). 

SUNSTEIN, FREE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE (1997). 
UNCERTAINTY 7 (1988). 
Decisions,55 ORG. BEHAV. AND HUM. DECISION PROCESSES 195 (1993). 
status quo ante, or should they reflect the amount that an injured party would demand to be subject to the injury before the fact? Juries appear to believe that the amount that would be demanded pre-injury is far greater than the amount that would restore the status quo ante.34 The legal system appears generally to see the compensation question as the latter one, though it does not seem to have made this choice in any systematic way. The disparity has large implications for the choice between liability rules and property rules. Property rules allow a taking only via "willingness to accept;" liability rules frame the question in terms of "willingness to pay." The economic literature on the choice between the two generally does not recognize that the resulting valuations may be dramatically different.3 5 
B. EXTREMENESS AVERSION 
As car salespeople and good advertisers well know, people are averse to extremes. Whether an option is extreme depends on the stated alternatives. Extremeness aversion gives rise to compromise effects.36 In this as in other respects, the framing of choice matters; the introduction of (unchosen, apparently irrelevant) alternatives into the frame can alter the outcome. When, for example, people are choosing between some small radio A and a mid-size radio B, most may well choose A; but the introduction of a third, large radio C is likely to lead many people to choose B instead.3 7 Thus the introduction of the third, unchosen (and in that sense irrelevant) option may produce a switch in choice as between two options. Almost everyone has had an experience of switching to (say) the second most expensive item on some menu of options, and of doing so partly because of the presence of the very most expensive item. 
Extremeness aversion suggests that a simple axiom of conventional economic theory-involving the irrelevance of added, unchosen alternatives-is wrong. 3 8 It also has large consequences for legal advocacy and judgment, as well as for predictions about the effects of law. How can a preferred option best be framed as the "compromise" choice? When should a lawyer argue in the alternative, and what kinds of alternative arguments are most effective? This should be a central question for advocates to answer. Juries and judges may well try to choose a compromise solution, and what "codes" as the compromise solution depends on what alternatives are made available. In elections, medical interventions, and policymaking, compromise effects matter a great deal. 

Analysis, 109 HARV. L. REV. 713 (1996). 
288 (1996). 

Economists sometimes assume that people are self-interested. This may well be true, and often it is a useful simplifying assumption. But people also may want to act fairly and, more importantly, they want to be seen to act fairly, especially but not only among nonstrangers. For purposes of understanding law, what is especially important is that people may sacrifice their economic selfinterest in order to be, or to appear, fair; and they may punish people perceived as unfair. 
Consider, for example, the ultimatum game. 39 The people who run the game give some money, on a provisional basis, to the first of two players. The first player is instructed to offer some part of the money to the second player. If the second player accepts that amount, he can keep what is offered, and the first player gets to keep the rest. But if the second player rejects the offer, neither player gets anything. Both players are informed that these are the rules. No bargaining is allowed. Using standard assumptions about rationality, selfinterest, and choice, economists predict that the first player should offer a penny and the second player should accept. But this is not what happens. Offers usually average between 30% and 40% of the total. Offers of less than 20% are often rejected. Often there is a fifty-fifty division. These results cut across the level of the stakes and also across diverse cultures. 
The results of the ultimatum game are highly suggestive.4 ° Perhaps people will not violate norms of fairness, even when doing so is in their economic self-interest, at least if the norm violations would be public. Do companies always raise prices when circumstances create short-term scarcity? For example, are there social constraints on price increases for snow shovels after a snowstorm, or for umbrellas during a rainstorm? It may well be that contracting parties are reluctant to take advantage of the misfortunes of others, partly because of social constraints on self-interested behavior. Here there is enormous room for future work. 
Experimental research also suggests that there can be a high degree of cooperation in prisoners' dilemma situations, not only but especially when people are speaking with one another.41 It is noteworthy to find the existence of many laws that are rarely enforced but that seem to meet with widespread compliance. Consider, for example, laws forbidding people from smoking in public places. Such laws are obeyed partly because of private enforcement via social norms. Would-be smokers are deterred because they would be perceived to be flouting pervasive norms. Much remains to be learned about the relation39. See THE HANDBOOK OF EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS 282-288 (John H. Kagel & Alvin E. Roth eds., 1995) for a general discussion. 
Economics, 50 STAN. L. REv. 1471 (1998). 
prisoner's dilemma arises when individually rational behavior produces collective harm. See EDNA ULLMAN-MARGALIT, THE EMERGENCE OF NORMS, 18-21 (1977), for a lucid discussion. ship between law and norms, and on how law can help create new cooperative norms, or promote the success of emerging ones. 
IV. HEURISTICS AND BIASES 
People make judgments about probability on the basis of heuristic devices, responsive perhaps to high costs of inquiry and decision, that may often work well but that tend to lead to systematic errors. The use of heuristics may not reflect irrationality (especially if they minimize decision costs), but it may produce serious problems at the individual and social levels. This work bears on the demand for (and hence also the supply of) government services, including regulation. 
A. CASE-BASED DECISION THEORY 
Heuristic devices are often used when the costs of deliberation are high; in such cases, second-order decisions, operating as default rules, can make particularized assessments less necessary.4 2 An important way of reducing decision costs is to make assessments on the basis of previous cases rather than through calculation of relevant costs and benefits.4 3 In fact people often reason by cwailtlhintghotsoemciansdesp;atrhtiiscuclaanr cbaeseasn iamndposreteainntgmheotwhodtheofprreodbulecmingatdhecainsdioncocmopstasr.e4s4 The construction of preferences and values stems from the law's selection of salient cases. 
The emphasis on case-based decisions, as a way of minimizing decision costs while producing acceptably low error costs, has significant consequences for the understanding of law. Adjudication usually involves a form of case-based reasoning, and we may be able better to understand its nature, and its vices and virtues, if we see it as an alternative to expected utility theory emerging from the distinctive institutional characteristics of judicial institutions. 
People tend to think that risks are more serious when an incident is readily called to mind or "available."- 45 If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. Assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. "Availability cascades" can produce a large demand for law, as in the familiar "pollutant of the month" syndrome in environmental law. We lack a firm understanding of no. 57, University of Chicago, Law and Economics Working Papers) (2d series 1998). 
(1992); Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heurisiticsand Biases, 185 SCIENCE 1129 (1979); how availability cascades occur and of how institutions might be designed to produce appropriate responses.4 6 
C. ANCHORING 
Often people make probability judgments on the basis of an initial value, or "anchor," for which they make insufficient adjustments.4 7 The initial value may have an arbitrary or irrational source. When this is so, the probability assessment may go badly wrong. This point bears on jury and judge deliberations reconstructing the facts. It also suggests possible problems with damage determinations, where arbitrary anchors can have large effects. 
D. REPRESENTATIVENESS 
Judgments about probability are often judgments about the likelihood that some process A will bring about some event B. Under what circumstances will driving produce significant increases in air pollution, or fatal accidents? When will airbags produce risks to children? Do disposable diapers cause pollution problems? In answering such questions, people ask about the extent to which A is representative of B in the sense that it resembles B. This point suggests that people will be insensitive to the sample size, misunderstand the phenomenon of regression to the mean, have excessive confidence in their own judgments, and misunderstand the effect on probability of base-rate frequency. 48 As a result, people may systematically misunderstand risk levels. Risk regulation in general and in particular cases may go awry. 
CONCLUSION 
I have attempted to sketch some of the ways that the legal system helps construct preferences and Values-both by creating procedures, descriptions, and contexts in courts themselves, and by creating entitlements that help shape preferences and values in domains that might appear to have nothing to do with law. In the area of punitive and compensatory damages, the legal system helps construct the key variables by selecting the response mode, here one of dollars, and also the context in which dollar awards are chosen. We have seen that people's normative judgments, at least in personal injury cases, appear to be remarkably uniform; their dollar judgments are not. Different response modes might well work better, by diminishing arbitrariness or enabling people to do something that they do well. Similar points apply in areas involving compensatory damages where erratic judgments are also likely. In those areas, large questions involve the appropriate role of technocratic and populist features in the operation of the legal system. 
is an effort to deal with these issues. 

In the last decades, a great deal of progress has been made by assuming that people have "preference maps" in their heads before the time of decision and choice. For many purposes this assumption, whether or not true, has been productive; certainly it has been a fruitful basis for the last generation of work on the relation between law and human behavior. But the context of punitive damages-where outcomes are palpably a product of procedure and where arbitrariness is widely observed-is simply an especially vivid example of a situation in which preferences and values do not, in any simple way, antedate the process that is used to elicit them. The fact that preferences and values can be a function of methods of elicitation, or construction, has a range of unexplored implications for law. I have attempted to trace a few of those implications here, and also to suggest several areas where future research would be fruitful. 
Introduction 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. Feature: Questioning Constitutional Justice Introduction The Legitimacy of Constitutional Courts: Notes on Theory and Practice Everyone agrees that thejob a constitutional court is to interpret the constitution. But the fact that constitutional courts are entrusted with thisjob can create two kinds of problems for politicians and, above all, for leaders of the executive and legislative branches of government. The first kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the unambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act. The second kind of problem arises when a constitutional court invokes the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate a political act. 
These problems are quite different, and their differences bear very much on the issues discussed in this symposium. When a court invokes unambiguous constitutional language to prevent politicians from doing what they want, politicians may suffer intense frustration. And if the court has the strength to resist politicians, constitutional amendment may be the only course. But from the standpoint of the rule of law, and constitutionalism itself, the politicians' frustration is no cause for alarm. It is part of the point. If a constitutional amendment is necessary, and the constitutional court invokes unambiguous language to say so, constitutional democracy is working very well. Frustrated politicians who attempt to "tame" the court, by bending it to their wishes, are making a travesty of the rule of law and the whole project of constitutional democracy. They may also be harming their long-term interests. Politicians can benefit from an independent court; such a court can enable politicians to insulate themselves from pressures that they would like to avoid, and such a court can allow politicians the potential advantage of pointing to constitutional constraints, enforced by the court, as a limitation on their power of action. 
Things are different when the governing constitutional provision is ambiguous-when reasonable people can interpret that provision in diverse ways. 
If a court invokes ambiguous language to strike down a political act, politicians may claim that the court's interpretation is erroneous, that the court is following not law but personal predilection, and hence that the politicians, rather than the judges, are the constitution's true loyalists. Of course many constitutional provisions are ambiguous. How do social and economic guarantees bear on political effort to change the fabric of socialist law? Does a constitutional ban on inequality, or a requirement of equal treatment, forbid discrimination on the basis of sex? In education? In the military? Does an equality provision forbid discrimination on the basis of homosexuality, or disability? Does a right to free speech protect the right to urge crime, revolution, or hatred of ethnic and religious groups? Does it include the right to engage in unrestricted commercial advertising or to spread pornography? These-are questions on which constitutional provisions are frequently ambiguous, and when politicians disagree with the Court, they may well claim to do so in the constitution's name. Their objection isto the court, not to the constitution. 
These observations show the complexity of the notions of "judicial activism" or "an activist court." A court that invokes the unambiguous language of the constitution may be described as "activist" if and in the sense that it invalidates acts of public officials. But this form of activism is far from troubling. On the contrary, it is a tribute to the rule of law. Hence a court that ignores the unambiguous language of the constitution in order to permitpublic officials to do as they choose might also be described as "activist," though in a very different sense. Such a court is capitulating to the political winds; it is allowing the constitution to dissipate under pressure. We can conclude that when a constitution is clear, it should be obeyed; that the minimal role of a constitutional court lies here; and that the proper question to ask of such a court in such a case is whether it has or has not capitulated to politics. 
A court that deals with ambiguous provisions is much harder to evaluate. Some people think that courts should consider themselves the special guardians of their constitutions, so thatjudicial use of ambiguous provisions, to invalidate public acts, is entirely acceptable. (In the United States, this position is sometimes associated with Ronald Dworkin; it is also one view of the situation in Hungary.) But some people think that the court should uphold public acts if the constitution contains any uncertainty. (In the United States, this position is sometimes associated with James Bradley Thayer; it is one view of the situation in Russia.) (Table 1) 
Invalidate act Validate act 
Cells (1) and (2) are simple; the most serious question is whether the court will capitulate, and the answer is that it should not if constitutional democracy is to prevail. The hardest puzzles arise for constitutional courts when those courts are asked to invoke the ambiguous language of the constitution to invalidate acts of public officials. Whypoliticians might and will predictably ask-should courts be allowed to interpret ambiguous language as they wish, especially in light of the fact that the interpretation of such language will inevitably -involve not merely "law" but also the judges' own judgments of policy or principle? Interpretation of ambiguous language cannot avoid some such judgments. The vice of "formalism" can be found whenever judges claim, falsely, that they are simply speaking for "the law," and deny the role of their own values in interpretation. Formalism is a pervasive risk for cells (2) and (3). 
But there are some answers to the politician's question about why courts should feel free to interpret ambiguous language to invalidate acts of other public officials. In ordinary life, we frequently confront ambiguous language, and we know that some interpretations are better than others. So, too, ambiguous constitutional language can be interpreted well or poorly; much depends on the context and the purposes of the relevant language. And perhaps judges are in an especially good position to interpret ambiguous provisions, precisely because they are insulated from political forces. In other words, judges' comparative independence may be a virtue, not a vice, even or perhaps especially if the interpretation calls for a judgment of principle. If the question is the scope of religious liberty, it is possible that courts are in a particularly good position to make reasonable judgments, and hence that while respectful of the decisions of public officials, courts charged with constitutional interpretation should feel to reject those decisions if they seem inconsistent with the best understanding of the constitutional guarantee. 
There is a more fundamental point. We should 
Constitution ambiguous (3)Judidal overreaching (?) (4) Excessive judicial 
caution (?) not be too quick to identify the outcomes of any particular political process with democracy. Perhaps the best course isfor a constitutionalcourt to interpret ambiguous provisions by reference to democratic ideals themselves-by, for example, assuming an especially large role when rights central to democratic government are at stake, or when groups not able to protect themselves through ordinary politics are at risk. This view, associated with both John Hart Ely (in the United States) and Jurgen Habermas (in Germany), lays great stress on what might be called the internal morality of democracy. Thus it might be said that courts should aggressively review any effort to stifle political dissent (by, for example, limiting criticism of public officials, or reducing the areas where dissenters can make their view heard), and also take strong steps to ensure full political participation and to counteract discrimination against groups at systematic risk in the political process, such as religious and ethnic minorities. 
We might therefore conclude, at least provisionally, that a constitutional court acts legitimately when it invokes unambiguous constitutional provisions and when it interprets ambiguous provisions by reference to democratic ideals. When people question constitutional justice, these ideas provide a good place to start. But they raise questions of their own. Democratic ideals can themselves be ambiguous: What do such ideals require in the context of (say) libel law and equality on the basis of sex? In any case a constitutional court will inevitably be dependent on a constellation of political forces that will constrain it in one way or another. That latter lesson-involving the complex relations between theories of legitimacy and practical constraints on legitimacy-may be the principal one emerging from this symposium. Thus a full understanding of constitutional justice would have to consider not only accounts of democracy and (closely related) accounts of legal interpretation; it would also have to connect those accounts to an understanding of real-world limitations on what constitutional courts, consisting of human beings whose reputations, employment, and sometimes even lives may be on the line, are actually permitted to do. 
Belarus 
Alexander Lukashuk Mikhail Chudakou was born in 1949. In 1972, hegraduatedfrom BelarusianState University(BSU), worked in the attorneygeneral'soffice as assistantcounsel in civilmattersfrom 1972-1976, and completed his doctorate, 'The Legal Problems of Individual Participation in Direct Democracy in the USSR," in 1982.From 1977 to the presen4 he has taught at BSU. From 1990 to 1994 he was a member of the ConstitutionalCommission ang in June 1996,he became a member ofthe ConstitutionalCourt.In protestagainstthepresident'sDecember 1996 referendum, JusticeChudakov resignedfromthe CourtonJanuary23, 1997 Before the referendum the Court had 11 members. Followingthe referendum seven members resignedorwere fired. On January 4, the president reappointed the four remainingjustices to the Court and appointedtwo others. On January 24, the Council of the Republic (the upper house of the NationalAssembly) appointedfive morejustices. The post-referendum Court has 12 seats, althoughto date only 11 seats have beenfied Alexander Lukashuk: The first Constitutional Court of Belarus existed for two and a half years. What favored and what hampered the work of the Court? Mikhail Chudakou: First, the executive branch's antagonism toward thejudiciary made it impossible to work in a normal way. Our invalidation of presidential decrees was invariably perceived by the executive as intentionally hostile. The executive viewed the Court as a functionary of the opposition. Another factor was that, in the majority of cases, one ofthejustices always would deliver a "special opinion." Today, the author of these "special opinions" is the new chairman of the Court, Ryhor Vasilevich. The purpose of these "special opinions" was to argue in legal terms why the president was always right. They had a particularly detrimental effect on the Court. 
AL: Were these "special opinions" political rather than legal arguments? MC: Yes. The public perception was that while one group of justices supported one approach, 
on Environmental Law: Risk in the Republic: Comparative Risk Analysis and Public Policy: Making Risk Policy in the Face of Expert/Public Conflicts," 8 Duke 
Ordinary people seem to perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider the diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to reducing smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity, and hence, the resulting deaths are less troublesome than are other sorts of deaths. People have voluntarily assumed the relevant risks. This idea helps account for the fact that the government devotes relatively little in the way of resources to control not only smoking, but also to combat the habits of poor diet and insufficient exercise, which produce at least 300,000 premature deaths every year. 
The distinction between voluntary and involuntary risk may well be the central element in the difference between lay and expert' judgments about risk. Experts tend to focus on aggregate lives at stake; lay people care a great deal whether a risk is undertaken voluntarily. Their concern on this score seems quite reasonable, in part because it accords so well with widespread intuitions. But my basic claim here is otherwise. I suggest that judgments about whether a risk is "involuntary" often stem from confusion and selective attention, and that the real basis for such judgments frequently lies in an antecedent judgment of some other kind. It is important to identify and defend such judgments. 
More generally, and more importantly, I contend that the effort to exempt "voluntary" risks from governmental concernundoubtedly a response to the public demand for regulation-results in hundreds of thousands of unnecessary and preventable deaths each year. If the government focused its attention on more of the supposedly "voluntary" causes of death-consider smoking, poor diet and exercise, and automobile accidents-it could save an enormous nunber of lives, and it could do so at a relatively low cost. 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay draws on Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths,14 J. OF RISK AND UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997); Cass R. Sunstein, Selective Fatalism, 26 J. LEGAL STUD. (forthcoming 1997). 
It is tempting to think that the apparent, lay preference for ac-, cording greater weight to "involuntary" risks to life requires significant qualification of any criterion that experts may use, such as lives or life-years saved. But a simple reference to voluntariness, if taken to suggest something special about "lay rationality," raises many puzzles. The most important problem is that it is not simple to know when a risk is voluntarily incurred. "Voluntariness" may be entirely absent in the case of an unforeseeable collision with an asteroid; but voluntariness is not, in cases of environmental, occupational, or most other social risks, an all-or-nothing matter. Instead it is a matter of degree. Return to the conventional thought that airplane crashes are "involuntary" and automobile crashes more "voluntary." Certainly it would be possible to see the risks from air travel as voluntarily run; people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they do fly, they pay a certain amount for a certain package, including risks of various sorts. The same is true of automobile safety-and it is not in any way less true, however disparately the two kinds of risks may "seem." Perhaps people are responding to the perceived fact that they have no control over the pilot's behavior, whereas-they have considerable control over automobile safety since they are themselves drivers. But airlines respond to market forces, including the market for safety, and many people-injured in automobile accidents are not at fault. Thus, along the dimension of voluntariness, this is hardly a crisp distinction. The difference between the two risks is hardly so categorical as to justify an assessment that they fall on poles of some voluntariness-involuntariness divide. Indeed, it is not clear even what is meant by the suggestion that one is voluntary and the other is not. Something else appears to underlie that suggestion. 
I. THREE CASES: INFORMATION, CONTRACT, AND COST To shed some light on the issue, consider three classes of cases. First, consider the question whether workers exposed to cancer risks are voluntarily or involuntarily so exposed. If workers do not know about such risks-if they lack relevant information-we seem to have an easy case of involuntariness. Thus it makes sense to say that risks are run involuntarily when the people running them do not know about them. Lack of adequate information provides a legitimate case for a judgment of involuntary exposure to risk. But of course, information itself can be' obtained at some cost, pecuniary or otherwise. In cases of this kind, we are thus dealing-with high costs of risk avoidance, in the distinctive form of high (sometimes prohibitively high) costs of acquiring relevant information. 
Second, suppose that people who are exposed to a certain risk are aware of the risk, but are not in a contractual relation with the risk-producer. Many victims of pollution are in this position; recall that in surveys air pollution is a particular source of public concern. People in Los Angeles may well know that they face high levels of smog. Are they exposed involuntarily? In a way the answer is yes; but they can take steps to reduce the risks associated with exposure to smog, by (among other" things) moving away. If we conclude that people in Los Angeles are involuntarily exposed to air pollution risks, we may mean that a risk is incurred involuntarily when and in the sense that it is typically very expensive for people to avoid itand when someone else can reduce the risks more cheaply. Here a claim that the risk is faced "involuntarily" may mean that those who "run" the risk can reduce it only at very high cost, at least compared to those who "produce" the risk. (The quotation marks are necessary for Coasian reasons; the existence of the risk is attributable to the acts and omissions of people on both sides.)1 Or it is possible that we' mean that on nonutilitarian grounds, the people exposed to the risk have a moral entitlement to be free from it, at least if they have not explicitly sold it. 
But turn now to a third class of cases,'mvolving a wage package or contract that does include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a high-level scientist, knowledgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, people may well conclude that we have an instance of voluntariness (in the same category can be found the case of an astronaut). But people might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not like his work at all.2 What distinguishes the two cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. The underlying judgment must be that the compensation is inadequate, perhaps because background inequality has produced a wage package that seems unfair even if voluntarily chosen by the parties. 

From this discussion it seems reasonable to speculate that any judgment that a risk is run "involuntarily" is probably based on: (1) a lack of knowledge of the risk, or, more accurately, the high costs of obtaining information about the risk; (2) a belief that, despite adequate information, it would be very costly for people to avoid the risk; or (3) a belief that the risk is unaccompanied by compensating benefits, notwithstanding the belief that the contract is in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of the third ground. If people have signed the contract with full information, in what sense can the risk be denominated involuntary? What might be at work is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain (not by itself a good reason to disrupt the deal, because any such disruption will not respond to the inequalities and may even make those who are badly off worse off). Or perhaps there is a belief that workers are competing to their collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests? 
On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not is often not a'categorical one but instead a question of degree, associated with information costs, risk-reduction costs, and the existence or not of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices used by ordinary people, and also on selective attention, as people focus on a single aspect of a complex transaction or set of events. 
III. PURPOSES, RESPONSIBILITY, BLAME 
Risks may seem "voluntarily" run when people do not approve of the purpose for which people run the relevant risks, and involuntarily run when people think that the purpose for which the risk is run is laudable. It is predictable that people will not want to pour enormous taxpayer resources into lowering the risks associated with skydiving, even if the dollars/life-years saved ratio is quite good. By contrast, it is doubtful that people think that it is wrong to spend enormous resources on the prevention of death from childbirth or from being a police officer, even though the decision to have a child is (with appropriate qualifications) voluntary, as is the decision to become a police officer. 

There is a related point. People may think that when the appeal or purpose of the activity is associated with its very riskiness, resources should not be devoted to risk-reduction. At least this is plausible when the risk is an independent good or part of the benefit of the activity. It is easy to imagine a belief that some activities-unsafe sex, cigarette smoking-can be treated like the skydiving case, perhaps because the risks are sometimes part of the benefit, or because the risks are not incurred for a purpose that observers find worthy or valuable. 
It might seem that this consideration-the purpose for which the risk is incurred-overlaps with or is even identical to the question whether there are high costs of risk-avoidance. When the costs are low, as in skydiving, the purpose might seem inadequate. But on reflection, the two ideas are hardly the same; these are quite different moral intuitions. It may well be that failing to skydive, or skydiving with some safety-increasing technology, imposes high costs on skydivers. There seems to be an objective judgment, not necessarily connected with subjective costs, in the claim that some risks are voluntary, or deserve less attention, because they are run for inadequate purposes. 
Relatedly, airplane accidents may seem different from automobile accidents not because the former are less voluntary, and not because of the diverse costs of risk avoidance, but because the victims of airplane accidents are less blameworthy than the victims of automobile accidents in the sense that any death or injury is not a product of their own negligence or misconduct. In the case of an airplane disaster, weather conditions, mechanical failure, or pilot error are likely causes; in the case of an automobile accident, it is more likely (though not of course certain) that the victim could have avoided death through more careful driving. The point is crude, since many victims of automobile accidents are not drivers, and many drivers in accidents do not behave negligently. But the perceived difference, in a significant number of cases, may underlie an apparent judgment of "voluntariness" that is really a judgment about responsibility and blameworthiness. These judgments must of course be defended and earned. IV. UNDERLYING QUESTIONS AND ASSUMPTION OF RISK We might therefore conclude that whether a risk qualifies as voluntary raises many of the questions raised by the question whether the government should regulate the market at all. A risk might be characterized as involuntarily run because affected people lack relevant information; because the transactions costs of bargaining are high; because the risks should be seen to amount to externalities; because collective action problems make market outcomes unsatisfactory since (for example) workers are in a prisoner's dilemma best solved through law; or because some motivational or cognitive defect makes successful solutions through markets unlikely.4 These of course are among the conventional grounds for regulation in the first instance. When a risk seems voluntary, and not worthy of substantial regulatory resources, the term "voluntary" may well be serving as a placeholder for an argument that there is no sufficient ground for governmental action. This may occur because the accompanying benefits are high or the risk-reduction costs are low, and because market arrangements take adequate account of these facts. 
But there are many problems here. Should voluntarily run risks of death or injury receive no public attention, on the ground that the ielevant people have already received compensation? The puzzle lies in the fact that it is hard to know when aind how a risk is voluntarily run, in such a way as to make a-government role inadvisable. Suppose that we consider a risk of death or injury to be incurred voluntarily when an informed person decided to incur it in light of its costs and benefits. Suppose, for example, that someone purchases a small car knowing that it is equipped with fewer safety features, or decides to become a boxer, an astronaut, or a police officer in a dangerous neighborhood. If a death results from such a choice, it might seem that the chooser has no legitimate ground for complaint; there has been ex ante compensation for the risk. But even in such cases, it is not clear that the government lacks a role. If the government can reduce a serious risk at low cost, and thus eliminate deaths, it should do so even when there is ex ante compensation for the relevant risk. The fact that someone voluntarily ran the risk, in one respect, is no reason not to reduce that very risk. Suppose that the government can reduce -4. See Cass R. Sunstein, BehavioralAnalysis of Law, 64 U. CH. L. REV. (forthcoming 1997). the relevant risks in such a way as to survive any cost-benefit test. Why should it not do so? 
The general point is that observers frequently confuse two quite different questions: (1) should people be banned from running a certain risk when they have run that risk voluntarily? and (2) should the government attempt to reduce a certain risk when people have run that risk voluntarily? A negative answer to the first question does not answer the second question. People may run a risk voluntarily, but also be better off when that risk is reduced. They are hardly hypocritical or confused when they seek the government to help in risk reduction. They may well say that they acted voluntarily, but that they did not voluntarily run the risk, at least in the sense that they. wished it to be lower than it was, and wish it to be lower than it now is. 
V. A TENTATIVE CONCLUSION 
From these points, it should be concluded that a lay judgment that a risk is "voluntary" should not be decisive for purposes of policy. Many risks that people consider "voluntary" should be the subject of greater governmental concern, not least because hundreds of thousands of lives might thereby be saved. The lay focus on "involuntary" risks sometimes points to reasonable judgments, but it is at most a start. The danger of using it as the basis for policy is that it is, literally, dangerous, in the sense that it ensures that the government will do far less than it could to reduce the number of premature deaths. 
In short, there is no special magic in notions like "voluntary" and "involuntary." Judgments about the voluntary character of risk often depend on confusion and selective attention. People often focus on a small part of a complex interaction-not the decision to fly, but the accident when it occurs; not the decision to live in a high-polluting area, but respiratory problems when they are experienced. Risks that appear involuntarily run can often be redescribed, with some plausibility, as voluntarily run, and the converse is also true. A better understanding of what factors underlie a judgment about voluntariness should be used for purposes of regulatory policy. I have attempted to identify some of the possible factors here. 
My basic conclusion is simple: the government should attempt to save as many lives, or as many life-years, as it can, subject to the limited public and private resources devoted to risk regulation. Ordinarily, people's concern, with voluntariness should not allow dramatic departures from this basic goal, which specifies what the government is generally trying to increase. The most that can be said is that when reasonable judgments underlie a judgment that people have been voluntarily or involuntarily exposed to a risk, the extent of the government's focus might be adjusted. In other words, the government might devote more resources to a problem when those at risk lack relevant information or when the costs of risk-avoidance are especially high, and it might devote fewer resources to a problem when those at risk have the information and when the costs of riskavoidance are low. 
I provide these remarks in the context of two personal observations. As you may know, at the University of Chicago, the economists and the lawyers interact frequently. I have noted that these highly intelligent economists contribute, much in their field, but when they talk about law it is apparent that something has gone wrong. They do not clearly understand the legal field, and there is even a question ofwhat it is about the field that they do not understand. 
The second observation occurred longer ago, when I was a law student in contracts class. I had a very dazzling socratic teacher who exposed us to a lot of analogical reasoning. As he went from case to case, we students were confused and amazed. We did not think that we understood anything, but nonetheless we thought it was really fantastic. But shortly thereafter we discovered that we really could not recover much that we had learned from the class. It was, in its way, a dazzling class, but there were no criteria by which we could decide whether our judgments were right or wrong. The instructor had not introduced any, and we never learned any. What was there that we could use? 
My claims here are three, and they are simple. 
The first is that the enormous contribution of the economic analysis of law is that it orders debates about law by simply asking how we can minimize the costs of decision and the costs of error. My simple suggestion is that many legal debates turn on the issue of minimizing the costs of decision and the costs of error. With that simple insight we can bring order and structure to debates whose content may be otherwise mysterious. 
My second and third points describe ways in which law has a claim to autonomy. 
* Karl N. Liewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School. HaroardJournalofLaw &Public Policy 
The second claim focuses on incompletely theorized arguments. Law often tries to get agreement on particulars from people who disagree about abstractions. The autonomy of lav often lies in incompletely theorized agreements on particular points amidst diversity of opinion on abstract concepts. In a family, a workplace, a court, or a nation, people often disagree on first principles, whether they are utilitarians or Kantians or democrats. Though they may disagree very sharply, they might still be able to agree that a speed limit law makes perfect sense, or that the basic rules of negligence are quite plausible. Take another example. There is a law school in the United States that was doing quite well in hiring new faculty. By and large, it handled each particular case well. But then there came a decision in which issues of diversity had to be brought out for theoretical agreement. At that point, the law school stopped working well. People who had agreed on particulars could not agree on the abstractions underlying those particulars. My submission is that the autonomy of law often lies in simultaneous agreement on particulars amidst disagreement about abstractions. 
My third claim is that sometimes cost-benefit analysis itself may fail cost-benefit analysis because it does not minimize the sum of decision costs and error costs. Often law makes a kind of second order, or meta-decision, to truncate the sorts of considerations to which participants in law may look. The autonomy of law is best understood as reflecting the secondorder decision that particular people occupying certain institutional roles should look at some select considerations and not at others. For example, judges, in deciding what the Occupational Safety and Health Act means, are not to make a decision about what the Occupational Safety and Health Act ought to mean.' Often in ordinary life and in law there is a second-order decision to say-that certain considerations are blocked-they are just not admissible on the agenda. You might think, for example, that you are not allowed to gossip about province is to decide what the law is, not to declare what it should be .... If the law is wrong, it ought to be changed; but the power for that is not with us.") (omission in original) (quoting Minor v. Happersett, 88 U.S. (21 Wall.) 162, 178 (1875)); Taylor v. Foremost-McKesson, Inc., 656 F.2d 1029 (5th Cir. 1981) (stating that, in a diversity suit, the Court of Appeals' inquiry is notwhat the state law ought to be, but ratherwhatit is). some secret that a close friend told you just because it would be fun-the second-order consideration blocks that means of having fun. Law works similarly. The second-order decision itself has to be justified, but it results in a degree of legal autonomy. 
More concretely, consider a case called Chevron. To introduce the case, I have done a little empirical study of citations to famous cases. Marbury v. Madison has been cited in federal cases 1,066 times. Brown v. Board of Educatio4 has been cited 1,468 times. Roe v. Wade,5 the key case in a lot of substantive due process decisions, and the hero and villain in a lot of litigation, recently surpassed Brown: Roe has been cited 1,476 times-at last count eight more times than Brown. Chevron, decided in 1984, has had a significantly shorter amount of time to accumulate citations, yet it has been cited 3,627 times, and before long it may exceed Marbury, Brown, and Roe combined. 
Chevron basically holds that when a statute is ambiguous, the court ought to accept the agency's interpretation so long as it is reasonable.6 Chevron holds that a court ought not to ask if the agency's interpretation is correct (as Marbury might suggest the court should do7), but instead the court should ask if the agency's interpretation of law is reasonable (so long as the statute has ambiguity in it)." Chevronis a kind of counter-Marbuy for the regulatory state. 
We might ask, in thinking about the autonomy of law, what is the origin of the analysis in Chevron? I think the analysis proceeds relatively simply. The first question on which people have broad agreement is that the appropriate posture of a court reviewing an agency interpretation of law depends in the first instance on what Congress wants. That is, if .Congress wants courts to defer to agency interpretations of law, then courts ought to defer to agency interpretations of law. If not, then courts ought not to defer to such interpretations. 
(1984). 

department to saywhat the law is."). 

HarvardJournaolfLaw & PublicPolicy In the first instance, this is a question of congressional instructions. 
Note, interestingly, that the proposition itself is incompletely theorized. That is, people who agree that the question of whether agencies deserve deference in their interpretations of law is a question for Congress to answer hold that opinion for diverse reasons. Some would offer economic justifications pointing to Marbury v. Madison. Others would offer non-economic justifications also pointing to Marbuiy v. Madison. The proposition is, itself, incompletely theorized. 
If we look at Congress's instructions on whether courts should defer to agency interpretations of law, we will find some ambiguity. Congress has not spoken with clarity to that general issue. In the most powerful justification for the Chevron decision, Justice Scalia has basically argued that if we want to minimize the costs of decision and the costs of error, Chevron does better than anything else.9 It introduces a high degree of simplicity and uniformity into the law. It produces a rule against which courts and Congress can act. It allows for congressional correction with relative clarity about the background against which corrections will take place. 
Overall, it reduces error as well as any alternative. Often the resolution of ambiguities calls for a policy judgment. Often Congress and courts are in a worse position than agencies in resolving those ambiguities. If we want to reduce mistakes, this is no worse than any other way, and if we want to reduce decision costs, it is better. 
The debate over 
Chevron is very elaborate and extensive. 
There are many thousands of pages on the issue." Despite the L.J. 511, 517 (noting that administrative errors in statutory interpretation can be more readily remedied thanjudicial errors). 
agencies under Chevron, not because of a presumption that they drafted the provisions In question, or were present at the hearings, or spoke to the principal sponsors; but rather because of a presumption that Congress, when it left ambiguity in a statute meant for implementation by an agency, understood that the ambiguity would be resolved, first and foremost, by the agency, and desired the agency (rather than the courts) to possess whatever degree of discretion the ambiguity allows."). 
UpdatingStatuto3yInterpretation,87 MICH. L. REV. 20 (1988); Harold H. Bmff,Coordinating JudicialReviewin AdministrativeLan, 39 UCLA L. REV. 1193 (1992); Maureen B. Callahan, Must Federal Courts Defer to Agency Interpretationsof Statutes?: A New Doctrinal Basis for Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 1991 Wis. L. REv. 1275 (1991); Iinda R. Hirshman, PostmodernJurisprudenceand theProblem ofAdministrativeDiscretion,82 Nw. U. L REV. 646 (1988); Dan M. 1ahan, Is Chevron Reeuant to FederalCriminalLaw?, 110 HARV. L REV. 469 (1996); John F. Manning, ConstitutionalStructure andJudicial diversity of arguments for and against Chevron, they are debates on the grounds not far from those identified by Justice Scaliawhat rule will most reduce the costs of decision and the costs of error? Current debates on the scope of Chevron focus on very similar issues. These are debates that have a degree of technicality, but they raise large questions about the nature of separation of powers and constitutional government. There are debates about the role of legislative history and of statutory text in statutory interpretation. Suppose an agency wants to go against the legislative history or wants to buck the statutory text. Debates in such a case are about the degree of decisional simplicity that can be produced by one rule or another and the best way to reduce error. 
Let me conclude with just a few notations. Plainly Judge Easterbrook is correct in saying that law is not autonomous in the sense that any legal doctrine ultimately needs a defense in non-legal terms1 A defense of law in purely legal terms would be circular, and therefore we need to look outside of law for a defense. The kind of core, simple insight of the economic analysis of law-indispensable, I think, to the practice of law in the Twenty-first Century-is that we can organize a lot of our otherwise unruly debates by suggesting that they are really debates about how to minimize decision costs and error costs. However, it is not as if this were a magic algorithm that can solve our problems. The identification of what counts as an error may well become contentious, but a lot of debates become much simpler once we see them through the law and economics lens because we can identify our exact point of disagreement. 
Sometimes the effort to reduce decision costs and error costs pushes courts toward a degree of autonomy for law. Sometimes the effort to reduce the sum of decision costs and error costs produces autonomous law embodied in the notion that costbenefit analysis sometimes fails cost-benefit analysis. Consider analogical reasoning, principles of deference to other institutional actors, and principles excluding certain reasons for Dtferenceto Agency IntepretationsofAgency Rules, 96 COLUM. L. REV. 612 (1996); Richard J. Pierce, Jr., PoliticalControl Veus ImpermissibleBias in Agency Decisionmaking:Lessons firm Chevron and Mistretta, 57 U. CHI. L. REV. 481 (1990); RichardJ. PierceJr., 77 Rote of ConstitutionalandPoliticalThAeoy inAdministrativeLaw, 64TEx. L RV. 469 (1985); Cass R. Sunstein, Law andAdministrationajLerChevron, 90 COLUM. L. REv. 2071 (1990). 
Federalist Society Symposium on Law and Public Policy (1997). HaroardJournaol fLaw & PublicPolicy action that would be admissible in other circumstances.' These various practices produce a degree of autonomy for law. They need a second order or metajustification which may be either in economic or non-economic terms. It makes legal judgment independent of moral or political or economic judgment for moral, political, or economic reasons. 
Finally, a clue to the autonomy of law lies in the fact that often people from diverse theoretical perspectives can converge in a kind of incompletely theorized way on particular agreements about what to do. People who often disagree about exactly what to say can often agree on what ought to be done. Let me conclude with the suggestion that a key to the autonomy of legal reasoning and a key to social stability in a pluralistic society lies in the phenomenon of incompletely theorized agreements. 
reason to regulate speech. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Yale Law Journal Company, Inc. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Yale Law Journal. 
This content downloaded from 128.226.37.5 on Fri, 02 Oct 2015 21:03:07 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions The 
Right to 
Die next great arena for the struggle to define the scope of fundamental rights under the Due Process 
Clause. 
the 
Second 
Circuit rejected the due astonishingly, that New 
York had acted process "irrationally" claim but held, 
somewhat and hence in violation of the Equal Protection Clause because it prohibited while simultaneously permitting patients to withdraw physician-assisted the for 
In laws 
The issues 
physician-assisted presented by a right to physician-assisted may cause serious social problemseven if they are right.See infratext accompanyingnotes 129-33. By "recognizingrights,"I mean invalidatinglegislation;as suggested below, I do think these cases are an appropriatesetting for recognizinga presumptiveright, in the sense that the state should be requiredto bring forwarda strongjustificationfor any intrusion. 
sponsoreda widely discussed Task Force reportin 1994 that rejectedlegalizationof physician-assisted suicide. See Quill, 80 F.3d at 734-35 (Calabresi,J., concurring)(describingNew York background); Compassionin Dying v. Washington,49 F.3d 586, 591-92 (9th Cir. 1995) (describingdiscussionin New Yorkand Michigan),rev'd, Compassionin Dying, 79 F.3d790. 
discussion is Dan W. Brock, Life ANDDEATH202-30 (1993), which argues for autonomyright and challenges the distinction between withdrawalof treatmentand active euthanasia.See also Ronald Dworkin, Life's Dominion 218-41 (1993) (arguingfor autonomyright);JohnKeown,Euthanasiain the Netherlands:Slidingdownthe SlipperySlope?, in EUTHANASEIAXAMINE2D61, 261-62 (JohnKeowned., 1995) (collectingvariouspositionsaboutwhethervoluntaryeuthanasiawill leadto involuntaryeuthanasia). As will become apparent,the philosophicalissue is farfromcoextensivewith the constitutionalissue, and there is a limit to how much progresscan be made throughphilosophicaldiscussionalone; many of the key questionsare empirical,involving the real-worldeffects of the relevantright. 
the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as "fundamental" under those cases. We might want to read current law to say that there is a presumptive right8 against government intrusion into a decision whether to terminate one's life under hopeless conditions or, alternatively and more presumptive right against nontrivial government-imposed physical space of one's own body, In some cases, the right to physicianassisted suicide meets the former standard, and while it does not quite meet the latter?it not a right "from" invasion?that broadly, intrusions into the certainly is a right "to" invasion, be taken as close enough as "fundamental" 
conditions. existing the patient faces medically hopeless reasonable for the Court to make this assumption But?and this is the central state by the when 
be strong the risk point?the array justifications for intruding on that right. These justifications involve of abuse by doctors and others and the danger that a right to physician-assisted suicide would, in practice, decrease rather than increase 
The state may believe, for example, that recognition from and distorted patient autonomy. 
of the right would to terminate allow people suffering depression judgment their lives when their judgments should not readily be trusted; that a right to physician-assisted suicide would discourage people from dealing more productively with their distress and with the fact of death; that the line between hopeless and hopeful conditions is too thin in practice and that any right to physician-assisted suicide would thus produce premature deaths; that at least some doctors, carrying a great deal of authority and faced with multiple demands on their time, would present death as an option in such a way that some patients would have a hard time refusing; that some well-meaning families would irresistible pressures on terminal to "choose" have harmful effects in general. 
impose death; or that any such right would and norms of the medical 
On some 
profession of these counts, life-sustaining is quite different from the right to physician-assisted suicide, the latter creates far more serious risks of abuse.9 At least relevant in is the fact that numerous doctors?aware of the patients on the performance and perhaps on the norms of the citizenry 
the right to remove a right to physician-assisted Court should decline to impose underlying suicide.10 In these circumstances, a national solution. a matter arguments This is emphatically not an argument allow interests favor the right, social and familial interests support the right, the risks that trouble opponents of the right may not be as severe through procedural 
safeguards be predicted The interest in doing so appears to have been recognized physician-assistedsuicide);see also Keown,supra note 6, at 263-66 (describingcontroversialsafeguards in Netherlands).Keown identifiessafeguardsrequiringthatthe requestmustcome fromthe patientand be free and voluntary;the request must be well-considered,durable,and persistent;the patient must be intolerably suffering, with no hope of improvement;euthanasiamust be the last resort, after other alternativeshave failed; euthanasiamust be performedby the physician;the physicianmust consult with anotherphysiciantrainedin the field; and the deathrecordshould not indicatedeathof "naturalcauses." These safeguardsare controversialbecause it is not clear thatthey are respectedin practice.See id.; see also Herbert Hendin, Seduced by Death 47-95 (1997). 
whose constitutionaladequacyis in doubt.See Lee v. Oregon,891 F. Supp. 1429 (D. Or. 1995). In 1988, there was a failed effort to produce a referendumon this topic in California;in November 1991, Washingtonvoters rejected a highly publicized referendumproposalto legalize active euthanasia.See BROCKs,upra note 6, at 203. 
questiondoctrine"?a doctrinethatwould allow the Courtto decline to validateor invalidatelegislation, and to suspendits judgmentaboutconstitutionalityuntil a certainperiodof democraticdeliberation(and clarificationof relevantissues) haspassed.The Courtcan denycertiorario,f course,andthereareanalogues in Americanlaw to such a doctrine,see infraSectionIV.C(discussingdesuetudeandassociateddoctrines), but the idea has no explicit constitutionalfoundation.Such a doctrinewould be especially well-suitedto the rightto physician-assistedsuicide. 
of an autonomyright. 

The principlethat a competentpersonhas a constitutionallyprotectedlibertyinterestin refusingunwantedmedical treatmentmay be inferredfrom our priordecisions. . . . Although we thinkthe logic of thecases . . . wouldembracesuch a libertyinterest[in resistingthe forced administrationof life-sustainingmedical treatment],the dramaticconsequences involved in justification for intruding citizens to decline medical treatment.16 
The distinction between 
on that interest. and the right to physician-assisted here I am speaking of cases treatment. Consider In any case, many states allow the right to withdraw 
life-sustaining equipment suicide is problematic in many ways,17 but that involve more than the withdrawal of patient will experience death under conditions physical period most familiar deterioration 
the following possibilities, designed range of factual contexts in which the right might be claimed. patient seeks death under conditions that are both sense that the best medical judgment time to live, and physically difficult some intense 
medically hopeless, is that there is a fixed and relatively 
in the sense depressed (6) A patient may be facing a period difficulty knowing whether or not some improvement is eventually possible. His is therefore considerably better than in (5), but he seeks death he no longer considers life worth living. (7) Any of the above might involve a person who seeks death, not with the assistance of but with the assistance member. 
of a friend or family refusalof such treatmentwould informthe inquiryas to whetherthe deprivationof thatinterest is constitutionallypermissible.But for purposesof this case, we assumethatthe United States Constitution would grant a competent person a constitutionallyprotected right to refuse lifesaving hydrationand nutrition. 
Id. at 278-79. JusticeO'Connorwas muchcleareron this point.See id. at 289 (O'Connor,J., concurring) ("[T]helibertyguaranteedby the Due ProcessClausemustprotect,if it protectsanything,an individual's deeply personaldecision to rejectmedicaltreatment,includingthe artificialdeliveryof food and water."). 
(describingNew Yorkstatutesallowing patientsto decline treatment). 

example, Brock writes: 
There are not great numbersof patientsundergoingsevere suffering that can only be relieved by directlykilling them. Modernmethodsof pain managementenablephysiciansand nursesto controlthe painof virtuallyall suchpatientswithouttheuse of lethalpoisons, though often at the cost of so sedatingthe patientthat interactionand communicationwith others is limitedor no longerpossible. 
Brock, supra note 6, at 170. These various situations 
present quite different issues. In case (4), there is but nonetheless seeks to terminate 
his life. In some of the highly recent cases, it has been feared that doctors have brought death simply (7), we may fear that medical judgments that the case is in that sense close to ordinary there is too large a risk of abuse because of the absence of professional and professional 
involvement.20 about 
Case or that norms actually a question 192 (1986). 
criminalpenaltieson one who assists anotherto commit suicide. We do not thinka State is requiredto remainneutralin the face of an informedand voluntarydecision by a physically able adult to starveto death.");ParisAdultTheatreI v. Slaton,413 U.S. 49, 68 n.l5 (1973) (suggestingthatlaws banningsuicide are constitutionallyunproblematic). of a constitutional ruling: If apparent category interests in encouraging a general commitment to the continuation of life and in protecting people from engaging in behavior that may be myopic or a product of short-term depression or distortions in judgment. Some of the strongest cases for public interference with private judgments involve myopia, cognitive error or motivational problems, or similar distortions. It is easy to imagine cases in which people facing severe temporary (or not so temporary) distress are inclined to seek a way out, and there is extremely good reason for social norms?and laws both expressing and fortifying those social norms?discouraging such people from terminating their lives. Suicide may seem the only solution to the experience of intolerable suffering, perhaps occasioned by some disastrous or life-transforming event (death of a loved one, involuntary separation, divorce); but the suffering may be far more short-term and far more remediable than it seems.24 The norms directed against suicide and assisted suicide have a salutary function in encouraging people to deal with even the most severe problems in a more constructive fashion; part of the salutary function of the relevant norms and laws is to block serious thought of suicide in cases where it appears to be the only or the simplest solution. In fact, it is possible that in many cases those who are "assisting" suicide are actually urging or at least legitimating it.25 A decent society seeks to inculcate a strong norm in favor of preserving life even when things seem extremely bad. It does so especially in view of the fact that suicide seems remarkably contagious. Highly publicized suicides can create bandwagon or cascade effects.26 
Of course we can also imagine cases in which a suicide may be warranted and in which assistance in suicide is morally acceptable and perhaps morally responsible, even in category (5). But in such cases, criminal prosecutions are quite unlikely, and even if there are such prosecutions, the relevant laws are generally acceptable on constitutional grounds, and that proposition is sufficient for my purposes here. I will deal, then, principally with cases failing in categories (1) and (2), for these are the most insistent ones for a constitutional "right to die." They also provide the factual settings behind both Quill and Compassion in Dying. 
These points suggest a possible problem with right-to-die litigation, one that points to the distorting lens of adjudication. The particular cases brought to a court's attention will certainly be the most compelling ones. They will involve competent patients facing horrible life prospects and perhaps intense pain. A focus on the particular cases will make the right seem particularly insistent, and this will be a fully reasonable reaction to those cases. But a 
Implicationsofthe WertherEffect,39 AM.SOC.Rev. 340 (1974). in these particular patients' favor will undoubtedly affect other people the court, and those cases will be much more difficult. 
Very and compelling however, simply tracking the law. Thus a legal system lacking an actual or formally "right to die" may well make space (even quasi-official about whether to prolong life or hasten 
death in some way, usually For example, sooner, allow made in close consultation 
with the a doctor a patient may administer 
painkillers not to take life-sustaining decision not before poignant whole 
of the problem. recognized physician quiet, not widely patient and family judgments advertised members. that will make death come entirely practice informal insistent, merely say that in many resources to the cases most medicines 
or even food and water, or avoid line between these steps and physician-assisted "extraordinary" suicide seems undoubtedly an informal breached in practice. 
It is imaginable 
that patients "right to die" regardless of the illegality of physician-assisted measures.27 
The thin and it is often exercise can outrun law is important for courts to keep in mind; it suggests that illegality an unlawful is important; no one should 
feel act. But the fact that social on the statute books but also on prosecutorial appears that those rights will be recognized in some or many cases in category (1) and (2) contexts. issue. 
With these 
notes let us now turn to the constitutional II. A Fundamental 
Right? Under the Court's findsa "fundamentarlight,"the statemay intrudeonly on a showingthatit has chosen the least restrictive means of promotinga compellingstate interest.See, e.g., Roe, 410 U.S. at 155. It is unclearwhetherthe identificationof a "libertyinterest"has the same consequence.It is notablethat in Cruzanv. Director, MissouriDepartmentof Health,the Courtspoke of a "libertyinterest"ratherthana fundamentalright,see 497 U.S. 261, 278-79 (1990), thoughit is not clear thatthis was intendedas a distinction. 
view: "Wereferto the most specific level at which a relevanttraditionprotecting,or denying protection to, the assertedrightcan be identified."Id. at 127 n.6. Interestingly,the pluralityfound consistency with Griswoldv. Connecticut,381 U.S. 479 (1965), and Eisenstadtv. Baird, 405 U.S. 438 (1972), by saying thatsuch cases did not acknowledge"alongstandingandstill extantsocietaltraditionwithholdingthe very rightpronouncedto be the subjectof [the]libertyinterest."491 U.S. at 127.Thus,in thosecases, therewas no traditionof state enforcementof laws withholdingthe libertyinterest"continuingto the presentday." Id. This idea bearson the notion of desuetude.See infra text accompanyingnotes 150-52. Table of Substantive we will see, the "no-more-except-for-tradition" reading very well, and it also lacks much appeal in principle. 
does not fit the cases On the other hand, the terms "personal" and "intimate" are far too broad; they create too many the Of and lead in too many unhelpful directions. 
This is not the occasion of these points?I Constitution (1991), which challenges traditionalismin constitutionallaw; J.M. Balkin, Tradition, Betrayal, and the Politics of Deconstruction, 11 CARDOZOL. REV. 1613 (1990), which argues that traditionsare indeterminate;and Jed Rubenfeld,The Right of Privacy, 102 HARVL.. Rev. 737 (1989), which arguesfor broadprivacyrightnot rootedin tradition. 
(discussingrightof adulterousnaturalfatheras not rootedin specific tradition);Bowers v. Hardwick,478 U.S. 186, 192-95 (1986) (White, J.) (discussinglack of specific traditionsupportingright to consensual sodomy);Moore v. City of East Cleveland,431 U.S. 494, 503-06 (1977) (pluralityopinionof Powell, J.) (discussing need to groundrights in traditionand sanctityof family tradition);Griswoldv. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 501-02 (1965) (Harlan,J., concurring)(discussingneed to groundfundamentalrights in "continualinsistence upon respectfor the teachingsof history,solid recognitionof the basic values that underlieour society"). 
497 U.S. 261, 294-95 (1990), of the historicalEnglish legal reasonfor the prohibitionon suicide, and a similardiscussionin Compassionin Dying v. Washington7,9 F3d 790, 806-10 (9th Cir.)(en banc),cert. granted, 117 S. Ct. 37 (1996). 
Compassionin Dying, 79 F3d at 808-10 (discussingGreco-Romanand Anglo-Americanreasoning). 
rarityof enforcement). 
539-45 (1961) (Harlan,J., dissenting)(arguingthatban on use of contraceptiveswithin marriageshould be invalidatedpartlybecause it is so anomalousand so at odds with tradition)). may a ban on the right of a grandparent to live with her child;54 but the same cannot be said about the right to physician-assisted 
If the right to die must be rooted in tradition, then it does not qualify with understanding solely by reference to tradition, with existing 
understanding law. Roe v. Wade56 is the clearest of the there is no clear tradition establishing a right to abortion.57 
But this is true not only of abortion. 
of tradition, a large number of the 
Court's cases make little sense. 
The cases a right to tradition. traditions; with 
due and with use past despite of precedent its in purely the 
Court brute facts, do not support the right to physician-assisted few of the key cases, and hence traditionalism does not make sense of unacceptable. 
Perhaps decisions? 
This plurality 
opinion if traditionalism were will inevitably 
should grounds. minimizing aggregate judicial source of rights. 
But this is not a very plausible understood at a level of great specificity, 
reliable as to exclude with and in principle, suicide and (let courts should 
right is, in by tradition. If, between a us not traditionally unrecognized suppose) a traditionally recognized say that the latter is constitutionally FourteenthAmendmentIncorporatethe Bill of Rights?, 2 STAN.L. Rev. 5, 9-15 (1949) (discussing historicaldevelopmentof limitedPrivilegesand ImmunitiesClause). 
should be characterizedat level of greatestspecificity). 
relativelysimple to identify traditions. 
traditionis good source of rights). 
877 (1996) (defendingidea thatconstitutionallaw is form of common law). 

Bodily Integrity, Intimacy 
As we will see, the relevant cases seem to depend not simply on deciding that an interest has considerable importance, but also on at least implicit problems of procedural due process or equal protection, problems that suggest an underlying defect in democratic processes themselves.71 It is extremely difficult to produce any verbal formula that is satisfactory, consistent with current law, and adequate to resolve the issue of physician-assisted suicide. For this reason, it would be best for the Court simply to assume that the right qualifies as fundamental and to proceed from there to the question of justification;72 at least this course would make sense if the justification is sufficient, as I will argue. to family needs). 
Ct. 37 (1996). 

minimalismin midst of complex issues of fact and value). 
But if the Court wanted to be more ambitious, it might venture a tentative alternative. The Court might say very narrowly that Cruzan should be read to recognize a presumptive right to make a choice about whether to live or die when one is suffering from a medically hopeless condition. Such a right would recognize that this choice is as central to individual selfdetermination as any that one can imagine; and if conditions are medically hopeless, it is harder, at least, to say that a state prohibition helps counteract individual irrationality. The existence of such a right would be important not only for people who are now dying but also for people not facing such conditions, who would be able to rest secure that if their condition became unbearable, they would have power to end it.73 Thus the Court might put to one side the issues raised by "dignity" and "intimacy" and rely instead on selfdetermination as the source of constitutional doctrine; it might conclude that whatever may fail in that category, the right to die when one is facing a terminal illness certainly does so. Such a right would also recognize that it is hard, in principle, to distinguish between withdrawal of life-saving equipment and category (1) and (2) cases,74 if we put to one side the risks of abuse discussed below. Those risks go not to the question of whether there is a right in the first instance, but to the separate issue of whether government has an adequate justification for intruding on the right. 
A narrow right of this kind would avoid many of the problems created by a general right to suicide. A large advantage of defining the presumptive right in this narrow way is that it would avoid the various puzzles created by any broader reading ofthe privacy cases. Perhaps the principal difficulties with such a definition are that the term "medically hopeless" is vague, the notion of "self-determination" leaves many open questions, and the line between terminal and nonterminal illnesses can be indistinct in practice. 
Invasion 
Suppose that the Court sought to be more ambitious and to introduce somewhat more order to the cases. It could find a principle of some appeal, and considerable consistency with the cases, if it said that there is a presumptive right against government authorization of nontrivial physical invasions into a person's body. A government authorization may be found when the law allows invasions by government officials or when law forbids people from fending off physical invasions by private persons. This basic idea?intended as a statement of a sufficient, if not necessary, condition for a fundamental interest?explains the notion that people have a presumptive right MissouriDepartmentof Health,497 U.S. 261, 296-97 (1990) (Scalia,J., concurring).This claim does not, however,mean thatthe distinctionfails rationalityreview.See infra SubsectionIV.B.l. intuition involuntary that there would 
administration undertook 
medical them 
to have as well, though of a person's body. experiments 
for their own operations the Court did not announce 
good. on people 
obviously, from taking steps to prevent a physical invasion of their bodies via pregnancy. 
The key point, then, is that a pregnancy is a physical invasion, and if government wants why without to prevent 
from justification.76 the Court has struck 
A particular fending advantage down off that invasion, it needs 
a special of the standard is that it helps explain laws involving contraception saying that there is a right to engage in sexual activity Court has been careful to say that the Constitution does not prohibit laws forbidding efforts to control fornication and adultery,77 and it has restricted 
its holdings fornication and adultery indirectly 
by creating to resist 
the widespread government required Cruzan appear to be any cases that fail to find a constitutionally cases in which the standard is met.78 
Of course this standard does not answer all imaginable questions, and this fact argues Court to attempt 
its judicial to make 
sense consists reconciled of a number 
of incompletely with one another. The notion 
theorized of "physical judgments79 invasion" adoption in a case that does not require the of its privacy doctrine, which undoubtedly 
not is vague. 
easily 
We state to administerantipsychoticdrugs to prisoneragainst his will despite significantliberty interestin avoiding such administrationof drugs). 
full defense of Roe v. Wade.See ElLEENL. McDONAGHB,reaking THEABORTIODNEADLOC(K1996), for an effort to defendRoe in these terms.Note also thatit is possible to thinkthatany physical invasion is legitimate either because the invasion is the productof the woman's voluntaryactions or because protectionof the fetus counts as sufficientjustification.These points bear on the question of whether governmentmay intrudeon the rightas I have understoodit. 
498-99 (1965) (Goldberg,J., concurring). 
is misleading.The suggested standardis about literalinvasion,not aboutconfinement.In any case, it is well understoodthatthe state needs a strongjustificationfor deprivingpeople of liberty;violationsof the criminallaw ordinarilyprovidethatjustification. 
CONFLIC3T5-61 (1996); and Cass R. Sunstein,IncompletelyTheorizedAgreements,108 Harv. L. Rev. 1733 (1995). can start with core or defining cases in which government officials or private actors are authorized literally to invade bodily space?Cruzan and Washington v. Harper*0 are examples?but hard questions can easily be imagined, in which it is unclear whether there is a physical invasion.81 Some of the modern due process cases finding fundamental rights do not meet the standard; the right to marry82 and the right to live with one's grandchild83 are examples. Moreover, I have not explained what is special about the physical invasion of one's own body. The best answer might begin with an understanding of the time-honored nature of that right in Anglo-American law; tradition affords a special place to the individual's right to prevent invasion of his body. The right to self-defense can itself be understood in these terms. Even if tradition is not decisive, for reasons suggested above, it plainly matters under existing law, and it tends to support the right described here. Tradition aside, protection of one's body against external intrusion provides the most primitive and basic sense of personal security and independence. In this way, the right to prevent physical invasions can be seen as the most central and defining case of a series of familiar rights, including the right to private property itself.84 
Does this standard support the right to physician-assisted suicide? Understood minimally, the standard seems not to create any such right. In such cases, the state is attempting to prevent a physical invasion. It is not itself undertaking a physical invasion, or making it impossible for people to stop a physical invasion from other private parties. Instead, the government is attempting to forbid people from allowing their bodies to be physically invaded. Thus the suggested standard seems to create a right to withdraw lifesaving equipment without creating a right to physician-assisted suicide. But there are two problems with this conclusion. First, as discussed above, some cases find a fundamental right even without a bodily invasion. Second, the distinction between withdrawal of life-saving equipment and physician-assisted suicide raises some serious conceptual issues, involving perhaps intractable distinctions between actions and omissions. Does it make sense to say that people have a constitutional right to resist physical invasions without also saying that they have a constitutional right to bring about physical invasions? In other words, we might say that the former implies the latter, so that people have a presumptive right to decide whether or not their bodies will be physically invaded. A strong commitment to autonomy might well lead in this direction.85 But this idea seems far too broad as a matter of both settled law and basic principle. It would draw into question, for example, much of the activity of the Food and Drug Administration, which is precisely in the business of deciding what sorts of things may be ingested. Much criminal law also forbids people from allowing certain invasions of their body; consider laws forbidding use of addictive substances. The broader standard also appears to imply an expansive right to sexual autonomy, one that extends far beyond existing doctrine. We may conclude that the right to prevent physical invasions has some appeal but has the disadvantage of leaving open many questions, while the right to decide whether to allow physical invasions lacks both consistency with precedent and much appeal on the merits. 
Summary 
and Alternatives 
From these points, several alternatives are available to the Court. First and simplest, the Court might say that it need not decide whether the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as fundamental for constitutional purposes and proceed from that point to assess the state's justifications. Second, the Court might hold that its decisions protect rights vindicated by tradition and at most involve a right to prevent physical invasions and do not extend to other kinds of decisional autonomy, even when the body is directly involved. But this approach has the disadvantage of failing to account for some key cases. It also fails to explain why so sharp a distinction should be drawn between removing life-sustaining equipment and administering a drug that hastens death. As we shall see, a distinction of this kind is reasonable if we focus on the potential for abuse; but at the level of presumptive rights, it is much harder to defend. In any case, it seems odd to say that this vexed and controversial distinction can support the momentous difference between rational basis review and something like the "compelling interest" standard. 
Third, the Court might say more narrowly that there is, under medically hopeless conditions, a presumptive right to decide whether one will continue to live. Fourth, and more broadly, the Court might say that the cases recognize a presumptive right to protection against physical invasion of one's body. It might add that it is not easy, in principle, to distinguish between the right to prevent bodily intrusions and the right to physician-assisted suicide, because that latter right is so obviously central to a person's most fundamental and apparently self-regarding judgments about the ultimate direction of his life, and because it is hard to explain why a person should have a constitutionally protected interest in withdrawing life-saving equipment without also having of autonomyas matterof policy). such an interest in terminating his life through "more active" means.86 On this view, the state must therefore meet a severe burden if it seeks to intrude on those judgments. Because of the difficulties associated with the various alternatives, it would probably be best for the Court to take the first route, to assume that the right to physician-assisted suicide qualifies as fundamental, and to proceed from there with the issue of justification. This is the course suggested by Cruzan.*1 
III. State 
Justifications 
Suppose that the right to physician-assisted suicide does or is assumed to qualify as a fundamental interest for constitutional purposes. From this point it should not be concluded, in mechanical fashion, that any state intrusion is unacceptable. The Court should say, as it did in Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena,? that "strict scrutiny" need not be "'fatal in fact.'"89 The Court should require a strong demonstration that the interference is reasonable, without having to be persuaded that it actually agrees with the enacting legislature.90 Does the state have a sufficient reason to interfere with that interest? There are several possible grounds.91 I outline them here, not to endorse them, but to suggest what reasonable people might say on behalf of the ban on physician-assisted suicide. The broadest point is that autonomy, rightly conceived, does not entail respect for all "choices"; sometimes the right to choose can diminish autonomy by subjecting people to novel pressures and influences. 
A. 
Depression, 
Distress, and Distorted 
Judgment 
People who are in intense pain or emotional distress, and who face a bleak future, may well be unlikely to think clearly. They may be deeply depressed or myopic; short-term distress may overwhelm their judgment. We could easily imagine that people who are or appear to be terminally ill might be facing the equivalent of duress. In these circumstances, a right to die might be denied as a way of protecting people against their own distorted judgment. As I have suggested, the ban on suicide itself is best justified in these terms. but noting thatstate may nonethelesshave sufficientgroundsto interferewith thatinterest). 
forms, that view is rooted in considerationsthat are essentially religious in natureand thereforean illegitimatebasis for upholdinga law. In nonreligiousforms,the idea is hardto understandindependently of the considerationsdiscussedin the text. It is intended to signal with the gravity preservation, an understanding that people might, extremely difficult times, be tempted to end their lives. 
When people's prospects are uncertain, this argument has considerable force. It appears weaker if we are dealing with genuine category (1) cases?in which, say, a patient faces six months of deterioration and almost certain death thereafter. We might conclude that the argument relating to distorted judgment does not justify state interference in such cases. But in practice, those cases can be hard to separate from other, quite different cases, and the difficulty of separating them argues in favor of a general prohibition. In any case, it is a relevant point in favor of such a prohibition that current medical technology allows a wide range of means by which to reduce or eliminate intense pain.92 
There is a related issue. Sometimes physician-assisted suicide may seem the easiest way to deal with extreme and understandable but in many of these cases, there are more productive to deal better with their fears. circumstances and a bleak 
seeking On this view, a prohibition on physician-assisted from the general ban on suicide. It is part of an effort to see death as a part of life?to encourage distressed people and their families to come to terms with their fears, including the fear of death itself, in a way that can be productive, and to ensure that distressed, sick, or dying people are not treated, and do not treat themselves, to be eliminated from the scene. autonomy argument against the ban. Ironically, effect. A vulnerable person with perhaps psychological pressures from family, certainly if (as is likely) family are feeling great distress and also if (as is possible) nontrivial sums of money are at stake. The closing stages of life can, in short, create conflicts of interest between a patient and the patient's family members.94 The patient may wish to live as to intrude 
on the seem pressurefrom boyfriends,parents,or husbandsto have an abortion,even when they would prefernot to long as possible; family members may believe that this is a situation of great tragedy, difficulty, and expense, and that it will be much better when it is over. Here too a right to die may seem the simplest solution while more difficult approaches would be better for all concerned. 
Of course we can imagine situations in which the patient freely agrees with the family on this point. But it is also possible to foresee situations in which the patient, having been granted a "right to die," bows to the family's wishes and hence very much regrets the fact that he has that right.95 If there is a right to physician-assisted suicide, the social meaning of a refusal to terminate one's life would be very different from what it now is. Perhaps this would be an acceptable situation. But since it is, after all, the patient's life that is on the line, we can imagine reasonable people thinking that the right to die should be rejected because it actually threatens to decrease patient autonomy in too many cases. 
Physician-assisted suicide may in practice increase the authority of physicians rather than the autonomy of patients.96 Suppose that a patient is confronted with a list of options from a doctor, one of which includes physician-assisted suicide. In some such cases the patient?confused or not?might feel actual or implicit pressure to accept the option of death. This is not because this option is, all things considered, the patient's preferred one, but because the physician explicitly or implicitly favors it and because, under the circumstances, the physician has assumed the role of an authority figure. Once a right is granted, real-world physicians may (consciously or unconsciously) favor death for any number of reasons, including financial pressures and the need to allocate scarce time to other, more promising cases. People who are poor, undereducated, or otherwise disadvantaged may be especially vulnerable to pressure. Here, too, we have a case in which a ban on physician-assisted suicide supports rather than undermines autonomy. It is relevant here that in the Netherlands, the only nation to legalize physicianassisted suicide, there are many allegations that patient consent is not always the precondition for medical decisions.97 One observer claims, "Euthanasia, do so, and in such cases the right might underminetheirautonomy.It is unlikely,however,thata large percentageof abortionsresultsfromthesepressuresas a matterof fact. If thepercentagewere in fact large, the argumentfor the rightto abortwould be undermined. 
discrimination,on the apparent heorythata legal barrierenabledthem to do whatthey wantedto do and in thatway increasedtheirautonomy.See LawrenceLessig, TheRegulationof Social Meaning,62 U. Chi. L. REV.943, 965-67 (1995) (discussinghow Civil RightsAct of 1964 protecteddesiresof restaurantsby changing"socialmeaning"of nondiscrimination)L. ikea rightto discriminatea, rightto die could decrease autonomy,by pressuringpatientsto submitto social normsand familialdesires. 
critics of the "right to die" believe 
that there is an easy to nonvoluntary to ensure 
slippage has two forms.99 
a trustworthy in a number of Nonvoluntary worth living. 
Once doctors begin to make that evaluation, be making judgments about the competence of patients they will, in practice, and the value of their and in some number 
of cases on the basis of their own will ultimately terminate 
lives rather than those partly of their or experience in the 
Netherlands is complex, but it is taken by to signal a warning on this front.101 A comprehensive survey suggested issues of whether to withdraw 
that of 130,000 400 cases amounted 
to assisted for euthanasia; 
of these, voluntary ends the life of someone who died each year, 49,000 raised life-saving suicide.102 equipment 
There euthanasia?"any 
or hasten death, and about were 9000 
annual requests action that intentionally else, on the request of that person"?was or about one-quarter. 
In 8100 advocated and instituted to foster patient autonomy and self-determination, has increased the paternalistic power of the medical profession."98 expression of the patient's 
will cannot be held in place?that cases, those safeguards 
will, as an empirical will be killed his wishes. 
people matter, prove inadequate, and the Other do not stress this empirical possibility honor the suicide inevitably be making but urge instead that if doctors are put in a position to requests some evaluation of (autonomous) patients, the doctors 
will also of whether those patients' lives will be from Some lives, mostly 2300 deaths 
because the doctorhas decidedthatthe qualityof the patient'slife is such thatit is time for the patientto die"). 
NETHERLAND10S4-11, 135 (1991) (claimingthatsome deathshave not been voluntary);HENDINs,upra note 11, at 75-84 (discussing involuntaryand nonvoluntarydeaths);Keown, supra note 6, at 262-63, 271-73 (discussingallegedly large numberof involuntarydeaths). 
CENTERRep., Mar.-Apr.1992, at 34 (describingstudy:CommissieOnderzockMedische Praktijkinzake euthanasie,MedischeBeslissingenrondhet Levenseinde[MedicalDecisions Concerningthe End of Life] (The Hague: S.D.U. Uitgeverij, 1991)); see also Keown, supra note 6, at 267-75 (reportingfindingsof study). 
5508 
on the patient's 
lends request euthanasia experience weighty 
Within a decade, the so-called 
Systemic 
Effects, 
Expressive 
Values, and the Role of the Physician contagious.110 fear that a few highly cases, with harmful suicide on suicide attitudes 
Some people because 
may be supported about the sanctity intruding so deeply on patient autonomy less controversially, it might be suggested insofar as it has salutary effects on social norms?helping in which life is seen with a degree of reverence, and in which the termination of life, by self or others, is taken to be a tragic event. This point has special insofar as a prohibition on suicide and assisted suicide, even in the importance most compelling cases, helps express and fortify norms in favor of dealing with difficult conditions in more constructive ways. A right to physicianassisted suicide might be taken to compromise the general social norm against suicide and assisted suicide, even if, as a technical matter, it applies only in a restricted context. We have seen that acts of suicide can be suicides for and compelling 
The state may want to disallow physician-assisted 
cases may spur a wide range of additional publicized effects on norms against suicide in general.111 suicide 
It is also possible that a right to physician-assisted would have adverse effects on the norms and role of physicians. Physicians are now faced with an entrenched norm in favor of the preservation of life. A right to physician-assisted suicide might have harmful effects on that norm. It is possible, for example, that such a right would make doctors more willing to hasten death whether or not this is actually the patient's choice. Such a right 
been demonstrated)P;OSNERs,upra note 11, at 242 & n.23 (same). 
(discussingnormsandofficial "statements")C;ass R. Sunstein,Social Normsand Social Roles, 96 COLUM. L. Rev. 903, 964-65 (1996) (same). 

Phillips,supra note 26, at 341-42 (discussingrelationbetweensuicidesand knowledgeof othersuicides). may encourage physicians to make personal or cost-benefit disserve many patients' interests. The ban on physician-assisted this view, intended to serve an expressive function, fortifying associated with the proper role of the physician. judgments that suicide is, on social norms IV. Constitutional 
Options 
We have now seen that the state can invoke some powerful justifications to oppose the right to physician-assisted suicide. In light of these considerations, how might the Court resolve the question of whether there is a constitutionally guaranteed right to die? I believe that the Court should reject the constitutional challenge, partly for institutional reasons connected with the limited place of the Supreme Court in American government:112 When the issue is very close in light of the underlying issues of fact and value, and when there is no democratic defect in the underlying political process, the Court should not strike down reasonable legislative judgments. I consider substantive due process, equal protection, and (following the lead of Judge Guido Calabresi in Quill) the form of procedural due process involving the defect known as "desuetude." 
Substantive 
Due Process 
Narrowly 
Vindicating 
the Right 
Like the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the Supreme Court might say that there is a fundamental liberty interest in deciding whether to live or die and that the various state justifications are not sufficient to overcome that interest. It might support this view with the plausible suggestion that the various risks can be counteracted through less restrictive alternatives. A state concerned about those risks might take steps to make sure that the patient really wants to die by requiring a certain burden of proof, ensuring that the circumstances meet certain constraints, imposing procedural safeguards of various kinds, and using the criminal law against doctors who pressure patients and do not simply follow their wishes. This approach would be reminiscent of Roe in the sense that it would follow the familiar two-step process of finding a fundamental right and declaring that the state does not have a "compelling" interest that it is unable to support with less restrictive means. 
This route would not be entirely indefensible. At least if we have a category (1) or category (2) case?the patient's wishes are clear, the condition is genuinely hopeless, and the patient is facing physically difficult circumstances?reasonable people might believe that the state's interests are not overriding. Perhaps the basic risks could be adequately handled through procedural safeguards (as I believe is likely true as a matter of policy). Indeed, it is possible to think that such a route would be stronger than that in several of the privacy cases, including Roe itself. Here the individual interest may be at least as insistent and the countervailing interests might seem weaker insofar as the individual in question has extremely poor life prospects. There is no direct argument, as there is in the abortion context, about preventing harm to third parties. The Court has almost never said that a state can intrude on a right that qualifies as fundamental, and unlike the procedural rules upheld in Cruzan, the barrier to physician-assisted suicide is a total ban. 
But vindication of the right would not, all things considered, be a good resolution. The privacy cases are actually far narrower than this two-step process suggests, and the Court might reasonably seek to cabin those cases by taking account of their distinctive features. Those features very much involve problems with democratic deliberation. First, equal protection dimensions?themselves calling up democratic concerns connected with political inequality?were present in many of these cases. Roe was in important part a case of gender equality, as then-Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg suggested in 1985113 and as the Court has since explicitly acknowledged.114 If that decision is to be made acceptable, it must be partly because of the connection between sex equality and the abortion right.115 Nor was this only true of Roe. In privacy cases involving a right of use or access to contraceptives,116 there was at least a tacit equal protection dimension as well, for women were particularly at risk in the event of an unwanted pregnancy. It does not require much imagination to see this point. When discrimination of this kind is involved, the interest in democratic deliberation legitimately calls for a larger judicial role so as to counteract predictable problems with ordinary majoritarian processes. 
Second, as Alexander Bickel suggested long ago, the early cases raised questions of procedural due process, for they involved laws that were practically unenforced and unenforceable.117 Thus the ban on the use of contraceptives within marriage was not a simple invasion of privacy; it involved a statute enacted long ago, not plausibly representing the considered judgments of the relevant electorate, and enforced only in a selective and discriminatory manner.118 In this sense, the ban presented a case of desuetude.119 The other privacy cases did not vindicate a broad right to control one's body. They suggested more narrowly that if a state is going to regulate sexual activity, it must do so directly and not through the indirect, at best modestly effective means of making pregnancy the price of that activity. We may thus conclude that the privacy cases did not involve a simple identification of a fundamental right and a judgment that the state lacked sufficient justification to intrude. There were important issues relating to procedural due process and equal protection as well. And these issues suggest that there were problems in the system of democratic deliberation that contributed to the outcomes in the relevant cases. Thus the Court did not announce a broad right to sexual autonomy. It said more narrowly that any intrusion on that right must be direct, nondiscriminatory, and supported by actual public judgments, rather than indirect, discriminatory, and reflecting no actual judgment from the democratic public. 
Along these dimensions, the right to physician-assisted suicide is quite different. In many cases, that right has been considered very recently in the relevant states.120 Moreover, there is no serious equal protection dimension in these cases.121 No politically vulnerable group is at risk, at least not in any constitutionally pertinent sense. It does make sense to assume or say that the decision whether to live in category (1) and (2) cases implicates a fundamental interest for constitutional purposes. But the state has very strong reasons to intrude on that interest. The closest analogy may be to third-trimester abortions, where the Court did not deny that women retain a fundamental interest, but found the state's justification sufficient to support intrusion on that interest, even in the context of a near-total prohibition.122 It is perfectly reasonable for citizens, in their capacity as voters, to conclude that state law should allow a right to physician-assisted suicide. But a decision by the Court, foreclosing diverse solutions in diverse states, would intrude into ongoing CatholicChurchin preventingstatutorychange). 

a formalrightto physician-assistedsuicide;many(wealthy,well-educated)peoplemayhavesomethinglike thatrighteven in a system in whichthe rightis not formallyrecognized.But politicallyweakpeople would also be at special risk in a system recognizingsuch a right;the risks of abuse might well operatemost stronglyagainstmembersof disadvantagedgroups.Hence the interestin politicalequalitydoes not seem to argue in any particulardirection. Note in this regardthat while a slight majorityof whites favor physician-assistedsuicide, AfricanAmericansoppose it by morethantwo to one. See HENDINs,upranote 11, at 180. 
deliberative processes in circumstances in which reasonable This is so especially insofar as the relevant judgments depend not well-suited for judicial judgment. people may differ. 
on factual issues 
Rejecting 
The Court might simply uphold the relevant laws. It might hold that there is no fundamental interest, for reasons discussed above. Far more promisingly, it might say that even if there is a fundamental interest, the state has sufficient reason to interfere with the choice. There is a great deal to be said on behalf of this conclusion. The distinction between withdrawing treatment and active euthanasia may not be supportable at the level of first principles; but it reflects widely held intuitions and, more fundamentally, the state's justifications for rejecting a right to physician-assisted suicide are stronger at least in degree.123 Thus the Court might say that the risks of abuse and misapplication are not so serious in the case of withdrawal of treatment, but that a state could reasonably decide that those risks are decisive against physician-assisted suicide. 
Moreover, recognition of the importance of the state's countervailing interests would free up state legislatures to do as they wish with a problem that is very much on the public agenda. As we have seen, the state does have powerful interests with which to counterpose the claim from decisional autonomy.124 Notably, those interests are more powerful than in any of the privacy cases vindicating the underlying right. In Roe, the state's justification?protection of fetal life?seemed (and seems) to many quite strong; but at least there is a serious question whether, on secular grounds, fetal life deserves the same respect and concern as human life post-viability. By contrast, the potential abuses introduced by any right to physician-assisted suicide have considerable weight whatever one's convictions about foundational issues. The Court is not in a good position to know whether the likely risks are serious and whether they can be reduced sufficiently through less restrictive means. For this reason, the question is admirably well-suited to a federal system that can conduct a range of experiments. 
Institutional 
Notes 
It should controversial 
be clear that the argument I am suggestion that when there is no palpable making depends on the defect in the system of 
supra note 6, at 172 ("Differentpersonscan reasonablyreachdifferentconclusions. . . ."). deliberation,125 courts should respect very even if a "fundamental interest" is at stake.126 This view legislative depends on two assumptions. the relevant interests, 
The first is that judicial 
about how to balance in light of factual and predictive uncertainties, of both fact and value, judicial insulation can be a disadvantage too; it can make it harder for courts to obtain relevant information, and it can make always of both fact and political morality. 
careful But with by virtue of with respect respect to for judges to choose what to do in the face of factual Judicial insulation that courts should not be too sure that are right,127 in the sense that they be reluctant to overturn in democratic when the balance deliberation.128 is quite close and when there is no democratic are not doctrines their insulation to underlying it less uncertainty. they legislative very different may truncate a plausible amicably 
The second assumption is that even if judges are right, they should aware that their (by hypothesis correct) moral judgments, once announced, 
be may not receive immediate 
social vindication from 
what they intended.129 ongoing of democratic 
deliberation, and may instead 
This is because produce judicial judgments and by so doing, may prove futile or even counterproductive. 
In the context of abortion, this is view, for the nation may well have been moving toward a solution not far from 
Roe and reflecting reasonably 4; see also JORGEHNABERMABSE,TWEEFNACTSANDNORM2S66 (WilliamRehgtrans.,PolityPress 1996) (1992) (arguingagainstjudicialpaternalism)S;UNSTEINsu,pranote29, at 123-61 (embracingsamegeneral view). On this view, a democraticproblemexists if a rightcentralto democracyis at issue (for example, the right to free political speech) or if a group is being fenced out of political processes throughformal exclusions or, more controversially,prejudiceor "animus."See Romerv. Evans, 116 S. Ct. 1620, 1627 (1996) (strikingdown state constitutionalamendmentpartlybecauseit reflects"animus"). 
It might be thoughtthat thereis such a defect in light of the fact thatreligious groupscan block changefor religiousreasons,andperhapsthis accountsforcurrentpracticein some states.The shortanswer is thatthis is not the sort of defect thatwouldjustify a moreaggressivejudicial role. Religious groupsof course are entitledto participatein democraticprocesses,andeven if thereare constraintson the kindsof argumentsthatthey areentitledto make,the argumentstypicallyinvokedagainstphysician-assistedsuicide do not run afoul of those constraints.The case is differentfrom Griswoldv. Connecticut,381 U.S. 479 (1965), wherea well-organizedreligiousminority,invokinga purelyreligiousargument,was able to block a repeal that was very generally favored of a prohibitionthat was never directly enforced throughthe criminallaw. See POSNERs,upra note 118, at 324-28. 
criticalfact here is thatfully reasonablepeople might decide this issue eitherway, even thoughthe Court might find one view more reasonablethanthe otheras a matterof policy. 
ed., 3d ed. enlarged1960) (suggestingthatspiritof libertyis spiritwhich "is not too surethatit is right"). 
insofaras he is a strongdefenderof the rightto physician-assistedsuicide as a matterof policy, see id. (manuscriptch. 16, at 2-3), and insofaras he is not reluctantto urgea strongjudicial role in otherareas, see RICHARAD. Epstein, Takings (1985) (arguingfor aggressiveprotectionof propertyrights). 
in producingsocial reformand complex effects of Roe v. Wade). in various compromises respect to physician-assisted similar, the right to constitutional ruling This consideration 
were right compelling, a majority or minority any kind of heckler's racial animus reasonable inequality this kind are relevant.133 
suggested people should and the issue is otherwise 
may embroil should not be decisive; ways values) that government imposed a general to have abortions, or said that randomly people 
to those who need them. The fact that these cases people kidneys unlikely suggests that the occasions for "pure" substantive rare indeed. Ordinarily, political safeguards are sufficient abuses, and if they are not sufficient, circumstances 
different from (outraged, uncomprehending) substantive due process. For present purposes there may be some cases in which states have no sufficiently 
grounds are so bizarrely 
will be due process such gross 
facts and But see David J. Garrow, Liberty and Sexuality 616-17 (1994) (contendingthat states would not have moved in directionset by Roe). Whetheror not Roe is a good example,the point certainlyholds in general. 
Marriage 123-82 (1996), which claims thatthe Constitutionforbidslaws banningsame-sex marriage. 
Norms, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1212, 1220-28 (1978) (discussingrightsthatcourts, for institutionalreasons, underenforce). for interfering with what is properly characterized as a fundamental interest, the right to physician-assisted suicide is not such a case. 
In the context at hand, there is a further point. As least as much as Roe itself, a decision on behalf of a right to physician-assisted suicide would put the Court in the exceedingly difficult business of specifying appropriate procedures and boundary lines. It is inevitable that a judicially recognized right would have to be accompanied by guarantees designed to ensure that the patient genuinely wants to die. States that are skeptical of the underlying right would predictably devise correspondingly elaborate procedures, and hence the Court would be in the business of distinguishing between justified and unjustified measures designed to produce certainty about the patient's wishes. If a ban on suicide is permissible, the Court would have to make fine distinctions between those cases in which physician-assisted suicide is a constitutional right and those in which it is not. These considerations ought not to be decisive if the case for a constitutional guarantee is otherwise compelling. But they suggest that any such guarantee would produce not one judgment but a long line of judgments, not well-suited to judicial competence. The Court's difficulties with Roe in this regard counsel against a duplication of that experience. 
Rationality 
Review 
In Eisenstadt v. Baird,134 the Court struck down as irrational a law forbidding the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried people. The Court said that it was irrational to prohibit the distribution of contraceptives among unmarried people if such distribution was not prohibited to married people.135 Many questions might be raised about the Court's reasoning; the state's decision was hardly irrational in the technical sense. But Eisenstadt can be understood as a rather cautious and modest ruling, one that vindicates a claim that the Court thought convincing without going so far as to announce a general "substantive due process" right to purchase contraceptives. 
Perhaps the Court might attempt to do something like this and seek a more modest approach via the generality-requiring commands of the Equal Protection Clause. The Second Circuit attempted a route of just this sort in Quill v. Vacco.136 The court noticed that New York allowed patients to order the removal of life support systems, but did not otherwise allow patients to take action to terminate their lives. This inequality, the court said, violated the Equal Protection Clause because it was "not rationally related to any legitimate state interest."137 On this view, there is no sufficiently good reason to allow people to terminate their lives in one way while banning them from doing so in another way. Under the decision of the court of appeals, New York might be able to ban both physician-assisted suicide and removal of life support systems (though the latter step would raise substantive due process questions under Cruzan), but it may not discriminate. 
The equal protection/rationality approach has an advantage of comparative modesty; it also has a plausible antecedent in Eisenstadt. But the argument is nonetheless weak. Longstanding traditions, and many reasonable people, have distinguished between killing and letting die.138 This distinction finds a particular instantiation in the idea that people should be allowed to remove life-saving equipment but not to kill themselves. Certainly the action/omission distinction raises many puzzles, and it is far from clear that the distinction makes ultimate sense in this context,139 but a holding that it is "irrationar runs afoul of both ordinary law and ordinary intuitions. If the distinction in this context is unconstitutional because. it is irrational, it is unconstitutional in many other contexts as well. Consider, for example, criminal law's distinction between killing and letting die,140 tort law's absence of liability for bad samaritans,141 and indeed due process law's own distinction between government actions and omissions.142 
There is also theoretical support for the distinction. Here are some possible grounds. Without endorsing the distinction for all purposes, we can say that someone who jumps off a building expresses contempt for his own life, whereas someone who disconnects life-saving equipment, and allows nature to take its course, expresses no such contempt. The attitude expressed by what are conventionally labelled "acts" may well be different from the attitude expressed by what are conventionally labelled "omissions." Similarly, it might seem that a doctor who assists in suicide is different from a doctor who withdraws life-saving equipment, because of the different attitudes expressed by the two acts. In any case, the right to remove life support might be rooted in a desire to allow people to prevent the government from restraining and invading their bodies against their will. The right to physicianassisted suicide is at least plausibly different on this score. I do not mean to 
202-13. 

the generalfailureto assist people who will die withouthelp. 
(holding thatthereis no affirmativerightto action by state). 
663, 665 (1996). 
1992, at 52, 53-55. 
sufficientlyplausiblefor constitutionalpurposes;thepolicy issue is different.See supratext accompanying notes 11-13; see also Orentlichers,upra note 143, at 665-66 (arguingthatpermittingassisted suicide in "limited"cases will bringlaw closer to society's moralvalues). "Fundamental 
Rights" supportobligations). 
Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533 (1964) (articulatingone person,one vote principle). follow from a right to physician-assisted suicide. If the substantive due process argument is not convincing, the equal protection argument is unconvincing as well. 
The Court might strike down such laws unless they are a product of recent legislative deliberation on the particular issues raised by physicianassisted suicide. This is the solution favored by Judge Calabresi in his intriguing if somewhat adventurous concurring opinion in Quill.149 Judge Calabresi's solution identifies an important and salutary theme in constitutional law, one that raises complex issues and deserves considerable attention. A large advantage of Judge Calabresi's approach is institutional. It ensures that interferences with important forms of liberty will not be based on law that lacks current political support; in that way, the approach is democracysupporting. Moreover, it does not preempt but instead catalyzes democratic processes, and in that sense reflects the courts' appropriate caution in dealing with complex ethical and factual issues. The principal problem with Judge Calabresi's approach is that the case of physician-assisted suicide does not easily fit the case of desuetude, for the "right to die" has received ample recent consideration in most of the relevant states. I conclude that the idea of desuetude is extremely important and valuable, and deserves a more prominent and explicit place in constitutional law, but that it ought not to be used to call for new legislation in Washington or New York. 
Idea 
The basic argument is simple. Suppose that the relevant laws?banning people from helping in the commission of suicide?were written long ago, and suppose too that they were not specifically addressed to the problem of physician-assisted suicide. Indeed, that problem is a recent one, made available by new technologies and practices. In light of the novelty of the relevant practice, and (let us assume) the lack of legislative attention to that practice, we could imagine a state court ruling that state law bans on assisting suicide do not even cover physician-assisted suicide, on the ground that criminal statutes should be construed narrowly and not applied to a case that is so far afield from the understandings of the enacting legislature.150 If a state court concurringin the result). 
opinion of Stevens, J.) (construingstatuteagainstordinarylanguageso as to avoid perceivedunintended outcome); Churchof the Holy Trinityv. United States, 143 U.S. 457, 472 (1892) (interpretingstatute contraryto its plain meaningso as not to reachoutcome likely disfavoredby enactinglegislature). something has not so held, a federal court, faced with a due process like this: challenge, might say We do not hold that a state may never forbid physician-assisted suicide. But if a state is going to forbid a decision of this kind, it must demonstrate that it has focused with some particularity on the problem and concluded that its rationale is weighty enough to override the individual's decision. An old statute banning assistance in suicide, enacted long ago in a time of different values and facts, is not sufficient. 
in accordance an exotic argument. 
with which 
But it has roots in the old notion of under "desuetude," laws that were enacted connect 
Other judge-made have, using the name, pointed to desuetude-related concerns. In some cases, for example, the Court will uphold a statute only on the basis of a rationale actually at work in the process leading to its enactment. A merely hypothetical purpose is not enough. This was a central part of the Court's reasoning in United States v. Virginia,153 where the Court invalidated a same-sex program at the Virginia Military Institute on the ground that no legislature had in fact adopted single-sex education as a 
Accountability(Whatthe Bork-BrennanDebate Ignores), 105 HARVL.. REV.80, 122 n.136 (1991). 
purposeof promotingeducationaldiversityand equalopportunity);see also Thompsonv. Oklahoma,487 U.S. 815, 857-58 (1988) (O'Connor,J., concurring)(votingto strikedownlaw imposingdeathpenaltywith no minimumage provisionon groundsthatstatutedid not reflectactualand recentlegislativejudgments in light of subsequentstatute allowing minors to be dealt with as adults in some cases); Califano v. Goldfarb,430 U.S. 199, 223 n.9 (1977) (Stevens,J., concurring)("Perhapsan actual,consideredlegislative choice would be sufficient to allow this statuteto be upheld,but thatis a questionI would reserveuntil such a choice has been made."). 
jurisdictionover teachersin church-operatedschoolsunderthe NationalLaborRelationsAct so as to avoid FirstAmendmentdifficulties);Kentv. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 129 (1958) (construingstatuteso as to avoid constitutionaldoubts). 
law for vagueness). A similar idea underliesthe developmentof death penalty doctrine.In Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972), Justice White and Justice Stewartdid not hold thatdeathpenalties were unconstitutionalper se, but only that the deathpenaltyhad to be administerednonarbitrarilyS.ee id. at 306-14 (White and Stewart, JJ., concurring).Once the public reaffirmedits commitmentto capital punishmentundermorespecificcriteriaafterthis formof "constitutionarlemand,"the CourtretreatedS.ee Gregg v. Georgia,428 U.S. 153, 179-81 (1976). 
problem with the relevant regulation was that it faced a "legitimacy deficit" because it had not been embraced by someone with adequate political accountability.160 
All of these cases have close connections with the notion of desuetude. They suggest that a less intrusive alternative to a substantive due process holding is a conclusion that the state must show sufficient grounds, in actual democratic judgments, for an intrusion on certain interests and rights. 
Problems 
As I have noted, an idea of this kind is not a version of substantive due process; it suggests instead that there is a procedural defect in the laws at hand. What would be wrong with an opinion of this sort? There is an obvious slippery slope problem. Many statutes now in operation were enacted long ago, when facts and values were different; are all such statutes unconstitutional? Surely they are not, and their longstanding character may well testify to their wisdom and good sense, not to their doubtful legitimacy. A constitutional doctrine would be absurd if it declared all old enactments void. The answer would have to be that the prohibition against desuetude applies not only when a law is very old, but also when (a) a liberty interest is at stake; (b) the rationale brought forward in the law's defense did not play any kind of role in the enacting legislature; (c) there is a demonstrated problem of sporadic and perhaps discriminatory enforcement; and (d) the relevant rationale, if supported by adequate facts and an actual legislative judgment, may well be sufficient to justify the intrusion on the liberty interest. 
But there is another objection. An approach based on desuetude puts courts in the business of setting the legislative agenda. Any legislature has a great deal to do, and its failure to alter a law involving assisted suicide may well not signify indifference or neglect, but something like a considered judgment that the status quo is acceptable. In fact, this is a reasonable view about New York itself in Quill v. Vacco.m And if the legislature has recently considered the problem and failed to do anything new, the doctrine of desuetude probably should not apply. But for cases that involve an unusually strong liberty interest and a justification that is post hoc and of questionable relevance to any actual legislative decision, a ruling founded on desuetude makes a great deal of sense as a less restrictive alternative to an equal protection or due process ruling. It should be seen as an effort to create a more deliberative democracy, one in which certain interests can be compromised only on the basis of a recent deliberative judgment, not as a kind of accident. 
Desuetude 
Misapplied? F.3d 790 (9th Cir.),cert. granted, 117 S. Ct. 37 (1996). 

to repealstatuteis not necessarilysufficientto rebutchallengeon groundsof desuetude). 
only because of political power of CatholicChurch). process route; that we could imagine cases involving physician-assisted suicide that would provide a good arena for invoking that idea; but that the issue has been under intense discussion in many states and that Washington and New York have had intense recent deliberations. If the Court is to accept a version of Judge Calabresi's proposal?and I believe that it ultimately should?it should do so in a simpler and more compelling setting. 
Death and Abortion: 
A Note the Courtinvalidatedsame-sex educationat VirginiaMilitaryInstitute.AviSHAlMargalit, The Decent SOCIET Y(1996), is, in my view, a relevant discussion of the phenomenonof "humiliation"via state channels. 
have engaged in a form of dialogue with the political process.169 It would have done much better because it would not have caused so much destructive and unnecessary social upheaval, because it probably would have produced a range of creative compromises well-adapted to a federal system, and because a more cautious approach would not deeply have compromised the underlying right, as that right is best conceived. The Roe experience is not one that the Court should duplicate, at least when the Court's underlying judgment is subject to reasonable dispute and when there is no particular reason to distrust political processes. 
V. Conclusion supra note 72, at 49-50 (criticizingRoe for its "maximalism"). opinion would assume for purposes of argument that the right to physicianassisted suicide qualifies as a "fundamental right" while finding that the state has sufficient reason to override that right. 
It is hard to be comfortable with this conclusion. In actual cases, fully competent people, joined by their loved ones, are seeking to terminate their lives amidst hopeless conditions and an inevitable period of helplessness, despair, and perhaps intense emotional or physical pain. Those of us who are healthy are likely to have known people in such situations; those of use who are healthy may eventually find ourselves in such situations. In cases of this kind, an insistence on the abstract "right to life" can seem an egregious and unnecessary cruelty, and the notion of "death with dignity" acquires immense force. Lawyers and citizens should be aware that a judgment that people have no constitutional right to commit some act does not mean that they do not deserve, in the deepest moral sense, that very right. Undoubtedly doctors should consult closely with patients, friends, and family members, and on occasion, all will conclude that physician-assisted suicide is a merciful and fully legitimate act. Sometimes they will reach this conclusion whatever the technical content of state law, and in such cases prosecutors should tread very cautiously indeed. And here we arrive at the heart of the matter. The argument I have offered is institutional rather than substantive: It is not the Supreme Court but these other arenas?state legislatures, prosecutors' offices, hospitals, and private homes?that should decide whether, when, and how to legitimate a "right to die." 
Which Risks First? 
Almost everyone agrees that in controlling risks, the United States does a poor job of setting priorities. Sometimes substantial resources are devoted to controlling small or even de minimis risks. Some serious problems receive little attention. Consider the following chart, showing dramatic disparities in amounts spent per life-year saved; note especially the disparities in the environmental context: EPA 5,700,000.0 
We should not read this evidence for more than it is worth. There is considerable uncertainty in the numbers. Environmental protection has many purposes in addition to the protection of human life, including prevention of adverse health effects short of mortality, aesthetic goals, recreational goals, and prevention of deaths and adverse health effects in animals and plants. These purposes should also be taken into account in deciding which risks are most serious. But we know enough to approve of the general consensus that better priority setting is a crucial task for the modern regulatory state. A recent study suggests that better allocations of existing expenditures could save an additional 60,000 lives at no increased cost, and that with better allocations, we could save the same number of lives we now save with $31 billion in annual savings.2 
We might even conclude that selective attention is the principal problem facing modern regulation. Too often government focuses on pieces or sides of a problem, failing to see that what is at work is a complex whole! (It is notable that the science of ecology and the discipline of economics are both fundamentally concerned with this fact.) Too often government fails to see that if it affects (or fails to affect) one aspect of an environmental problem, it will simultaneously affect other aspects as well, probably involving prices, employment, poverty, international trade, and other environmental problems. It is selective attention that, for example, produces the pervasive phenomenon of risk regulation that actually increases (some, or aggregate) risks.4 And it is selective attention that produces regulations that reduce certain environmental harms but in the process create a range of new and sometimes serious social problems. The problem of selective attention is aggravated by the role of the media, which quite generally focuses on sensationalistic pieces of problems, and by the role of powerful private groups, which can attempt to promote risk redistributionrather than risk reduction. 
On all this there is general and growing agreement. There is, however, no similar consensus on what better priority-setting would specifically entail. If a government not suffering from selective attention attempts to address the worst risks first, what precisely will it do? Some people suggest that government should 2 Tammy 0. Tengs, et al, Five-HundredLife-Saving Interventionsand Their Cost-Effectiveness, 15 Risk Analysis 369 (1995). 
' See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure: Why Things Go Wrong and What We Can Do to Make Them Right (Metropolitan 1996), for an intriguing discussion of computer simulations that highlight this problem. 
' See John D. Graham and Jonathan Baert Wiener, Risk versus Risk: Tradeoffs in Protectingthe Environment (Harvard 1995). engage in priority-setting by consulting the criterion of private willingness to pay.5 Some people think that the government should try to maximize the number of total lives saved.' If one program would save one hundred lives, and another eighty, the government should (other things being equal) begin with the first program. But other people, referring to pervasive differences between lay and expert evaluations of risk, reject this idea. They say that lay people have more complex, "richer" judgments about which risks are worst and that these judgments should govern regulatory policy. On this view, there is a danger that expert judgments will hide controversial ideas about rationality behind a technocratic smokescreen. 
In this Article, I reject both of these views. A basic assumption is that the American constitutional order is a republic, or a deliberative democracy, in which public representatives are not supposed merely to register existing judgments but "to refine and enlarge the public view."7 If the issue of risk regulation is seen in these terms, representatives should attend to reflective citizen judgments, but they should not treat those judgments uncritically or accept them regardless of the reasons offered on their behalf. Much less should they rely on private willingness to pay, which may reflect unrealistic optimism, ignorance, or confusion. And if we examine the reasons that underlie risk-related judgments, we will conclude that it would be obtuse to say that government should attempt to maximize the number of lives saved, no matter the source and nature of relevant risks. Lives are not fungible with lives; it matters a great deal for what purpose and in what context lives are being put in danger. But it would also be odd to rely entirely on lay judgments, which are frequently based on confusion, ignorance, and selective attention. When those judgments are based on misunderstandings of the facts, they should play no role in policy. 
I contend that government should attempt a three-step inquiry. First it should try to estimate decently-livable life-years saved, rather than total lives saved. Thus the first step in its analysis should be to see how much aggregate extension of decently-livable years can be brought about by different regulatory " See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and PrivateResponsibilities for Risk (Oxford 1992). 
' This is the tendency in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993). 
' Federalist 10 (Madison), in Max Beloff, ed, The Federalist45 (Basil Blackwell 2d ed 1987). initiatives. The second step should incorporate lay judgments to the extent that these are based on reasonable judgments of value rather than factual error or selective attention. In this way, regulators should ask if regulatory priorities should be shifted from the aggregate measure by exploring whether there are important qualities in the context that call for a shift. The key questions here are: -Is the risk inequitably distributed? -Is it especially dreaded? -Is it run involuntarily? -How easily can it be controlled by those exposed? 
Answers to these questions may call for an adjustment of the first-stage judgment. As we will see, however, the second two questions raise complex issues, for risks are not "voluntary or not" or "uncontrollable or not," but instead come with small or high costs of avoidance. The ordinary criterion of decently-livable life-years should be adjusted upward when the costs of risk avoidance are especially high, and adjusted downward when the costs of risk avoidance are especially low. The third step consists of an incorporation of effects short of mortality, including (but not limited to) morbidity, adverse effects on aesthetics and recreation, and mortality effects for plants and animals. 
The discussion of defects in ordinary judgments about risk-unrealistic optimism, heuristics that produce error, and so forth-leads to a degree of skepticism about the criterion of "private willingness to pay," and I offer a few words against the economists' conventional approach. I also discuss institutional arrangements that might help both to ensure that government attacks the worst risks first and to ensure that technocratic and democratic goals are simultaneously promoted by government regulation. 
Many economists attempt to respond to the question of how to engage in sensible priority-setting through the criterion of private willingness to pay ("WT P").8 There are several advantages to resolving environmental questions via this criterion. For one thing, WTP provides simultaneous information on costs and benefits. This is important because an emphasis on decently' See, for example, W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and PrivateResponsibilities for Risk (Oxford 1992). livable life-years looks at the benefit side without looking at costs. To know how to proceed, it is of course important to know both. For another thing, WTP appears to have democratic virtues, since it allows risk regulation to be made by consulting actual public judgments. And there can be little doubt that use of WTP would produce more coherence and rationality than the crazy-quilt pattern we now observe. 
Nonetheless, there are three serious problems with proceeding in this way. The first problem is that private willingness to pay may well reflect factual errors, and factual errors should not be a basis for regulatory policy. The second problem is that the available methods for measuring willingness to pay--contingent valuation methods and revealed preference methods--have serious defects. The third problem is that willingness to pay reflects a category mistake; it sees government as a kind of "maximizing machine," attempting to aggregate private preferences. Although much can be gained by consulting private preferences, this is a misconception of government's duties. 
The first problem-reflection of factual errors-is the simplest. People may be willing to pay a great deal to live far from a nuclear power plant; but by itself, this fact does not mean that government should devote a great deal of money to ensure that nuclear power plants are located far from people. By contrast, people may not be willing to pay much to reduce risks from particulate matter; but if particulate matter is a serious contributor to respiratory problems and asthma, the low willingness to pay should not be used for purposes of policy. As we will see, ordinary people frequently lack or misunderstand relevant information and rely on heuristics that produce large-scale mistakes. Those mistakes should not be incorporated into law. 
Perhaps willingness to pay can be based not on factual judgments but on something more abstract, such as the willingness to pay for a statistical life; if so, the factual errors need not be incorporated, and we can rely on the basic criterion. Certainly this idea would produce improvements upon the haphazard and irrational status quo. But it too raises serious problems.9 There is the initial problem of deciding between willingness to pay (how much a person would pay for environmental improvement) and willingness to accept (how much a person would have to be paid to permit environmental deterioration); the relevant numbers 
I borrow in the next several paragraphs from Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1 (1995). may be substantially different, and it will be necessary to choose between them.1" This may not be a fundamental objection; perhaps the two numbers can set ceilings and floors, and that itself may be an advance. But many regulatory goods are not traded on markets, and hence "contingent valuation" methods must be used. Rather than looking at actual choices, these methods ask people hypothetical questions about how much they would be willing to pay to avoid certain harms or conditions. The most advanced methods involve lengthy interview sessions designed to provide information, give a sense of context, and allow discussion in a way that fosters deliberative results.1 
Much recent work with contingent valuation techniques has sought to elicit values for different states of health. In such studies, for example, people purport to be willing to pay a much greater amount to avert cancer deaths (from $1.5 million to $9.5 million) than unforeseen instant deaths (from $1 million to $5 million). 2 More generally, this work generates tables like the following: 3 Similarly, these survey techniques purport to show that people value days of illness-from coughing spells, headaches, nausea, sinus congestion, and so forth-in diverse amounts. 4 
Despite their apparent promise, contingent valuation methods have serious limitations. For one thing, it is difficult to believe that people answering hypothetical questions can assign '3 IIdd aatt 39492.. meaningful dollar values to various possible health or other risks. The more context-sensitive the method attempts to become, the more its hypothetical nature becomes problematic, bordering on the fantastic. The leading practitioners of contingent valuation purport to discover that people are willing to pay $90 to have a day of relief from angina if they have had it for only one day, but $288 for ten days of relief if they have had angina for twenty days. 5 It is hard to take these figures seriously. In economic terms, people have a difficult time assigning hypothetical dollar values to bundles of commodities they virtually never confront in everyday experience. 
Moreover, the results of contingent valuation studies suggest that the answers do not show actual valuation of relevant commodities. A special problem is that of "indifference to quantity," reflected in the astonishing and devastating fact that people will give the same dollar number to save 2000, 20,000, and 200,000 birds--or the same number to save one, two, or three wilderness areas."6 Relatedly, the valuation of a resource is much affected by whether it is offered alone or with other goods. Willingness to pay for spotted owls drops significantly when people are asked to value the owl with and in comparison to other species. This evidence suggests that people may be purchasing moral satisfaction rather than stating their real valuation. 7 It is pertinent in this connection that the order and number of questions seems crucial in determining valuation. When asked for their willingness to pay to preserve visibility in the Grand Canyon, people offer a number five times higher when this is the first question than when it is the third question." 
Would it be better to look at actual choices and thus to rely on revealed preferences? Some imaginative and provocative approaches attempt to determine the "value of life" by assessing willingness to pay for risk reductions. 9 The Office of Management and Budget has explicitly supported the willingness-to-pay criterion on the ground that it provides "an aggregate measure of what individuals are willing to forgo so as to enjoy a particular " Id at 89. The dollar figures are mean bid values, and relief means a "mild day." 16 See Peter A. Diamond and Jerry A. Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than No Number?, 8 J Econ Persp 45 (Fall 1994); Daniel Kahneman and Ilana Ritov, Determinants of Stated Willingness to Pay for Public Goods: A Study in the HeadlineMethod, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994). 
" See Kahneman and Ritov, 9 J Risk & Uncertainty 5 (cited in note 16). IS See id. " See Viscusi, FatalTradeoffs at 19-21 (cited in note 8). benefit."2" This approach appears to be prevalent in the agencies, where it results in a number of between $1 million and $8 million per life saved. 1 
But there are several problems with willingness-to-pay approaches based on actual market transactions. As noted, market behavior may reflect a lack of information about risks or cognitive problems and motivational influences that lead to inaccurate judgments about the facts.22 To be sure, workers are sometimes informed of risk levels and they can demand a risk premium; but to say the least, full information about workplace risks is rare, especially in light of the fact that some risks depend on complex causal mechanisms and take many years to come to fruition. There are possible motivational distortions as well. Wishful thinking and the desire to reduce cognitive dissonance-by thinking that you are not, in your daily work, exposing yourself to some cancer risk-may lead people to see risks as lower than they really are.' 
It is notable in this connection that people appear to be "risk optimists." They typically believe that they are less likely than other people to fall prey to social dangers. Thus the vast majority of drivers believe that they drive more safely than most drivers; thus most homosexuals believe that they are less likely than others to get AIDS; thus with respect to most hazards, people believe that they are at lower risk than the mean. I discuss this point in more detail below. 
Finally, willingness to pay measures ignore the distinction between the valuations people express in private, market transactions and those that they express in democratic arenas. What people are prepared to pay as private consumers is often, and appropriately, different from what they think society (and they, as members of society) ought to pay to avoid certain risks. Much empirical evidence confirms this point; for example, "[p]eople were, in fact, found on average to bid more for an improvement " See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Programof the United States Government, 1990-1991 (GPO 1992). The Administrative Conference reached a similar conclusion, though more cautiously. See Recommendations of the Administrative Conference Regarding Administrative Practice and Procedure and Correction, Recommendation No. 88-7, 53 Fed Reg 39585, 39586-87 (1988). 
21 See Ted R. Miller, Willingness to Pay Comes of Age: Will the System Survive?, 83 Nw U L Rev 876, 886-89 (1989). 
See Part III for further discussion. 
2 See Elliott Aronson, The Social Animal (W. H. Freeman 7th ed 1995); George A. Akerlof and William T. Dickens, The Economic Consequences of CognitiveDissonance, 72 Am Econ Rev 307, 307-08 (1982). for everyone in the United States than for just themselves."24 Judgments made in the context of democratic choice are designed to elicit different motivations and different considerations from those made in market transactions. Through exchange of different perspectives, collective decision making, and social-regarding reasoning, democratic arenas produce distinctive valuations. Partly this is a product of social norms;' partly it is a product of the fact that in the democratic setting, people are aware of the fact that whatever they are doing, they are doing it together. 
There is a further point, having to do with the phenomenon of "adaptive preferences." 21 People may well adapt their conduct and even their desires to what has been available. Consider here the story of the fox and the sour grapes. The fox does not want the grapes because he considers them to be sour; but his belief to this effect is based on the fact that the grapes are unavailable. It is therefore hard to justify their unavailability by reference to his preferences.27 In the environmental context, it might be hypothesized that the preference for environmental quality will be especially weak among people who have not been exposed to pristine areas, clean water, and clean air. If the point is right, it has important implications for positive and normative work.2 
Akerlof and Dickens have argued that workers are unwilling to confront the real magnitude of environmental risks faced in the workplace, because it is too distressing for them to do so.29 On this view, workers, having adapted their preferences and beliefs to a relatively risky status quo, attempt to reduce cognitive dissonance by concluding that the dangers are trivial. The claim is speculative and the relevant evidence is largely anecdotal. But there is some empirical support for the general view. Consider the fact that after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant accident, it was the people who lived on Three Mile Island who, of all those polled, believed that the relevant risks were lowest."0 
If the general claim is right, it would follow that the demand for environmental legislation might be relatively low among people deprived of exposure to environmental quality, and this phenomenon would be attributable to adaptation of preferences to what is available. It is extremely difficult to test this hypothesis against more 'conventional alternatives stressing learning and rational choice under conditions of deprivation. We might, however, begin to investigate the demand for environmental protection across regions and across nations. It would be especially valuable to see how the demand for environmental quality changes over time, perhaps with exposure to pristine areas, perhaps with a social belief that the degradation of environmental amenities is not inevitable, perhaps with the rise of organizations solving collective action problems of various sorts. 
As a normative matter, it might also follow that existing preferences, as expressed in consumption choices, are an uncertain basis for regulatory policy, since we cannot without circularity justify regulatory outcomes by reference to preferences that those outcomes have generated. Of course, it is right to insist that government should usually respect private choices, partly because of the frustration and resentment that are produced by efforts to bring about change, partly because of the constant risk of ignorance and bias on government's part. But if what I have said here is true, it will be necessary to rethink the under-analyzed and vexing issue of paternalism, in environmental law and elsewhere. 
Let us put willingness to pay to one side and ask what government should attempt to maximize in regulating risks. This is a question of great theoretical interest; but it also has considerable practical importance. Any answer should meet two constraints. First, it should be acceptable from the theoretical point of view. Second, it should be administrable, that is, it should be something that real-world officials can actually use. The two constraints are mutually checking. A theoretically excellent answer 
See Aronson, The Social Animal at 176-78 (cited in note 23). See also the discussion in Part III.B.1 of unrealistic optimism as a distorting factor. It is possible, of course, that the people who lived in this area were better informed. might be rejected because it is too complex or unwieldy, or because it imposes unrealistic informational demands on government. (Some forms of cost-benefit analysis, unaccompanied by constraints on what count as costs and benefits, run afoul of this objection.) A practically useful answer might be indefensible from the standpoint of theory. 
In recent years, many observers and some regulators, seeking a practical answer to the question what they should maximize, have focused on numbers of lives saved."' They decide which risks to regulate first by exploring the aggregate number of lives at risk. Thus many agencies attempt to specify that number in the course of making regulatory choices. In the environmental context, this is a promising start. A program that saves one hundred lives seems better than a program that saves two lives. (Of course to get a full picture, we must add gains in terms of morbidity, aesthetics, recreational opportunities, and tourism as well.) If this is our standard, much progress might be made by attending to the number of lives in danger from various "preventable" risks:32 " This idea is emphasized in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993). 
32 j. Michael McGinnis and William H. Foege, Actual Causes of Death in the United States, 270 JAMA 2207, 2208 (1993). 
' The notion of decently livable life years is intended as an improvement on the highly influential standard proposed by Richard Zeckhauser and Donald Shepard, Where Now For Saving Lives, 40 L & Contemp Probs 5, 11-45 (Autumn 1976), which uses the notion of "quality-adjusted life years." For general discussion, see George Tolley, Donald Kenkel, and Robert Fabian, eds, ValuingHealthfor Policy:An Economic Approach 290-94 (Chicago 1994); George W. Torrance, Measurementof Health State Utilities.ForEconomic Appraisal:A Review, 5 J Health Econ 1 (1986). The notion of decently livable life-years is gram "saves lives"; at best it extends them. Compare two regulations. The first extends the lives of one hundred elderly people, but in doing so, it gives them five additional years, accompanied by considerable pain and distress. The second extends the lives of eighty children, and in doing so, it gives each of them a statistical likelihood of fifty or more years of life. The second policy seems preferable to the first along two important dimensions. First: Lives are certainly not fungible, but where regulatory resources are limited and where choices have to be made, it makes sense (other things being equal and as an administrable start) to save as many years as possible. Other things being equal, many years should be chosen over few. Second: If government has a choice between preserving lives in a way that ensures decentlylivable years and preserving lives in a way that ensures a barely functional and extremely painful continued existence, it should choose the former. To someone who has a choice between death and five years of constant and considerable pain, the latter will probably seem a lot better; but for government regulators, it is preferable to provide five good years rather than five difficult ones if there is a choice. We might conclude, then, that government agencies should shift their attention from "lives saved" to "decently-livable life-years saved." 
Notably, the idea of decently-livable life-years is designed to set a floor, not to give some numerical amount to each such year in terms of its overall "quality." The floor might be defined in various ways; I understand it to refer to basic functional capacity. Thus someone who has chronic asthma certainly can live a decently-livable life. Someone who is confined to a hospital cannot. It is easy to imagine borderline cases, and perhaps the floor should be moved up or down, but the notion should have a degree of simplicity and should allow administrators to put to one side some of the harder questions. It is a modest variation on the idea of life-years saved; it subtracts from that amount the number of years saved that, because of some independent condition, are not decently-livable. 
Along this dimension, the idea of decently-livable life-years is far simpler than its close cousin: quality-adjusted ife-years.24 Its simplicity is in some ways a vice but also one of its virtues; instead of adjusting life-years for quality, every life-year above a simpler than quality-adjusted life-years and for that reason is more easily administrable as well as less contentious. 
' See Zeckhauser and Shephard, 40 L & Contemp Probs 5 (cited in note 33). certain floor counts for no less and no more than one. Of course scientific information currently leaves doubts about how many life-years are at risk, and frequently the best that can be done is to specify a range. But this very point suggests that decentlylivable life-years has another advantage over quality-adjusted life-years: it imposes a less severe cognitive demand on government. Specification of the "quality" of lives aided by regulation can be an extremely demanding task. 
In addition to simplicity, the idea of decently-livable lifeyears has the advantage that it is less contentious, and properly so. It is controversial to suggest that people with a chronic problem (respiratory difficulties, for example) deserve less in the way of regulatory help than people without such a problem. To devote resources to those who are suffering no difficulties, at the expense of those who, while functional, have a health problem, is to raise hard questions of equity. It is far less controversial to say that the government will treat everyone above a certain floor the same. 
A shift from lives saved to life-years saved makes a good deal of sense and has a degree of simplicity; but the notion of decently-livable life-years raises many questions. This is not a purely statistical inquiry; it has evaluative dimensions. The best way to handle the resulting problems is to recognize that a judgment of policy is being made and to ensure that that judgment is made by people who are subject to appropriate constraints, informed about relevant facts, and politically accountable. 
An especially controversial issue lurks in the background: it is possible that some lives might be considered not decently-livable because of unjust or highly disadvantageous social conditions. Desperately poor people, for example, may lack decent life prospects already, and a small incremental reduction in their health may seem to push them below the relevant "floor." For purposes of regulatory policy, this ought not to be counted. If it did count, regulatory policy would be devoted to the protection of those already well-off and to the neglect of those in desperate conditions; thus one social injustice would be compounded by another. The question is whether the saved years meet a decent floor, and it should be stipulated that this criterion is met by lives filled with extreme difficulty because of social and economic deprivation alone. 
Social psychologists have uncovered a number of distinctive characteristics of ordinary human judgments about risks. 5 Much of the remainder of this paper will be focused on those characteristics and on their role in regulatory policy. How, if at all, should the basic criterion of decently-livable life-years saved be qualified? Consider, for example, the following table, showing differences between expert and lay judgments about which risks are most serious: 6 
In this section, I discuss judgments that should not, in my view, play a role in government regulation. The most general ' See, for example, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristicsand Biases 3-20 (Cambridge 1990); Paul Slovic, et al, Regulation of Risk: A PsychologicalPerspective,in Roger G. Noll, ed, Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences 241 (California 1985). 
(Harvard 1993 conclusion is simple: Ordinary judgments should not be controlling when they are based on factual errors. When human judgments depend on heuristics or "frames" that produce mistakes, regulators should not rely on them. But some of these judgments are not easy to characterize, and they raise some questions about the nature of rationality (from the normative point of view) in this context. 
It is predictable that some people will find risks of special concern when they disproportionately affect white people or heterosexuals; risks that affect blacks and homosexuals may well be undervalued. Here, there is a judgment that distributional considerations properly enter into the calculus, and that some risks, because of their distribution, are properly neglected. As we will see, distributional decisions can play an appropriate role in regulatory policy. But where the relevant judgments are invidious, they do not belong. Of course, we can enter into reasonable debates about how to evaluate some judgments. The easiest cases involve a constitutional prohibition on distributional judgments, as for example in the prohibition on measures motivated by prejudice grounded in gender and race. But government might reasonably decide that certain judgments are unacceptable even if they are not unconstitutional. 
B. Misunderstandings of Facts and the Role of Heuristics 
People frequently misstate probabilities. If people are asked to rank various risks in terms of severity, they may well make factual blunders. s7 Some of their judgments about "severity" undoubtedly turn on judgments about value." But it is safe to say that factual mistakes are often at work. 
overconfidence. 
People tend to think that risks are more likely to materialize for others. Thus, there is systematic overconfidence in risk judgments, as the vast majority of people believe that they are less likely than other people to be subject to automobile accidents, "7Of course, judgments of severity may well be based on values as well as facts, and here things are more complex. See discussion in Part V. 
See Slovic, et al, Regulationof Risk (cited in note 35). infection from AIDS, heart attacks, asthma, and many other health risks.89 In one survey, for example, 90 percent of automobile drivers considered themselves to be above-average drivers.' ° In another survey, students asked to envision their future said that they were far less likely than their classmates to be fired from a job, to have a heart attack or to get cancer, to be divorced after a few years of marriage, or to have a drinking problem.4' 
Reflecting illusions about their own practices, gay men appear systematically to. underestimate the chance that they will get AIDS, even though they do not lack information about AIDS risks in general. 2 Older people similarly underestimate the likelihood that they will be in a car accident or contract major diseases. Unrealistic optimism appears to characterize people in most social categories." People systematically underestimate the extent to which they are at risk, and perceptions of relative invulnerability affect preventive health practices." Consider, for example, the following table, based on a random community-wide survey of attitudes toward health risks; a number below 0 suggests a belief in above-average immunity from the relevant risk: 
Table 5 
Hazard Description Drug Addiction Drinking (alcohol) problem Attempting Suicide Asthma Food Poisoning Poison Ivy rash Sunstroke Nervous breakdown Homicide victim Gallstone Deaf Pneumonia 
Mean -2.17*** -2.02*** -1.94*** -1.36*** -1.25*** -1.19*** -1.17*** -1.15*** -1.14*** -.84"** -.82*** -.80*** 9 See Neil D. Weinstein, Optimistic BiasesAbout PersonalRisks, 246 Science 1232 (1989). 
Shelley E. Taylor, Positive Illusions 10-11 (Basic 1990). 
Id at 33. 
42 Laurie J. Bauman and Karolynn Siegel, MisperceptionAmong Gay Men of the Risk for AIDS Associated With Their Sexual Behavior, 17 J Applied Soc Psych 329 (March 1987). 
4 Id. 
Id at 330-331. 
's Reprinted from Neil D. Weinstein, UnrealisticOptimism About Susceptibility to HealthProblems: Conclusionsfrom a Community-Wide Sample, 10 J Behav Med 481, 486 (1986). 
Evidence of this kind much complicates the view that people often overstate low-probability events. It is true that people may think that low probability events have higher probability than they in fact do. But many individual agents think that they are peculiarly less susceptible to such events, which may mean that they err in the other direction. 
People tend to think that risks are more serious when an incident is readily called to mind or "available."4 If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. Assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. 
Often people make probability judgments on the basis of an initial value, or "anchor," for which they make insufficient adjustments. 47 The initial value may have an arbitrary or irrational source. When this is so, the probability assessment may go badly wrong. Thus, for example, people may think that the probability of getting AIDS is very low, or very high, and the anchor may not be readily revised. 

Judgments about probability are in large part judgments about whether some process A will bring about some event B. Under what circumstances will driving produce significant increases in air pollution or fatal accidents? When will airbags produce risks to children? Do disposable diapers cause pollution problems? In answering such questions, people ask about the extent to which A is representative of B in the sense that it re.sembles B. People tend to be insensitive to the sample size, to misunderstand the phenomenon of regression to the mean, to have excessive confidence in their own judgments, and to misun.derstand the effect on probability of base-rate frequency." As EL result, people may systematically misunderstand risk levels. 
People have a hard time understanding and evaluating risks that they view in isolation from other risks. Problems emerge when a risk is taken to be much larger than it is, simply by vir-. tue of the fact that it is not placed in context with other risks and events. Sometimes individual judgments, and even social. policies, may emerge because of this effect. 
Here we are dealing not with factual errors, but with "tastes" or preferences that lead people to favor certain approaches to risk. Probability-related tastes present harder questions for the policy analyst. 
People greatly prefer the elimination of a risk over the diminution of a risk, even when the aggregate reduction is the same. Thus it appears that people would much rather see a risk of .001 reduced to zero than a risk of .002 reduced to .001."' It is not 35). 
Id at 63-98. 
,' See Donald A. Redelmeier, et al, UnderstandingPatients'Decisions: Cognitive and Emotional Perspectives,270 JAMA 72, 73 (1993). ple would require a great deal to allow someone to subject them to a new risk; they would pay a great deal less to prevent someone from subjecting them to an existing risk. 
Should government indulge status quo bias, that is, should it impose special barriers to new risks, and be less concerned about old risks? In view of the dramatic number of existing and new risks and the ever-changing nature of any particular status quo, it is far from clear that it should. I take up this question in more detail below. 
Some risks produce a great deal of concern and disturbance regardless of their level; some risks appear as "background noise" and do not create much concern even if their magnitude is high. Human beings are, in short, selectively fatalistic. We lack an account of why people adapt themselves to certain risks but not others; undoubtedly the novelty of the risk matters, and people sometimes adapt themselves to risks that they cannot control. But it is hardly clear that policymakers should follow a selectively fatalistic population; perhaps people are fatalistic about risks that are large and easily diminished, and perhaps they are the opposite of fatalistic-alarmist-about risks that are small and controllable only at high cost. What matters is the source of their fatalism. The most that might be said is that regulators should consider whether a risk comes with low or high costs of adaptation. 
IV. WHAT SHOULD COUNT 
Thus far I have been focusing on heuristic devices and other cognitive processes that lead people to misassess risks. Social psychologists have spent a great deal of time discussing these devices and processes. My basic claim has been that government should be aware of these tendencies to make factual errors and should be on guard against them. 
Social psychologists have also, however, uncovered a quite different source of variation between lay and expert judgments of risk.52 In brief: Experts tend to focus on aggregate lives at stake. Ordinary people-on the now-conventional account-look at a range of more qualitative variables. They care not simply about number of lives at risk but also about whether the risk is equitably distributed, potentially catastrophic, controllable, voluntarily incurred, and so forth. Here is a compilation: 
Table 7' Influencing Factor familiarity personal control voluntariness media attention equity children future generations reversibility dreadedness identifiability of victims accompanying benefits human or natural origin trust in applicable institutions timing of effects understanding past history 
Aggravating new uncontrollable involuntary focussed on by media unfairly distributed children at special risk at risk irreversible especially dreaded victims known benefits clear human origin lack of trust 
Mitigating old controllable voluntary ignored by media equitable distribution children not at risk not at risk reversible not especially dreaded victims not identifiable benefits not visible created by nature good deal of trust effects delayed effects immediate mechanisms or process mechanism or process not understood understood major or minor accidents no past accidents 
Which, if any, of these factors should play a role in regulatory policy? For simple democratic reasons, it might seem tempting to say that all of them should. But this would be a mistake. Sometimes it is hard to separate them from heuristics and factual errors; media attention, for example, is closely connected with the availability heuristic, and we should not think that because the media are focused on a certain risk, government should gave that risk special attention too. (In fact, this is a pathology of regulatory policy.) Past history should be similarly understood; it is a rough proxy for future probability, not a reliable guide to the future. So too with trust. If people do not trust an institution's assurances, they are thinking that the risk is more serious than they are being told. Some of these factors may be a result of framing effects or of a process of selective attention.54 And some of them are easily accounted under the "life-years saved" criterion. If children and future generations are at risk, for example, more life-years are at stake. 
There is, moreover, a puzzle in the fact that people treat as quite serious death-risks that are microscopically small as a statistical matter, while risks that are statistically much larger are treated as "just a part of life." It is certainly possible that people's judgments about risk severity are partly a product of some of the more qualitative considerations listed above; this idea leads to the widespread view that ordinary people have a "richer" rationality than do experts, since ordinary people look at the nature and causes of death, not simply at aggregate deaths at issue. But as Howard Margolis has shown, it is also possible that an apparently "rich" judgment that a certain risk is severe, or not severe, depends not on well-considered judgments of value, but instead on the absence of ordinary contextual cues, on heuristic devices that are not well-adapted to the particular context, or instead on a range of confusing or confused ideas that people cannot fully articulate.55 When people say, for example, that the risk of nuclear power is very serious, they may be responding to their intense visceral concern, possibly based on (uninformed) statistical judgments about likely lives at risk, and on their failure to see that that risk comes accompanied by a range of social benefits. The fact that nuclear power produces benefits as well as risks may not "register" on the viewscreen, and this may help Id. 
I borrow here from the important discussion in Margolis, Dealing With Risk (cited in note 52). 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGOLEGAL FORUM produce a "high risk" judgment." And when people are asked what underlies that judgment, they may point to qualitative considerations that operate as after-the-fact explanations for the visceral concern, and that are not causes of that concern. 
For automobile accidents, by contrast, people's uninformed statistical judgment may not lead to overestimates of risk or visceral judgments of intense concern, partly because people are well aware that automobile travel produces high benefits as well as costs. Thus, it is possible that a judgment that a certain risk of death is unusually bad is based on an intuitive balancing that prominently includes perceived lives at stake and the perceived presence of small or no benefits associated with the risk-producing activity. And when people are asked to'say why they believe that some risk is especially bad, their answers may not be truly explanatory, but instead rationalizations of more visceral judgments based on other grounds. In other words, the reasons given may not actually lie behind the judgments; people are in fact not very good at giving subjective accounts of what underlies their judgments.57 
All this raises the possibility that people's references to "control" and "involuntariness" may not explain the actual basis of their judgments. This possibility remains to be investigated and tested. For the moment, let us put this possibility to one side and assume that the psychological evidence does suggest that certain risks are perceived as bad very much for more qualitative reasons. The important question is which reasons justify a qualification of the basic criterion of decently-livable life-years. Here are the strongest candidates. 
People seem to think that some risks are especially dreaded and that for this reason they deserve special attention. Deaths from cancer and AIDS fall in this category. There is nothing mysterious to this idea; it need not be taken to suggest any special conception of rationality. The underlying point is probably that the relevant deaths are especially grueling and hence that there is a kind of "pain and suffering premium" on the relevant death: not merely a life lost, but a period of intense emotional '5 See Ali S. Alhakami and Paul Slovic, A PsychologicalStudy of the Inverse Relationship Between Perceived Risk andPerceived Benefit, 14 Risk Analysis 1085 (1994). " See Margolis, Dealingwith Risk (cited in note 52). and physical difficulty as well. This period of intense difficulty might produce "costs" for those with the illness and for friends and family members as well. Sudden, unanticipated deaths cari be dreaded too-consider the idea of dying in an airplane crash-but the relevant premium is lower because it lacks the same degree of suffering. The best way to handle this factor is to supplement the criterion of "decently-livable life-years" in such L way as to take account of the pain and suffering associated with certain deaths. 
Some risks are inequitably distributed. They might, for example, be concentrated among poor people or African-Americans, or instead among homosexuals. Consider, for example, the risk of lead paint poisoning suffered by inner city children, or the risk of AIDS faced disproportionately by African-Americans, poor people, and homosexuals. It is fully legitimate for citizens or for elected representatives to think that inequitably distributed risks deserve special attention from government, as a way of counteracting background injustice. If the distributional judgments are not. invidious, it makes sense to defer to democratic judgments on the point. 
Thus regulators should be permitted to give distributional weights to risks whose distributional incidence is especially troublesome. This point supports special efforts to control environmental risks like asthma, which are concentrated in the inner city, and also to prevent the spread of diseases like breast cancer, whose incidence is concentrated among women. 
It is clear that people perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider, for example, diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity and hence that the resulting deaths are less troublesome than are other sorts of death. 
Many people have suggested that the lay judgment to accord greater weight to "involuntary" risks shows a richer conception of rationality and therefore deserves deference from government. But a simple reference to voluntariness, when taken to suggest something special about "lay rationality," raises many puzzles. Most important: How do we know when risk is voluntarily incurred? "Voluntariness" is not a simple question of fact, and it is not, in the cases we are discussing, an all-or-nothing matter. Consider the fact that airplane crashes are conventionally thought "involuntary" and automobile crashes more "voluntary." Certainly it would be possible to see the risks from air travel as voluntarily run; certainly people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they do fly, they pay a certain amount for a certain package, including risks of various sorts. The same is true of automobile safety. The difference between the two risks is hardly so categorical as to justify an assessment that they provide poles of voluntariness and involuntariness. Indeed, it is not clear even what is meant by the suggestion that one is voluntary and the other is not. 
To shed more light on the issue, let us consider three classes of cases. First, consider the question whether workers exposed to cancer risks are voluntarily or involuntarily so exposed. If workers do not know about such risks-if they lack relevant information-we seem to have an easy case of involuntariness. Thus it makes sense to say that risks are run involuntarily when the people running them do not know about them. Lack of information provides a legitimate case for a judgment of involuntary exposure to risk. Of course, information itself can be obtained at some cost, pecuniary or otherwise. We are thus dealing, in cases of this kind, with high costs of risk avoidance in the form of high costs of acquiring relevant information. 
Second, suppose that people who are exposed to a certain risk are aware of the risk, but are not in a contractual relation with the risk-producer. It is easy to imagine that some victims of pollution are in this position. People in Los Angeles may well know that they face high levels of smog. Are they exposed involuntarily? If we conclude that they are, we may mean that a risk is incurred involuntarily when and in the sense that it is typically very expensive for people to avoid it-and when someone else is the cheapest cost avoider. Consider ordinary people subject to cancer risks from toxic air pollutants. Here a claim that the risk is faced "involuntarily" may mean that those who "run" the risk can reduce it only at very high cost, at least compared with those who "produce" the risk. (The quotation marks are necessary for obvious Coasian reasons.) 
But turn now to a third class of cases, involving a wage package or contract that does include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a high-level scientist, knowledgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, we might well conclude that we have a case of voluntariness. (In the same category can be found the case of an astronaut.) But we might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not like his work at all." But what distinguishes the two cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. It may be that the reason for running the risk seems in some way better or more worthy in the first case than in the second, but this is not a distinction along the dimension of voluntariness. Thus a judgment that a risk is run "involuntarily" is probably based on 1) a lack of knowledge of the risk, or, more accurately, high costs of obtaining information about the risk, 2) a belief that even if information is present, it would be very costly or difficult for people to avoid the risk, or 3) a belief that the risk is unaccompanied by benefits that people incurring the relevant risks find satisfactorily compensatory in some subjective sense, notwithstanding their belief that the contract is in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of the third alternative; what might be at work is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain, or a belief that workers are competing to their collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests.59 
On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not usually is not a categorical one but instead is a question of degree, associated with information, risk-reduction costs, and the existence or absence of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk "codes" as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices and selective attention. 
We might therefore conclude that whether a risk qualifies as involuntary raises many of the questions raised by the question whether government should regulate the market at all. A risk might be characterized as involuntarily run because affected See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics 196-203 (Harvard 1993). 
See Robert H. Frank, Choosingthe Right Pond:Human Behaviorand the Quest for Status (Oxford 1983). people lack relevant information; because the transaction costs of bargaining are high; because the risks should be seen to amount to "externalities"; because collective action problems make market outcomes unsatisfactory since, for example, workers are in a prisoner's dilemma best solved through law; or because some motivational or cognitive defect makes successful solutions through markets unlikely. These, of course, are among the conventional grounds for regulation in the first instance. When a risk seems voluntary, and not worthy of substantial regulatory resources, the term "voluntary" is serving as a placeholder for an argument that there is no sufficient ground for government action, because the accompanying benefits are high or the riskreduction costs are low, and because market arrangements take adequate account of these facts. 
From this point we should conclude that a lay judgment that a risk is "voluntary" should not be decisive. A better understanding of what factors underlie and support that judgment should be used for purposes of regulatory policy. The basic criterion of decently-livable life-years might, then, be adjusted upward when those at risk lack relevant information or when the costs of riskavoidance are especially high-or downward when those at risk have the information and when the costs of risk-avoidance are low. 
People find risks less acceptable if those risks do not seem to be within their control. Automobile accidents may seem less troublesome than airline disasters partly for this reason. People have a sense that they cannot control the latter, which are hence wholly involuntary, whereas they can control the former, which have a voluntary element. But it should be clear from the previous discussion that the question is not whether risks can be controlled, but how expensive it is for individuals to control them. People can control their subjection to airplane-related risks by refusing to fly in planes; people can control their subjection to risks from coal-fired power plants by living in areas served by solar energy. The question is not whether a risk can be controlled or not, but at what cost it is controllable, and with what benefits. Individuals tend to "frame" risk control in "all or nothing" terms, depending on the particular temporal event on which they focus. But this is a similar form of selective attention. As with voluntariness, "controllability" is a conclusion more than it is an analytic tool. It is best to look at the factors that account for a judgment that a risk is not controllable. 
I have suggested that many of the "qualitative" factors that underlie lay judgments about risk can be accounted for by the criterion of decently-livable life-years. Some of those factors cannot be incorporated in this way, and this conclusion requires a "stage two" adjustment of the basic criterion. Thus, dreaded risks should be treated differently, because of the problems associated with certain illnesses and deaths. Distributional weights can be given to risks that have disproportionate effects on disadvantaged people. Certain factors underlie lay judgments about voluntariness and control; those factors should be specified and also might be given weights. Of course, numerical weights have their limitations and it is important for those assessing risk to be aware of the qualitative factors and judgments that underlie the numbers. 
In this section I discuss some borderline cases: factors that may or may not justify a deviation from the basic criterion of decently-livable life-years. 
Do risks deserve special attention when future generations are at risk? In one sense the answer is certainly yes: When future generations are at risk, more people are at risk. Of course, there are large questions about the appropriate discount rate. But it seems sensible to say that if a risk will be incurred by people not yet born, it deserves greater attention because its degree is to that extent greater. This claim is easily taken care of via the notion of decently-livable life-years. 
Some psychological studies suggest that people think that potentially catastrophic risks deserve special attention. People's fear of nuclear power, for example, might be attributed to an understanding that if things go wrong, things will go very, very wrong. Thus, low probability, high-danger risks might be treated as worse than their "actuarial value." A one-in-a-million risk of 10,000 deaths might seem worth more than a one-in-a-thousand risk of ten deaths, or a one-in-a-hundred risk of one death. 
This judgment may depend on a refusal to see that all risks must be evaluated in probabilistic terms and that catastrophicness is simply a matter of degree.' Thus, when a low probability, high-danger risk enters the viewscreen, people may focus on the danger itself, may fail to see the low probability, and may fail as well to see that the risk may provide substantial benefits, including reduction in other risks. The special concern for "catastrophic" risks may actually reflect selective attention rather than reasonable underlying judgments of value. Or the special attention given to potential catastrophes may depend on a refusal to trust the officials who give assurances that the probability is low. If the lack of trust is justified, then the lay judgment deserves respect on the ground that the official statements may be or simply are false. But if we put that point to one side, the difficulty lies in discerning why a small risk of a huge disaster is worse than an actuarially equivalent large risk of a small disaster. 
It seems clear that people are especially hostile to new risks. Old risks tend to be taken for granted. Thus an additional risk of .001 percent may well be treated as more troubling than a removal of a risk of .002 percent. The point is connected with the well-known psychological phenomenon of loss aversion. Losses from the status quo are seen as more bad than (equivalent) gains from the status quo are seen as good."' 
At least as a general rule, and putting to one side the possibility that new risks may pose especially high costs of adaptation, government should probably refuse to treat new risks as especially troublesome. On reflection it is not at all clear why a new risk of a certain magnitude is worse than an old risk of the same magnitude. Perhaps it could be said that old risks are an inextricable part of a system of benefits and costs that have already been "coded" at the individual level. Thus, the environmental risks associated with coal-fired power plants are something to ' See Sarah Lichtenstein, et al, When Lives Are In Your Hands:Dilemmas of the Social Decision Maker, in Robin M. Hogarth, ed, Insights in Decision Making:A Tribute to Hillel J. Einhorn91 (Chicago 1990). 
61 See Richard H. Thaler, Quasi Rational Economics 159-60, 167, 169 (Russel Sage 1993). which people have (more or less) adjusted, and a dramatic switch from coal-fired power plants would force people to give up an energy source to which they are acclimated. The case of automobiles is perhaps the most vivid. But new risks often come with benefits as well, and there is no reason why these should not "code" too. 
The strongest argument in favor of more severe regulation of new risks would be that people have adjusted to old risks, and hence an old risk/new risk division nicely corresponds to the actual costs associated with adjustment. When this is so, it makes sense to treat new risks more severely. But the degree of the disparity, as described by lay judgments, reflects status quo bias in a way that is hard to defend in pragmatic terms. 
VI. POSITIVE NOTES 
The discussion thus far has implications for the positive theory of health and safety regulation. It suggests that some apparently odd patterns (see Table 1) may well reflect differences between lay and expert judgments about risk. In this section, I offer several examples. 
We would expect greater resources to be devoted to risks that are especially dreaded. Thus government might well devote more resources to the AIDS crisis and to cancer prevention, partly because these deaths are so dreaded. With AIDS, there is the additional problem that the disease casts a pall over a wide range of sexual acts; this would increase the public "demand" for AIDS-related research. Judge Posner has attributed the large amount of resources devoted to such research to interest-group power."2 But the qualitative nature of risks-producing particularly grim deaths-undoubtedly plays a role in funding decisions. 
It is easy to predict that the availability heuristic would help create a kind of crazy-quilt pattern in regulation, with some events calling for stringent regulation and others calling for little or no regulation at all. The regulation would not be closely asso62 See Thomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, Private Choices and Public Health:The AIDS Epidemic in an Economic Perspective 194-206 (Harvard 1993). ciated with actual risk levels. This is the pattern we observe. Studies of American government show extraordinary disparities in expenditures per life saved.' 
The disparities are plausibly attributed at least in part to the availability heuristic. The dramatic difference between expert and public assessments of risk levels has something to do with this heuristic, and the difference maps closely onto actual differences in expenditures per life saved. The public demand for regulation therefore appears to be a product of the availability heuristic, which is itself endogenous to the nature and levels of public and private publicity. Thus, for example, there are enormous expenditures designed to counteract cancers in the workplace, and relatively low expenditures designed to prevent injuries from automobile accidents. The comparative over-regulation of certain environmental risks may well be a product of the fact that those risks, when they come to fruition, are highly publicized. Through this route, too, we might be able to explain the otherwise inexplicably severe controls on nuclear power. We might also be able to explain the extraordinary safety of air travel as compared with other means of transportation." 
If people are averse to ambiguity, we might expect that political outcomes will avoid ambiguity and present risks in "all or nothing" terms. In fact, this is a pervasive phenomenon in environmental statutes, where administrators are entrusted with ensuring a "safe level" rather than with coping pragmatically amidst ambiguities of both fact and value.' 
Samuelson and Zeckhauser have shown that the affinity for the status quo appears to affect such diverse forms of behavior as brand allegiance, choice of insurance plans, changing public policies, marketing techniques, and investment decisions." If this is correct, large consequences follow. We can predict that much See Table 1. 
See Nancy L. Rose, Fearof Flying?Economic Analyses of Airline Safety, 6 J Econ Persp 75 (Spring 1992). 
' See Marc K. Landy, et al, The EnvironmentalProtectionAgency: Asking the Wrong Questions FromNixon to Clinton 310-34 (Oxford 1994). 
" William Samuelson and Richard Zeckhauser, Status Quo Bias in Decision Making, 1 J Risk & Uncertainty 7 (1988). governmental behavior in the environmental context will be a product of endowment effects. Private and public reactions to risks should reflect a status quo bias. Both supply and demand will be affected. Government regulation of new risks will predictably be more stringent than government regulation of (equivalent) old risks. This is so precisely because the public: demand for regulation will be a product of status quo bias. 
This is in fact what we observe. It is a defining characteristic: of the current system of environmental controls. 7 New risks are regulated far more stringently than old ones, even though this strategy sometimes creates extremely perverse results, by perpetuating the life of the especially severe old risks and thus damaging public health and safety. New stationary sources of air pollution must meet technological requirements not imposed on old sources; new cars are regulated far more heavily than old ones.6 
There are many other examples in the area of environmental regulation. Consider, for example, the controversial and probably irrational Prevention of Significant Deterioration ("PSD") program. 9 The PSD program says roughly that states that met national ambient air quality standards in 1977 cannot suffer a deterioration in air quality, even if the air would remain very clean, and even if there are good reasons for allowing new development. The use of the 1977 benchmark seems puzzling and even senseless. There is no clear reason to conclude that the air cannot, become dirtier than it happened to be in 1977, so long as it is consistent with the other national benchmark standards in the Clean Air Act. Of course, there is good reason to ensure that some areas are pristine or have especially clean air. The PSD program is, however, ill-suited to achieving this goal, since the 1977 benchmark is so broad. 
How, then, can we explain the existence of the PSD program, which seems hard to justify on public interest grounds? Certainly part of the explanation comes from public choice theory. Representatives in "clear air" states disproportionately opposed the program, and those in "dirty air" states disproportionately supported it, no doubt in order to prevent the exodus of revenue67 See Peter Huber, The Old-New Division in Risk Regulation, 69 Va L Rev 1025 (1983). 
. ' See Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State 92 (Harvard 1990). 
69 Clean Air Act, 42 USC §§ 7470-92 (1994). producing, polluting companies to "clean air" states.7" But the apparently broad appeal of the PSD program may owe a good deal as well to the endowment effect. The perception that air quality ought at least to stay where it is-that the government should prevent deterioration from the status quo-seems to have widespread appeal. This is so despite the fact that other things being equal, regulatory efforts to make the air cleaner than it now is often face strong political roadblocks. The asymmetry cannot be fully explained on public interest grounds, for prevention of deterioration can be far worse than actual improvements. It probably has a good deal to do with status quo bias and with the initial endowment reflected in air quality at the time the legislation was under consideration. 
Or consider one of the most criticized features of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts, the pervasive requirement that companies adopt the "best available technology" (BAT).71 This strategy has been challenged on the ground that there is at best an incidental relationship between cost-effective environmental policy and adoption of BAT. In principle, it seems unreasonable to require everyone to adopt the best available technology. Instead, government should allow companies a high degree of flexibility in achieving air quality goals. Some companies should switch to clean energy sources, rather than put expensive technology on dirty energy sources; some companies should go out of business because once they pay the environmental costs, their activity is not worthwhile; some companies should not use BAT at all, since they do business in regions in which adoption of expensive technology is not sensible in light of the variables at stake. 
An interest-group explanation is not entirely implausible for BAT requirements. But the requirements can also be understood as an outgrowth of status quo bias. If the technological status quo is thought to be an appropriate benchmark for legal requirements, its use in environmental law may not be so puzzling. There may be general agreement that the technological status quo is the best and fairest foundation for environmental law, even if this view will not survive critical scrutiny. 
'0 B. Peter Pashigian, EnvironmentalRegulation: Whose Self-Interests are Being Protected?, in George J. Stigler, ed, ChicagoStudies in PoliticalEconomy 498 (Chicago 1988). 
71 See, for example in the Clean Air Act, 42 USC § 7475 (1982) (preconstruction requirements); 42 USC § 7411 (1982) (standards of performance for new stationary sources). 
It is notable too that it appears very difficult (though not impossible) to bring about even rational environmental regulation through tax increases--on, for example, polluting vehicles or gasoline. "Green taxes" are supported by strong justifications, but they are an almost invisible part of national environmental policy. Perhaps the difficulty can be attributed to the influence of the automobile industry; but some leaders in the industry have actually favored gasoline taxes. The difficulty may well be understood in terms of the endowment effect, as that effect operates to define the public demand for regulation. The existing price of gasoline marks the status quo from which departures are measured. Government efforts to raise the price therefore meet strong resistance. Hence, the public is generally quite hostile to any effort to increase the price of gasoline. 
By contrast, there are many popular regulatory requirements that ultimately raise the cost of energy and automobiles, but that do so mostly by affecting new sources. By almost any measure of social welfare, the direct tax approach would be preferable to the regulatory approach.72 I do not deny that there are many possible explanations for currently dysfunctional environmental policy. But a contributing factor may be that a tax or fee imposes highly visible losses as compared with the status quo, whereas the regulatory approach does no such thing. 
Or consider the fact that subsidies to mass transit might well be an especially sensible and inexpensive environmental strategy. If automobiles are a major contributor to air pollution, an important goal is to reduce vehicle miles traveled, as well as (or instead of) improving pollution control devices on cars. This much seems clear from the fact that regulatory requirements have not succeeded in reducing aggregate automobile pollution levels, because the decrease in air pollution per mile traveled has been more than offset by increases in total car use.73 It follows that an imperative for environmental policy is to create incentives that will decrease the use of the underlying polluting activity. But this idea has played relatively little role in policy, especially in the area in which it makes most sense: government expenditures devoted to mass transit and highways. 
Here too the political influence of the automobile industry is a plausible contributing factor. But status quo bias may play a 72 See Robert W. Crandall, Policy Watch: CorporateAverage FuelEconomy Standards, 6 J Econ Persp 171 (Spring 1992). 
73 Robert W. Crandall, Regulatingthe Automobile (Brookings 1986). large role as well. Because Americans have adapted their behavior to frequent use of the automobile, it is especially difficult to change their behavior in the direction of mass transit. This explanation helps to account for the remarkable comparative popularity in Europe of environmental strategies that do deter automobile use and promote mass transit.7' In Europe, people have not so deeply adapted their practices and preferences to automobile use. Social norms are thus a culprit here, and they are taken as given when they might be more changeable and fluid than we think. 
The point is very general. Public policy often takes the status quo-including, very prominently, the existence of particular firms-as if it were a given. Laws that endanger current institutions are subject to special social scrutiny. To some extent, this is fully rational in light of the real costs of transition. But I hypothesize that a large part of the phenomenon is attributable to a bias in favor of the status quo that is far stronger than traditional theory would predict. 
What about risks that do not involve mortality? As I have noted, many risks, especially in the environmental area, are serious because of morbidity effects, harms to recreational opportunities and aesthetic values, and mortality and morbidity effects for plants and animals. Here, there seems to be no alternative but to try to specify the relevant adverse effects in both quantitative and qualitative terms-how many weeks of respiratory problems, how much in the way of damage to crops, how much and what kind of animal morbidity. These specifications might be translated into more commensurable units through some variation on the idea of quality-adjusted or disability-adjusted life years.75 That is, morbidity effects might be analyzed by seeing the extent to which the effects diminish ideal functional capacity. This idea imposes a large cognitive demand on government, and it may be best to rely on simplifying categories. It is possible that we would want to separate the mechanism used to identify the ' See Marcia D. Lowe, Shaping Cities, in Lester R. Brown, ed, State of the World, 1992: A Worldwatch InstituteReport on ProgressToward a SustainableSociety 119 (W. W. Norton 1992). 
7"A clear-headed discussion and criticism is found in Sudhir Anand and Kristina Hanson, Disability-Adjusted Life Years: A CriticalReview, (Harvard School of Public Health, Working Paper No. 96.06, Sept 1995). magnitude of the harm from that used for purposes of allocating resources; the resource allocation judgment might depend, for reasons stated above, on distributional judgments calling for special attention to those who are systematically disadvantaged, lack much wealth, or are without access to relevant public services. I cannot discuss in this space the various possible refinements on the idea of quality-adjusted or disability-adjusted life years. Though the 'appropriate refinements are a large and important task for the future, we can begin to make progress in the less rigorous way suggested here-beginning with decently-livable lifeyears, adjusting the measure in the way suggested above, and adding various non-mortality effects in a relatively uniform way. 
The effort to generate numbers to identify qualitative gains in human lives does not run afoul of some of the objections discussed above, since it does not treat some lives as more or less valuable than others because of pre-existing conditions that do, not prevent basic functional capacity. The crucial task is to rank. various morbidity consequences against one another, so that comparisons can be made. Much the same thing can be said about recreational and aesthetic effects. Adverse consequences, should be ranked against one another, rather than viewed in isolation. And perhaps it will ultimately be possible to come up, with an aggregate number, summing the various components. that come under the general category of "regulatory benefits." The number ought not, however, to disguise the fact that its. ingredients are qualitatively diverse. 
Thus far I have discussed matters of substance, but some of the most pressing questions are institutional. Current American institutions fail to promote either democratic or technocratic goals. The current system is insufficiently democratic in the sense that the pattern of risk regulation cannot be plausibly attributed to considered judgments of the American people. Thai; pattern is more plausibly a combination of interest-group pressure, selective attention, sensationalistic media "scandals," and the "pollutant of the month" syndrome that plagues federal regulation. The current system is insufficiently technocratic be.. cause there is no general or coherent effort to bring the best scientific judgments to bear on risk-regulation. Of course science plays a large role; but its role is episodic rather than global. Instead, American government has a highly fragmented system, with a proliferation of congressional committees reflecting vari.. ous pathologies, and with a wide range of agencies not interacting with one another and operating pursuant to diverse statutory standards. 
What possible remedies are there? Any answer must devote considerable attention to the question how to promote trust in government institutions. 7' Here are four proposals: 
job of compiling information about risk levels and producing better priority-setting.A large problem for American government consists of the congressional committee structure, which ensures that comparative risk analysis will be rare, and which promotes a kind of balkanization of federal law. A straightforward remedy would consist of the creation of a new committee whose principal purpose would be to ensure good priority-setting. Such a committee would have authority over substantive statutes and also over the appropriations process. Its basic goal would be to engage in "risk ranking," to publicize misallocations, and to initiate corrective legislation. Such a committee should rely a great deal on current scientific findings. But it should be aware that value judgments play a legitimate role in deciding which risks are most serious. Thus the committee might adopt a presumption in favor of maximizing the number of decently-livable life-years, but allow adjustments when reasonable judgments of value so require. It would be an advantage to initiate the very process of deliberating about how to decide which risks are most serious. Such a process would alert legislators and perhaps the public to the problems in "safe or unsafe" thinking and to the need to engage in risk comparisons. 
Affairs ("OIRA"), to make sure that it has, and is known to have, the authority to ensure better priority-setting.Under Presidents Reagan and Bush, OIRA was understood as a kind of "cost-benefit" police officer, intervening in a fairly ad hoc way so as to ensure that grossly inefficient regulations would be reconsidered.77 Under President Clinton, this role appears to have diminished, notwithstanding the general interest in "reinventing government" so as to ensure greater attention to results rather than processes. 
" See Stephen Breyer, Breakingthe Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (Harvard 1993); Paul Slovic, et al, Regulation of Risk: A PsychologicalPerspective, in Roger G. Noll, ed, Regulatory Policy and the Social Sciences 241 (California 1985). 
" See Thomas 0. McGarrity, Reinventing Rationality: The Role of RegulatoryAnalysis in the FederalBureaucracy(Cambridge 1991). 
I suggest that OIRA might command far broader bipartisan support if its main role were seen as ensuring better prioritysetting through maximizing the number of life-years saved through regulation. This role would call for more regulation in some areas and less regulation in others; it would involve recom.mendations and policy guidance for both rulemaking and enforcement action. Of course OIRA could adjust the basic criterion with reference to the judgments of value discussed above. The basic point is that OIRA should not be seen solely as a brake on regulation. Sometimes it should be a spur. Its general goal should be to overcome some of the cognitive problems described above, which affect judgments at the individual level, the public "demand" for regulation,78 and the behavior of government officials themselves. 
harm.7"9 The judicial role in managing risk regulation is inevitably partial and modest. But courts do have power to invalidate the most extreme or ill-considered regulatory proposals or omissions. There has been a modest direction in favor of a "more good than harm" principle embodying a presumptive requirement that costs not be grossly disproportionate to benefits."0 
This idea is a way of overcoming the general problem of selective attention; it is appropriately modest but also has considerable power. It entails at a minimum an interpretive principle allowing agencies to exempt de minimis risks, and perhaps requiring them to do so, on analogy to the old common law idea that absurdity in interpretation will be avoided. It also entails a principle that agencies should be permitted to engage in "healthhealth" analysis where they see fit, ensuring that regulations do not create health problems greater than those that they are intended to reduce.8' Finally, it entails a requirement that under the Administrative Procedure Act,8" agencies should, under "arbitrary or capricious" review, make a plausible showing that a regulation will make things better rather than worse. 
See Roger G. Noll and James E. Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation, 19 J Legal Stud 747 (1990); Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, EnvironmentalLaw, 22 J Legal Stud 217 (1993). 
" See Edward W. Warren and Gary E. Marchant, More Good Than Harm, 20 Ecology L Q 379 (1993); Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (Chicago 1996). 
'o See, for example, CorrosionProofFittings v EPA, 947 F2d 1201 (5th Cir 1991). 81See id; Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs, 63 U Chi L Rev 1533 (1996). 82 5 USC §§ 551-59 (1994). and to focus attention on the most serious risks. Justice Breyer has suggested the creation of an elite corps of risk managers, versed in various disciplines and authorized to divert resources from small problems to large ones.s" Most ambitiously, then, the national government might move in the direction of a variation on the "Breyer group" to engage in the sort of analysis I have proposed here, and grant that group the authority to 1) publicize its findings about which risks are most severe, 2) require agencies to engage in similar priority-setting, 3) recommend changes in statutes or regulations, or appropriations, and perhaps 4) engage in some reallocating on its own. 
these proposals raise concerns along the dimension of trust, and it is important to ensure that risk regulation is not seen as a purely technocratic matter. A major goal of these (briefly sketched) proposals is indeed to strengthen the scientific underpinnings of regulation; but there are important democratic goals as well. The most central point here is that the crazy-quilt pattern of current risk regulation cannot plausibly be seen as a good response to democratic convictions. Instead, that pattern reflects some combination of interest-group pressures, selective attention, strategic behavior on the part of politicians, and sensationalistic anecdotes on the part of the mass media. A movement toward better priority-setting (however this is conceived) should start with democratic as well as technocratic goals, and with a recognition that the status quo cannot reasonably be defended on democratic grounds. 
Thus, institutional changes should attend to citizen judgments at both the "input" and "output" sides. At the level of "inputs," it is important to ensure that public officials have an understanding of people's actual concerns and the foundations for those concerns. Citizen panels have been used productively by some agencies with an eye toward this goal.' At the level of "outputs," officials should not rest content with sensible regulations, but should have a continuing obligation to provide information and to engage in discussion about the grounds for regulation and the basis and legitimacy of any citizen concerns. The point is especially important in light of the fact that some groups of citiSee Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (cited in note 76). 
See Richard H. Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1 (1995), for citations and discussion. zens may be less trusting than others, and distrust, once present, may accelerate." 
I have made four basic claims in this essay. First, environmental regulation suffers above all from a problem of selective attention. No reasonable reading of reflective citizen judgments can account for the pattern we now observe, and an understanding of the systemic effects of regulation would much improve the process of priority-setting. Second, the foundation for regulatory policy should be the number of decently-livable life-years saved. Third, government should use expert judgments on that count as the foundation for analysis, and it should qualify those judgments in a limited way. More specifically, it should do so with reference to whether the risks at issue are especially dreaded, inequitably distributed, and controllable or voluntarily incurred by the individuals involved. The latter two factors point in essence to the costs of risk avoidance (including information costs). Numerical weights might be added to different assessments of these variables. Government should not use lay judgments to the extent that they reflect factual errors, even though those judgments do appear to play a role in any persuasive "positive" account of regulation. Fourth, institutional arrangements should be designed so as to allow government to make the relevant judgments in a rational manner. 
This approach is in significant part a technocratic one; it places a high premium on scientific judgments and on getting the numbers right. It rejects the view that those judgments are decisive, but it rejects even more firmly the view that ordinary lay judgments, regardless of their content and grounds, should play a central role in regulatory policy. Those judgments are too frequently the product of framing effects, heuristic devices, or confused factual claims; often they are proxies for factors that can be better analyzed in other ways. By itself, the approach I am suggesting would not solve all of the problems raised by the question which risks should be treated first; a large gap-on which I have offered just a few brief notes-consists in the problem of how to deal with environmental and other risks that do not involve human mortality. But the approach holds out some hope of combinSee id. 
