A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics 
Economic analysis of law usually proceeds under the assumptions of neoclassical economics. But empirical evidence gives much reason to doubt these assumptions; people exhibit bounded rationality, bounded self-interest, and bounded willpower. This article offers a broad vision of how law and economics analysis may be improved by increased attention to insights about actual human behavior. It considers specific topics in the economic analysis of law and proposes new models and approaches for addressing these topics. The analysis of the article is organized into three categories: positive, prescriptive, and normative. Positive analysis of law concerns how agents behave in response to legal rules and how legal rules are shaped. Prescriptive analysis concerns what rules should be adopted to advance specified ends. Normative analysis attempts to assess more broadly the ends of the legal system: Should the system always respect people’s choices? By drawing attention to cognitive and motivational problems of both citizens and government, behavioral law and economics offers answers distinct from those offered by the standard analysis. * Assistant Professor of Law, Harvard Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. *** Robert P. Gwinn Professor of Economics and Behavioral Science, Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. 
We acknowledge the helpful comments of Ian Ayres, Lucian Bebchuk, Colin Camerer, David Charny, Richard Craswell, Jon Elster, Nuno Garoupa, J.B. Heaton, Samuel Issacharoff, Dan Kahan, Louis Kaplow, Lewis Kornhauser, Lawrence Lessig, Steven Levitt, A. Mitchell Polinsky, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Richard Revesz, Steven Shavell, Jonathan Zittrain, Ari Zweiman, and participants at the American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, the Boston University Law School Faculty Workshop, the Columbia University Law and Economics Workshop, workshops at Harvard Law School on law and economics and on rationality, the NBER Behavioral Law and Economics Conference, the NYU Rational Choice Colloquium, and the University of Chicago Law and Economics Workshop. Todd Murtha and Gil Seinfeld provided outstanding research assistance. Nicole Armenta provided helpful material on criminal abstinence programs. This work was finished while Thaler was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences; he is grateful for the Center’s support. 1476 1476 1477 1479 1479 1480 1481 1485 1487 1489 1489 1489 1493 1497 1497 1497 1499 1501 1501 1502 1504 1505 1505 1506 1508 1510 1510 1515 1516 1518 1518 1520 1522 

C. Behavior of Criminals ............................................................. V. NORMATIVE ANALYSIS: ANTI-ANTIPATERNALISM....................... 
A. Citizen Error ........................................................................... 
B. Behavioral Bureaucrats .......................................................... CONCLUSION ........................................................................................ APPENDIX: FRAMEWORK AND SUMMARY OF APPLICATIONS .............. 1527 1532 1533 1533 1534 1536 1538 1538 1539 1541 1541 1543 1545 1548 
Objections to the rational actor model in law and economics are almost as old as the field itself. Early skeptics about the economic analysis of law were quick to marshal arguments from psychology and other social sciences to undermine its claims.1 But in law, challenges to the rational actor assumption by those who sympathize with the basic objectives of economic analysis have been much less common. The absence of sustained and comprehensive economic analysis of legal rules from a perspective informed by insights about actual human behavior makes for a significant contrast with many other fields of economics, where such “behavioral” analysis has become relatively common.2 This is especially odd since law is a domain where behavioral analysis would appear to be particularly promising in light of the fact that nonmarket behavior is frequently involved. 
Our goal in this article is to advance an approach to the economic analysis of law that is informed by a more accurate conception of choice, one that reflects a better understanding of human behavior and its wellsprings. We build on and attempt to generalize earlier work in law outlining behavioral findings by taking the two logical next steps: proposing a systematic framework for a behavioral approach to economic analysis of law, and using behavioral insights to develop specific models and approaches addressing topics of abiding interest in law and economics.3 The analysis of these specific topics is preliminary and often in the nature of a proposal for a research agenda; we touch on a wide range of issues in an effort to show the potential uses of behavioral insights. The unifying idea in our analysis is that behavioral economics allows us to model and predict behavior relevant to law with the tools of traditional economic analysis, but with more accurate assumptions about human behavior, and more accurate predictions and prescriptions about law. Certainly a great deal of work would be necessary to justify a final evaluation of most of the topics pursued here; there is fertile ground for future research, both theoretical and empirical, and one of our principal goals is to suggest the directions in which that research might go. 
We suggest that an approach based on behavioral economics will help with the three functions of any proposed approach to law: positive, prescriptive, and normative.4 The positive task, perhaps most central to economic analysis of law and our principal emphasis here, is to explain both the effects and content of law. How will law affect human behavior? What will individuals’ likely response to changes in the rules be? Why does law take the form that it does? A superior understanding of human behavior will improve answers to such questions. 
The prescriptive task is to see how law might be used to achieve specified ends, such as deterring socially undesirable behavior. Much of conventional economic analysis is concerned with this sort of question. Explicit consideration of behavioral factors can improve the prescriptions offered by the analyst. For instance, instead of focusing only on the actual probability of detecting criminal behavior in considering whether offenders will be deterred, the analyst might also want to consider the perceived probability of detection and how it might differ in systematic and predictable ways from the actual probability. 
The normative task is to assess more broadly the ends of the legal system. In conventional economic analysis, normative analysis is no different from prescriptive analysis, since the goal of the legal system is to maximize findings and suggest legal issues to which these findings might be relevant. See Ward Edwards & Detlof von Winterfeldt, Cognitive Illusions and Their Implications for the Law, 59 S. CAL. L. REV. 225 (1986); Melvin Aron Eisenberg, The Limits of Cognition and the Limits of Contract, 47 STAN. L. REV. 211 (1995); Robert C. Ellickson, Bringing Culture and Human Frailty to Rational Actors: A Critique of Classical Law and Economics, 65 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 23 (1989); Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law, 64 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1997). The existing literature also includes a number of articles that use behavioral insights to analyze specific topics in the economic analysis of law—primarily the Coase theorem and behavior during bargaining. These articles are relevant to a few of the issues we discuss below, and we will draw on them in analyzing those issues. 
E. Bell, Howard Raiffa & Amos Tversky, Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Interactions in Decision Making, in DECISION MAKING 9 (David E. Bell, Howard Raiffa & Amos Tversky eds., 1988); Sunstein, supra note 3. “social welfare,” usually measured by people’s revealed preferences, and prescriptive (in our sense of the term) analysis also focuses, for the conventional economist, on how to maximize social welfare. But from the perspective of behavioral economics, the ends of the legal system are more complex. This is so because people’s revealed preferences are a less certain ground on which to build; obviously issues of paternalism become central here. 
Each of these three strands of our project is deeply constructive. Behavioral economics is a form of economics, and our goal is to strengthen the predictive and analytic power of law and economics, not to undermine it. Behavioral economics does not suggest that behavior is random or impossible to predict; rather it suggests, with economics, that behavior is systematic and can be modeled. We attempt to sketch several such models here. 
Part I below offers a general framework and provides an overview of the arguments for enriching the traditional economic framework. We see this enrichment as similar in spirit to the increased emphasis on asymmetric information in mainstream economic analysis in recent decades. Just as people often have imperfect information, which has predictable consequences for behavior, the departures from the standard conception of the economic agent also alter behavior in predictable ways. 
Parts II and III of the article involve positive analysis. Part II examines how a behaviorally-informed law and economics analysis can help to explain the behavior of human agents insofar as that behavior is relevant to law. Our topics here include bargaining behavior and the effects of mandatory contract terms. Part III shifts to an explanation of existing legal rules and institutions. We suggest that many features of the legal landscape that are puzzling from a traditional law and economics perspective follow naturally from behavioral phenomena. 
Part IV of the article examines prescriptive issues, offering a series of proposals that might seem surprising or controversial from a neoclassical economic perspective but that follow naturally from taking into account features of actual choice behavior. Our principal emphasis is on how people respond to information and how this point bears on the role of law. 
Part V is more speculative and normative. We briefly outline the main problems—some familiar and others less so—with the idea that the legal system ought always to respect informed choice, and also with the idea that government decisionmakers—who after all are behavioral actors too—can be relied upon to make better choices than citizens. Because of the complexity of these issues, we emphasize three broad points: the framework that behavioral economics suggests for thinking about issues of paternalism; the possibility that some institutions—such as populist government—may be particularly bad at attempted correction of citizen error, while others may be better; and the prospect that some methods of correction (such as those that focus on debiasing rather than outright coercion) may be acceptable even if one thinks that citizen error is relatively unlikely. 
I. FOUNDATIONS: WHAT IS “BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS”? In order to identify, in a general way, the defining features of behavioral law and economics, it is useful first to understand the defining features of law and economics. As we understand it, this approach to the law posits that legal rules are best analyzed and understood in light of standard economic principles. Gary Becker offers a typical account of those principles: “[A]ll human behavior can be viewed as involving participants who [1] maximize their utility [2] from a stable set of preferences and [3] accumulate an optimal amount of information and other inputs in a variety of markets.”5 The task of law and economics is to determine the implications of such rational maximizing behavior in and out of markets, and its legal implications for markets and other institutions. Although some of Becker’s particular applications of the economic approach might be thought of as contentious, that general approach underlies a wide range of work in the economic analysis of law.6 
What then is the task of behavioral law and economics? How does it differ from standard law and economics? These are the questions we address below. 
The task of behavioral law and economics, simply stated, is to explore the implications of actual (not hypothesized) human behavior for the law. How do “real people” differ from homo economicus? We will describe the differences by stressing three important “bounds” on human behavior, bounds that draw into question the central ideas of utility maximization, stable preferences, rational expectations, and optimal processing of information.7 People can be said to display bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest. 
All three bounds are well documented in the literature of other social sciences, but they are relatively unexplored in economics (although, as we noted at the outset, this has begun to change). Each of these bounds represents a significant way in which most people depart from the standard eco5. GARY S. BECKER, THE ECONOMIC APPROACH TO HUMAN BEHAVIOR 14 (1976). ed. 1989); RICHARD A. POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 3-4 (5th ed. 1998). 
Homo Economicus, in FOUNDATIONS OF RESEARCH IN ECONOMICS: HOW DO ECONOMISTS DO ECONOMICS? 227, 230-35 (Steven G. Medema & Warren J. Samuels eds., 1996). nomic model. While there are instances in which more than one bound comes into play, at this stage we think it is best to conceive of them as separate modeling problems. Nonetheless, each of the three bounds points to systematic (rather than random or arbitrary) departures from conventional economic models, and thus each of the three bears on generating sound predictions and prescriptions for law. They also provide the foundations for new and sometimes quite formal models of behavior. 
Bounded rationality, an idea first introduced by Herbert Simon, refers to the obvious fact that human cognitive abilities are not infinite.8 We have limited computational skills and seriously flawed memories. People can respond sensibly to these failings; thus it might be said that people sometimes respond rationally to their own cognitive limitations, minimizing the sum of decision costs and error costs. To deal with limited memories we make lists. To deal with limited brain power and time we use mental shortcuts and rules of thumb. But even with these remedies, and in some cases because of these remedies, human behavior differs in systematic ways from that predicted by the standard economic model of unbounded rationality. Even when the use of mental shortcuts is rational, it can produce predictable mistakes. The departures from the standard model can be divided into two categories: judgment and decisionmaking. Actual judgments show systematic departures from models of unbiased forecasts, and actual decisions often violate the axioms of expected utility theory. 
A major source of differences between actual judgments and unbiased forecasts is the use of rules of thumb. As stressed in the pathbreaking work of Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, rules of thumb such as the availability heuristic—in which the frequency of some event is estimated by judging how easy it is to recall other instances of this type (how “available” such instances are)—lead us to erroneous conclusions. People tend to conclude, for example, that the probability of an event (such as a car accident) is greater if they have recently witnessed an occurrence of that event than if they have not.9 What is especially important in the work of Kahneman and Tversky is that it shows that shortcuts and rules of thumb are predictable. While the heuristics are useful on average (which explains how they become adopted), they lead to errors in particular circumstances. This means that someone using such a rule of thumb may be behaving rationally in the sense of economizing on thinking time, but such a person will nonetheless make forecasts that are different from those that emerge from the standard rationalchoice model.10 
Just as unbiased forecasting is not a good description of actual human behavior, expected utility theory is not a good description of actual decisionmaking. While the axioms of expected utility theory characterize rational choice, actual choices diverge in important ways from this model, as has been known since the early experiments by Allais and Ellsberg.11 There has been an explosion of research in recent years trying to develop better formal models of actual decisionmaking. The model offered by Kahneman and Tversky, called prospect theory, seems to do a good job of explaining many features of observed behavior, and so we draw on that model (whose main features we summarize in Part IV.B below) here.12 
We emphasize that bounded rationality is entirely consistent with modeling behavior and generating predictions based on a model, in line with the methodology of conventional economics. As Kenneth Arrow has explained, “[T]here is no general principle that prevents the creation of an economic theory based on other hypotheses than that of rationality. . . . [A]ny coherent theory of reactions to the stimuli appropriate in an economic context . . . could in principle lead to a theory of the economy.”13 Arrow’s example here is habit formation; that behavior, he says, can be incorporated into a theory by supposing that people choose goods with an eye towards minimizing changes in their consumption. 
Though there is an optimization in this theory, it is different from utility maximization; for example, if prices and income return to their initial levels after several alterations, the final bundle [of goods] purchased will not be the same as the initial [bundle]. This theory would strike many lay observers as plausible, yet it is not rational as economists have used that term.14 
In addition to bounded rationality, people often display bounded willpower. This term refers to the fact that human beings often take actions that they know to be in conflict with their own long-term interests. Most smokers say they would prefer not to smoke, and many pay money to join a program or obtain a drug that will help them quit. As with bounded rationality, many people recognize that they have bounded willpower and take steps to mitigate its effects. They join a pension plan or “Christmas Club” (a special savings arrangement under which funds can be withdrawn only around the holidays) to prevent undersaving, and they don’t keep tempting desserts around the house when trying to diet. In some cases they may vote for or support governmental policies, such as social security, to eliminate any temptation to succumb to the desire for immediate rewards.15 Thus, the demand for and supply of law may reflect people’s understanding of their own (or others’) bounded willpower; consider “cooling off” periods for certain sales and programs that facilitate or even require saving. 
Finally, we use the term bounded self-interest to refer to an important fact about the utility function of most people: They care, or act as if they care, about others, even strangers, in some circumstances. (Thus, we are not questioning here the idea of utility maximization, but rather the common assumptions about what that entails.) Our notion is distinct from simple altruism, which conventional economics has emphasized in areas such as bequest decisions.16 Self-interest is bounded in a much broader range of settings than conventional economics assumes, and the bound operates in ways different from what the conventional understanding suggests. In many market and bargaining settings (as opposed to nonmarket settings such as bequest decisions), people care about being treated fairly and want to treat others fairly if those others are themselves behaving fairly. As a result of these concerns, the agents in a behavioral economic model are both nicer and (when they are not treated fairly) more spiteful than the agents postulated by neoclassical theory. Formal models have been used to show how people deal with both fairness and unfairness; we will draw on those models here. 
The goal of this article is to show how the incorporation of these understandings of human behavior bears on the actual operation and possible improvement of the legal system. The appendix summarizes some key features of each of the three bounds on human behavior just described. It also indicates the law and economics issues we analyze under each category. 
When is each bound likely to come into play? Any general statement will necessarily be incomplete, but some broad generalizations can be offered. First, bounded rationality as it relates to judgment behavior will come into play whenever actors in the legal system are called upon to assess the probability of an uncertain event. We discuss many examples below, including environmental legislation (Part III.C), negligence determinations (Part IV.A), and risk assessments (Parts IV.B and V.A.). Second, bounded rationality as it relates to decisionmaking behavior will come into play whenever actors are valuing outcomes; a prominent example here is loss aversion and its corollary, the endowment effect, which we discuss in connection with bargaining behavior (Part II.B), mandatory contract terms (Part II.D), prior restraints on speech (Part III.B), and risk assessments (Part IV.B). Bounded willpower is most relevant when decisions have consequences over time; our example is criminal behavior (Part IV.C), where the benefits are generally immediate and the costs deferred. Finally, bounded self-interest (as we use the term) is relevant primarily in situations in which one party has deviated substantially from the usual or ordinary conduct under the circumstances; in such circumstances the other party will often be willing to incur financial costs to punish the “unfair” behavior. Our applications here include bargaining behavior (Part II.B) and laws banning market transactions (Part III.A). 
The three bounds we describe do not (at least as we characterize them here) constitute a full description of human behavior in all its complexity. Although we will have more to say about parsimony below, we will say for now that our goal is to sketch out an approach spare enough to generate predictions across a range of contexts, but not so spare that its predictions about behavior are often incorrect (as we will suggest is the case with conventional law and economics in some contexts). Many interesting features of behavior discussed by psychologists but not emphasized by our framework may also play a role in explaining specific forms of behavior relevant to law.17 And it can be illuminating to attend in some detail to the role of social norms in Settlement: An Experimental Approach, 93 MICH. L. REV. 107 (1994) (finding effects of “equity seeking” and “reactive devaluation” on settlement behavior); Mark Kelman, Yuval Rottenstreich & Amos Tversky, Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making, 25 J. LEGAL STUD. 287 (1996) (describing effects of “compromise” and “contrast” behavior on jury decisionmaking). various contexts18 and to the place of shame, pride, and status,19 especially insofar as an understanding of these variables helps give content to people’s utility functions in ways that bear on the uses of law. Our principal purpose here, however, is to provide predictions, rather than to give full descriptions of individual motivations and self-understandings, and we will refer to these variables only occasionally and in passing. For similar reasons, we do not emphasize behavioral patterns that depart from standard economic assumptions but fail to point in systematic directions; such patterns would not generate distinct predictions (although they would of course matter to a full account of individual behavior). Our focus here is robust, empirically documented phenomena that have reasonably precise implications for legal issues. 
Behavioral and conventional law and economics do not differ solely in their assumptions about human behavior. They also differ, in testable ways, in their predictions about how law (as well as other forces) affects behavior. To make these differences more concrete, consider the three “fundamental principles of economics” set forth by Richard Posner in his Economic Analysis of Law,20 in a discussion that is, on these points, quite conventional. (Posner’s discussion represents an application of the basic economic methodology set forth by Becker above.21) To what extent would an account based on behavioral law and economics offer different “fundamental principles”? 
The first fundamental principle for the conventional approach is downward-sloping demand: Total demand for a good falls when its price rises.22 This prediction is, of course, valid. There are few if any documented cases of Giffen goods (goods that are consumed more heavily at high prices, due to the fact that the price increase makes people unable to afford goods that are even pricier than the good in question). However, confirmation of the prediction of downward-sloping demand does not suggest that people are optimizing. As Becker has shown, even people choosing at random (rather than in a way designed to serve their preferences) will tend to consume less of a good when its price goes up as long as they have limited resources.23 This behavior has also been demonstrated with laboratory rats.24 Thus, evidence of downward-sloping demand is not evidence in support of optimizing models. 
The second fundamental principle of conventional law and economics concerns the nature of costs: “Cost to the economist is ‘opportunity cost,’” and “‘[s]unk’ (incurred) costs do not affect decisions on prices and quantity.”25 Thus, according to traditional analysis, decisionmakers will equate opportunity costs (which are costs incurred by foregoing opportunities—say, the opportunity to sell one’s possessions) to out-of-pocket costs (such as costs incurred in buying possessions); and they will ignore sunk costs (costs that cannot be recovered, such as the cost of nonrefundable tickets). But each of these propositions is a frequent source of predictive failures. The equality of opportunity costs and out-of-pocket costs implies that, in the absence of important wealth effects, buying prices will be roughly equal to selling prices. This is frequently violated, as is well known. Many people holding tickets to a popular sporting event such as the Super Bowl would be unwilling to buy tickets at the market price (say $1000), yet would also be unwilling to sell at this price. Indeed, estimates of the ratio of selling prices to buying prices are often at least two to one, yet the size of the transaction makes it implausible in these studies to conclude that wealth effects explain the difference.26 As described below, these results are just what behavioral analysis suggests. 
The traditional assumption about sunk costs also generates invalid predictions. Here is one: A theater patron who ignores sunk costs would not take into account the cost of a prepaid season pass in deciding whether to “rou[se] [him]self . . . to go out” on the evening of a particular performance;27 the decision would be made purely on the basis of the benefits and costs from that moment forward. However, in a study of theater patrons, some of whom were randomly assigned to receive discounted prices on prepaid passes, the patrons who received discounts were found to attend significantly fewer performances than those who did not receive discounts, despite the fact that (due to random assignment) the benefit-cost ratio that should have mattered—benefits and costs going forward—was the same on average THEORY: AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF ANIMAL BEHAVIOR 8, 17-19, 24-25 (1995). 
Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. POL. ECON. 1325, 1327 tbl.1 (1990) (summarizing studies). 
in the two groups.28 In short, sunk costs mattered; again, the standard prediction proved invalid. 
The third fundamental principle of conventional law and economics is that “resources tend to gravitate toward their most valuable uses” as markets drive out any unexploited profit opportunities.29 When combined with the notion that opportunity and out-of-pocket costs are equated (see fundamental principle two), this yields the Coase theorem—the idea that initial assignments of entitlements will not affect the ultimate allocation of resources so long as transaction costs are zero.30 Many economists and economically oriented lawyers think of the Coase theorem as a tautology; if there were really no transaction costs (and no wealth effects), and if an alternative allocation of resources would make some agents better off and none worse off, then of course the agents would move to that allocation. Careful empirical study, however, shows that the Coase theorem is not a tautology; indeed, it can lead to inaccurate predictions.31 That is, even when transaction costs and wealth effects are known to be zero, initial entitlements alter the final allocation of resources. These results are predicted by behavioral economics, which emphasizes the difference between opportunity and out-of-pocket costs. 
Consider the following set of experiments conducted to test the Coase theorem;32 let us offer an interpretation geared to the particular context of economic analysis of law. The subjects were forty-four students taking an advanced undergraduate course in law and economics at Cornell University. Half the students were endowed with tokens. Each student (whether or not endowed with a token) was assigned a personal token value, the price at which a token could be redeemed for cash at the end of the experiment; these assigned values induce supply and demand curves for the tokens. Markets were conducted for tokens. Those without tokens could buy one, while those with tokens could sell. Those with tokens should (and do) sell their tokens if offered more than their assigned value; those without tokens should (and do) buy tokens if they can get one at a price below their assigned value. These token markets are a complete victory of economic theory. The equilibrium price was always exactly what the theory would predict, and the tokens did in fact flow to those who valued them most. 
However, life is generally not about tokens redeemable for cash. Thus another experiment was conducted, identical to the first except that now half the students were given Cornell coffee mugs instead of tokens. Here behavioral analysis generates a prediction distinct from standard economic analy28. Hal R. Arkes & Catherine Blumer, The Psychology of Sunk Cost, 35 ORG. BEHAV. & HUM. DECISION PROCESSES 124, 127-28 (1985). 

sis: Because people do not equate opportunity and out-of-pocket costs for goods whose values are not solely exogenously defined (as they were in the case of the tokens), those endowed with mugs should be reluctant to part with them even at prices they would not have considered paying to acquire a mug had they not received one. 
Was this prediction correct? Yes. Markets were conducted and mugs bought and sold. Unlike the case of the tokens, the assignment of property rights had a pronounced effect on the final allocation of mugs. The students who were assigned mugs had a strong tendency to keep them. Whereas the Coase theorem would have predicted that about half the mugs would trade (since transaction costs had been shown to be essentially zero in the token experiments, and mugs were randomly distributed), instead only fifteen percent of the mugs traded. And those who were endowed with mugs asked more than twice as much to give up a mug as those who didn’t get a mug were willing to pay. This result did not change if the markets were repeated. This effect is generally referred to as the “endowment effect”; it is a manifestation of the broader phenomenon of “loss aversion”—the idea that losses are weighted more heavily than gains—which in turn is a central building block of Kahneman and Tversky’s prospect theory. 
What are we to make of these findings? There are at least three important lessons. First, markets are indeed robust institutions. Even naive subjects participating at low stakes produce outcomes indistinguishable from those predicted by the theory when trading for tokens. Second, when agents must determine their own values (as with the mugs), outcomes can diverge substantially from those predicted by economic theory. Third, these departures will not be obvious outside an experiment, even when they exist and have considerable importance. That is, even in the mugs markets, there was trading; there was just not as much trading as the theory would predict. These lessons can be applied to other markets; we offer some examples below. 
The foregoing discussion illustrates the point with which we began this section: The difference between conventional and behavioral law and economics is not just a difference in the validity of the assumptions about human behavior. While the assumptions of unbounded rationality, willpower, and self-interest are unrealistic, the force of behavioral economics comes from the difference in its predictions (for example, fewer trades for mugs than for tokens). In this sense, our analysis is consistent with the precept originally proposed by Milton Friedman: Economics should not be judged on whether the assumptions are realistic or valid, but rather on the quality of its predictions.33 We share this view (or at least will accept it for purposes of this arti33. See MILTON FRIEDMAN, The Methodology of Positive Economics, in ESSAYS IN POSITIVE ECONOMICS 3, 14-16 (1953). cle); as we have emphasized, our principal interest is predictive in character. A behavioral analysis would be of much less interest if conventional economic models did a satisfactory job of predicting the behavior of agents insofar as relevant to law. Unfortunately, they often do not. 
they show that predictions about law based on the conventional assumptions tend to work? Consider some examples of the successes: ( correlation between price ceilings and queues; ( between rent control and the stock of housing; (3) the positive correlation in financial markets between risk and expected return; (4) the relation between futures prices and spot-market prices.34 The problem with the first three examples is that, as with tests of downward-sloping demand curves, they are quite undemanding; they ask simply whether the theory gets the direction of the effect right—and it does. But this is not a complete vindication of the theory, for the theory may misstate the magnitude of the effect. Consider (3), the positive relation between risk and return in financial markets. As predicted by this theory, stocks (equities) earn higher returns (on average) than do riskless assets such as treasury bills. But what can we say about the magnitude? Is this difference in return roughly what the theory would predict? This is precisely the question posed by Rajnish Mehra and Edward Prescott in their well-known paper on the “equity premium puzzle.”35 The equity premium is the difference in returns between equities and riskless assets. In the United States, the equity premium has been roughly six percent per year over the past seventy years.36 This implies that a dollar invested in stocks in 1926 would, at the end of 1997, be worth over $1800, while a dollar invested in treasury bills would have accumulated to less than $15. This difference is remarkably large. Mehra and Prescott therefore ask whether it can possibly be explained by investor risk aversion. They conclude that it cannot. That is, no plausible value of risk aversion could explain such a big difference.37 Although the theory gets the sign right in this case, the magnitude of the effect suggests that the theory is wrong. (And note that arbitrage, which we discuss just below, would not be expected to eliminate the equity premium; there are often significant costs of arbitrage in equity markets.38) 
Example (4) above, the relation between spot and futures prices, does better on magnitudes. Spot and futures prices are very closely related. However, this case is special in several respects. First, arbitrage is possible. If spot and futures prices get out of line, then investors can make sure profits by buying the contract that is too cheap and selling the one that is too expensive. Second, this context is one in which most of the activity is undertaken by professionals who will quickly lose their money and their jobs if they make frequent errors. Third, the markets in which these professionals operate offer frequent opportunities for learning. Under these circumstances, markets tend to work very well,39 though not perfectly.40 Essentially, these conditions render agents who do not conform to the standard economic assumptions irrelevant (because they will be bankrupt). 
So, in some (fairly unusual) circumstances, such as futures trading, market forces are strong enough to make the three “bounds” irrelevant for predictive purposes. The point is important; it suggests that while human beings often display bounded rationality, willpower, and self-interest, markets can sometimes lead to behavior consistent with conventional economic assumptions. Then the question becomes when, exactly, do market forces make it reasonable to assume that people behave in accordance with those assumptions? What circumstances apply to most of the domains in which law and economics is used? 
In this regard it is instructive to compare the market for futures contracts with the market for criminal activity. Consider the proposition that a potential criminal will commit some crime if the expected gains from the crime exceed its expected costs.41 Suppose a criminal mistakenly thinks that the expected gains outweigh the expected costs, when in fact the opposite is true. First notice that no arbitrage will be possible in this situation. If someone is unfortunate enough to commit a crime with a negative expected value, then there is no way for anyone else to profit directly from his behavior. Outside of financial markets (and not always there), those who engage in low-payoff activities lose utility but do not create profit opportunities for others. Nor do they typically disappear from the market. (Even poorly run firms can survive for many years; consider GM.) Being a bad criminal is rarely fatal, and except possibly for organized crime, there is little opportunity for “hostile takeovers.” Finally, the decision to enter a life of crime is not one that is made repeatedly with many opportunities to learn. Once a teenager has dropped out of high school to become a drug dealer, it is difficult to switch to dentistry. 
Because law and economics is frequently applied to criminal behavior, the above argument is obviously germane. We think that the same analysis applies to many of the domains in which law and economics has been used. In fact, economic analysis of law seems to be a branch of economics in which the limits of arbitrage are particularly powerful, so special care should be taken not to push the standard economic model too far. 
This is by no means to say that conventional law and economics has had no victories. One cannot look at the current state of antitrust law, or the use of market-based regulation in environmental law (to name just two of many examples), without acknowledging the important advances produced through the conventional approach. Often this approach points in the right direction and identifies flaws in noneconomic reasoning. Many advances in the positive and prescriptive understanding of law have come from the conventional assumptions. Attention to incentive effects can often reveal a great deal. (Thus, those who would argue that rent control helps tenants must contend with the obvious long-run supply effects of such laws.) 
The project of behavioral law and economics, as we see it, is to take the core insights and successes of economics and build upon them by making more realistic assumptions about human behavior. We wish to retain the power of the economist’s approach to social science while offering a better description of the behavior of the agents in society and the economy. Behavioral law and economics, in short, offers the potential to be law and economics with a higher “R2”—that is, greater power to explain the observed data. We will try to highlight some of that potential (and suggest cases where it has been realized) in this article. 
A possible objection to our approach is that conventional economics has the advantage of simplicity and parsimony. At least—the objection goes—it provides a theory. By contrast, a behavioral perspective offers a more complicated and unruly picture of human behavior, and perhaps that picture will make prediction more difficult, precisely because behavior is more complicated and unruly. Everything can be explained in an ex post fashion—some tool will be found that is up to the task—but the elegance, generalizability, and predictive power of the economic method will be lost. Shouldn’t analysts proceed with simple tools? We offer two responses: First, simplicity and parsimony are indeed beneficial; it would be highly desirable to come up with a model of behavior that is both simple and right. But conventional economics is not in this position, for its predictions are often wrong. We will encounter many examples in addition to those already discussed. 
often does so at the expense of any real predictive power. Its goal is to provide a unitary theory of behavior, a goal which may be impossible to achieve. By itself the notion of “rationality” (the centerpiece of traditional analysis) is not a theory; to generate predictions it must be more fully specified, often through the use of auxiliary assumptions.42 Indeed, the term “rationality” is highly ambiguous and can be used to mean many things. A person might be deemed rational if her behavior ( expected utility theory; ( changes her behavior when the costs and benefits are altered; (3) is internally consistent; (4) promotes her own welfare; or (5) is effective in achieving her goals, whatever the relationship between those goals and her actual welfare. We observe departures from most of these definitions; thus, with respect to ( nearly fifty years, and prospect theory seems to predict behavior better.43 With respect to (4) and (5), people’s decisions sometimes do not promote their welfare or help them to achieve their own goals; and with respect to (3), behavioral research shows that people sometimes behave in an inconsistent manner by, for example, indicating a preference for X over Y if asked to make a direct choice, but Y over X if asked to give their willingness to pay for each option.44 Many of our examples will thus show that people are frequently not rational if the term is understood to mean ( for ( idea of responsiveness to incentives is empty. If rationality is used to mean simply that people “choose” what they “prefer” in light of the prevailing incentives,45 then the notion of rationality offers few restrictions on behavior. The person who drinks castor oil as often as possible is rational because she happens to love castor oil. Other self-destructive behavior (drug addiction, suicide, etc.) can be explained on similar grounds. It is not even clear on this view whether rationality is intended as a definition of “preference” or as a prediction.46 
If such a notion of rationality allowed for good predictions, then perhaps there would be no reason for complaint; the problem, however, is that so high a degree of flexibility leaves the theory with few a priori restrictions. A theory with infinite degrees of freedom is no theory at all. For example, consider whether it is a paradox (as many economists think) that so many people vote (despite the virtual certainty that no one person’s vote will alter the outcome). If it is a paradox, so much the worse for the rationality assumption; if it is not a paradox, what does the assumption predict? Does it merely predict that people will respond to changes in conditions—for example, fewer people will vote when it is snowing? If so, the prediction is not bad, but surely it would be possible to say, after an unusually large vote amidst the storm, that more people voted simply because voting seemed especially valiant in those circumstances (so much for predictions based on this form of rationality). Conventional economics sometimes turns to stronger forms of rationality in response, and those forms provide stronger predictions in some cases; but those predictions are often inaccurate, as described above and as illustrated by the examples considered below. 
We believe that a behavioral approach imposes discipline on economic theorizing because assumptions cannot be imported at will. In a behavioral approach, assumptions about behavior should accord with empirically validated descriptions of actual behavior. For example, in the case of “fairness,” specifically defined and empirically verified patterns of behavior are used to generate predictions in new contexts. (“Fairness” is not, on this view, simply a catch-all to explain any observed behavior.) This is the approach we advocate for economic analysis of law. This approach, we believe, produces a better understanding of law and a better set of predictions about its effects. 
We now turn to positive, prescriptive, and normative issues. Our purpose is not to settle all of them, but to show the promise of behavioral economics in casting light on a wide range of questions. A great deal of work would be necessary to justify authoritative judgments on most of these questions. What follows should be taken partly as a proposal, perhaps in the spirit of the early economic analysis of law, for a research agenda to be carried out with a new set of tools. 
We begin with bounded self-interest, the third bound described above. A useful first example of this bound is agents’ behavior in a very simple bargaining game called the ultimatum game. In this game, one player, the Prowe think this is a sensible prescription in such settings, we note that it will not eliminate the effects of hindsight bias, since (as proponents of bifurcated trials recognize) “the jury will undoubtedly know that they are not being asked simply to engage in an academic exercise,”166 and that (because a trial is being held) “a bad outcome must have occurred.”167 In contrast, in cases in which jurors need not know (because they cannot infer from the fact of a lawsuit) what choice the defendant made, it may be possible to eliminate the hindsight bias completely. And there are many such situations: cases in which either of two options facing a physician could have caused harm or death to a patient; cases in which either the use or the failure to use a new technology could have led to harm; cases in which either revealing or failing to reveal suicide threats by a psychiatric patient could have resulted in suicide. 
A further feature of our prescription here is that even if we are wrong about the effects of hindsight bias, the prescription seems unlikely to do significant harm (from the perspective of the specified goal of achieving correct application of the ex ante cost-benefit standard). If hindsight bias is unimportant, then whether jurors are told what outcome occurred should not matter; either way, they should be able to make a correct ex ante determination. Thus, the prescription should either have no effect on decisionmaking (if hindsight bias is not a problem) or represent an improvement over the current system (if hindsight bias is a problem). 
Second prescription: Alter the evidentiary standard. The result of hindsight bias, as described above, is that jurors will overestimate the probability that harm will occur (since harm did, in fact, occur). The determination of the probability of harm would conventionally be made under a “preponderance of the evidence” standard: If jurors think it more likely than not, based on the evidence, that the probability of harm was above the threshold level required for liability, they are to find the defendant liable. One might imagine counteracting the effects of hindsight bias by raising the evidentiary standard (as an alternative, not in addition, to the previous proposal; the two together would produce overcorrection and, thus, underdeterrence). Thus, for example, if the jurors were to find the defendant liable only if the evidence suggested at least a seventy-five percent likelihood—rather than merely a fifty-one percent likelihood—that the critical harm probability threshold was met, then they might well reach the correct conclusion about liability: They would overestimate the likelihood attached to the critical threshold, but the overestimate might well be below the new required level. in Mental Health Malpractice Litigation: Some Preliminary Observations, 7 BEHAV. SCI. & L. 485, 496 (1989). 


The highest evidentiary threshold known to our legal system—the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard—is used only in criminal cases. However, in civil cases an intermediate standard (higher than the preponderance standard, but less demanding than the “beyond a reasonable doubt” standard) is the “clear and convincing evidence” standard. This standard has been adopted by many states for punitive-damage determinations,168 and a broadening of its use to all negligence determinations—or at least those in which hindsight bias seems most likely to present a significant problem—might provide a desirable counterweight to the tendency of jurors to overestimate the probability that harm will occur. (Of course, further study would be required before reaching a final conclusion here.) This, of course, would be likely to be a second-best solution; in some situations defendants might be found not liable when, under a perfectly functioning system with no hindsight bias and no heightened evidentiary standard, they would be found liable.169 This need not be the case, however, and even if it is, we might well tolerate a crude measure that produced some errors so long as it represented an improvement over the current system. Most importantly, there is much room for research focused on determining whether altering the evidentiary threshold would represent a desirable response on balance—either across the board or in particular categories of cases. Our goal is to suggest the value of research on this issue, rather than to urge an immediate change in policy based on what we now know. 
To fix ideas for purposes of exploring these points, imagine first that hindsight bias produces a similar increase across cases in a juror’s perceived likelihood that the negligence threshold is met. (So, for example, suppose that jurors generally overestimate by fifty percent the likelihood that the negligence threshold is met, based on the evidence presented.) In this circumstance, the overestimation of the likelihood that the negligence threshold is met could in theory be precisely offset by a change in the evidentiary threshold. To see this point, imagine that the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met is graphed as a function of the strength of the evidence. In the absence of hindsight bias, the function will cross the fiftypercent (preponderance) cut-off at a given level of evidentiary strength, and all cases in which the evidence is stronger than that should produce findings of liability. But with hindsight bias, jurors will overestimate the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met, and this will produce an upward shift in the function we are imagining; as a result, too many cases will cross the preponderance line. But if that line itself is shifted up by an appropriate amount, the hindsight-influenced function will cross it at precisely the same level of evidentiary strength as the one at which the original function crossed the preponderance standard. For instance, if the likelihood that the negligence threshold has been met is a linear function of the strength of the evidence, half of all cases in the system meet the threshold under the preponderance standard, and jurors overestimate by fifty percent the likelihood that the threshold is met, then a move to a seventy-five-percent likelihood requirement would result in the jurors’ finding negligence in precisely the half of cases in which it should be found. 
If hindsight bias produces different degrees of distortion in jurors’ probability estimates across different types of cases, then a shift to a higher evidentiary standard might result in underdeterrence of some defendants (specifically those whose actions will not be judged in a particularly hindsightbiased way). But as long as the increase in the evidentiary standard is modest relative to what hindsight bias in the average case warrants, the change would produce fewer “underdeterrence errors” (findings of no liability for defendants who should be found liable) than corrections of “overdeterrence errors” (findings of liability for defendants who should not be found liable). And the change from a move to the “clear and convincing evidence” standard would be a relatively modest one; a survey of federal district court judges found that in the judges’ view that standard requires a likelihood of sixty to seventy percent, compared to the fifty-one percent threshold under the preponderance standard.170 (Of course, more interesting would be data on how jurors view the two standards.) 
One response to this analysis is that the reason jurors tend to find defendants liable even when liability is not legally warranted is not that jurors overestimate the probability of harm, but simply that they want to compensate tort victims. Our first prescription addresses the latter issue as well as the former, for if jurors do not know what harm occurred, it is difficult for them to engage in compensation-based decisionmaking. (In the case of the food-processing company discussed above, the jurors, to ensure compensation for the harm that occurred, would have to say that the company was negligent whether it used the chemical or refrained from using it—probably not a likely scenario.) But as far as the second prescription is concerned, the problem of compensation-based decisionmaking remains. So if this is what is going on, jurors may continue to find defendants liable, regardless of a higher evidentiary threshold. But there is no reason to think the existence of a higher threshold will make things worse in this situation, and so as long as there are some cases in which jurors try faithfully to apply the negligence standard, moving to the higher evidentiary threshold may improve decisionmaking. The same response may be offered to the objection that jurors’ behavior is not sensitive to the evidentiary threshold—a point on which there is conflicting evidence;171 as long as an increase in the threshold will matter in some cases, the change may be desirable, since there is no reason to think it will cause harm in cases in which it does not change jurors’ behavior. 
A final objection might be that altering the evidentiary standard would not (it is claimed) survive the Kantian-Rawlsian publicity condition, which means, roughly, that principles of justice must be defensible publicly, and that their basis and content must not be secret.172 The question is whether it is coherent to tell jurors that: Although this case should be decided by the preponderance of the evidence, we know that you are likely to think irrationally, so therefore we raise the threshold to clear and convincing evidence. We do not believe that there is anything incoherent, or violative of the publicity condition, in an idea of this sort. In both private and public life, people, acting individually or in groups, take steps to ensure against their own tendencies to make mistakes. (We discussed in Part I.A the steps that people frequently take to deal with problems of bounded willpower.) Raising the standard of proof to prevent errors is consistent with much of the law of evidence, which is also designed to respond to cognitive errors. As just one example, consider the restrictions on admission of evidence of prior crimes.173 A public defense of such steps is perfectly intelligible. 
The discussion to this point has focused on tort cases decided under the negligence standard, but similar issues may arise in other areas of law in which juries (or judges) must determine whether an ex ante standard was met while armed with the knowledge that a negative event in fact materialized. One example is securities fraud litigation, whose perceived excesses prompted Congress to enact the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.174 In a typical securities fraud case, decisionmakers are confronted with a company whose stock price experienced a dramatic fall, and they are required to assess whether a particular issue or problem facing the company, whose disclosure prompted the fall, should have been disclosed at an earlier stage (typically before it had become an issue or problem). Decisionmakers in such a case are required to make an after-the-fact determination of whether a reasonable ex ante decisionmaker would have thought the prospective issue or problem “material” to the average shareholder based on the information available at the time.175 The problem is that this determination must be made against the backdrop of knowledge that the issue or problem in fact materialized, and produced a large drop in the company’s stock price. In this situation, a decisionmaker will likely find it difficult to see how a reasonable ex ante decisionmaker might have thought the prospective issue or problem other than material. Consistent with this analysis, the main predictor of whether a securities fraud action is brought seems to be whether there has been a large change in the company’s stock market value, not whether the company’s behavior was reasonable from an ex ante perspective.176 
Another example here involves damage suits for violations of the Fourth Amendment. A risk in such suits is that if the allegedly illegal search did in fact produce damaging evidence (say, drugs or other contraband), then decisionmakers are likely to conclude that the law enforcement agency’s behavior was reasonable. This will be true even if, from an ex ante perspective (without knowing the eventual outcome), this behavior would not have been found reasonable. 
Suppose it is agreed that individuals lack adequate information on a given subject—for example, workplace safety, appliance energy efficiency, or the effects of drug use. In some such instances the government may seek to foster comparison shopping and informed decisionmaking (as in the federal truth-in-lending law, which requires lenders to announce interest rates, measured the same way177); in other instances the government may have a specific policy goal (reducing drug use, encouraging the use of energyefficient refrigerators). Conventional economics acknowledges the possible desirability of each of these goals (the second in the case of phenomena such as externalities), and it often advocates, as a means of achieving them, providing additional information to citizens, either through a mandate to the relevant private actors (for instance, employers), or through provision of information by the government itself.178 
The prescription to “provide more information” is striking in its spareness. Behavioral analysis suggests that this prescription is far too spare. “Provide more information” says nothing about the way in which the information will be provided, and yet we know from much of what has been said already, as well as from empirical work by scholars such as W. Kip Viscusi, that this will matter a great deal.179 Thus, for example, we know that people’s perceptions of the probability of uncertain events is influenced by the salience of the presentation of these events. 
That presentation matters has several implications. One is “antiprescriptive”: Prescriptions directed toward fostering comparison shopping—the first government goal mentioned above—will often be incomplete and may even be paralyzing, since there is often no “neutral” way to present information. The second implication is that effective prescriptive strategies for achieving the second goal mentioned above—discouraging particular types of behavior—must take behavioral factors into account. It is not enough simply to “provide information.” We discuss several examples of this below. 
Consider the following example of a government attempt to foster informed decisionmaking: In the case of defined contribution plans such as 401(k)s, the Labor Department, the relevant government authority, has ruled that employers must give employees investment alternatives, and must provide information about those alternatives (such as risk and returns); but firms are not allowed to offer “advice” as to how to invest.180 We think that such spare guidelines place employers in a very difficult position. The reason is that the way firms decide to describe and display information on investment alternatives will have a powerful impact on the choices employees make. 
Consider in this connection a recent study of the division of retirement savings by university staff employees between two different funds, a safe one (bonds) and a risky one (stocks).181 All the employees were shown actual historical data on the returns of the two funds, but this information was displayed in two different ways; one group was given the distribution of oneyear rates of return, while the other was given a simulated distribution of thirty-year rates of return. Those shown the thirty-year returns elected to invest nearly all their savings in stocks, while those shown the one-year returns invested a majority of their funds in bonds. Our point is not that one of these outcomes is better. Our point is simply that in the real world, she who provides information ends up giving advice. 
This is an example in which the prescription to “provide more information” may be paralyzing; in other instances it may simply be incomplete. Thus, suppose that the prescription is that certain private actors be required to provide “information”; what does this mean? If it means that those who expose people to a dangerous substance or product in the workplace (say benzene) must provide them with accurate information about the danger, this leaves open a tremendous range of possibilities. The actors subject to the mandate will often have an interest in providing the least scary, most pallid version of the information possible (for example, “benzene has been associated with a statistical increase in risk”), while regulators might want the most scary, salient message available (say, “exposure to benzene will increase your risk of getting CANCER and other FATAL diseases”). Of course, the best message in this case, if the goal is accurate knowledge, may well be somewhere in between. An important goal of the analyst’s task in making prescriptions in this area is to say how the information should be provided— not just that it should be provided. 
In still other contexts, such as ones in which the presentation of information will affect people’s preferences rather than just their perceptions of risk, it is not even clear in theory what is meant by ensuring “informed decisionmaking.” It is not even clear that there are steady or stable background preferences that might be “informed.” The preferences can themselves be an artifact of the method of informing. For instance, one of the central features of Kahneman and Tversky’s prospect theory is that people evaluate outcomes based on the change they represent from an initial reference point, rather than based on the nature of the outcome itself; also, losses from the initial reference point are weighted much more heavily than gains.182 This aspect of prospect theory (like its other features) is based on evidence about actual choice behavior.183 The evaluation of outcomes in terms of gains and 
form of gains or losses from a perceived status quo); id. at 279 (citing Eugene Galanter & Patricia Pliner, Cross-Modality Matching of Money Against Other Continua, in SENSATION AND MEASUREMENT 65 (Howard R. Moskowitz, Bertram Scharf & Joseph C. Stevens eds., 1974)) (losses are weighted more heavily than gains). Another feature of how outcomes are viewed, both empirically and under prospect theory, is that a given change produces less reaction the further a decisionmaker is from her reference point. Thus, for example, the value difference between $10 and $20 is greater than the value difference between $1000 and $1010, both for gains and for losses, assuming a reference point of $0. See id. at 278. In terms of the shape of the “value function” for decisionmakers (a function giving the value of each outcome–this is prospect theory’s counterpart to the utility function), this suggests a function that is concave for gains and convex for losses; only with that shape are both gains and losses viewed as less significant the further the decisionmaker is from her reference point. See id. This shape of the value function is further supported by evidence of attitudes toward risk: People appear generally (though there are exceptions) to exhibit risklosses from an initial reference point, coupled with the special aversion to losses, means that it matters a great deal whether something is presented as a gain or a loss relative to the status quo; a perceived threat of a loss relative to the status quo weighs more heavily than a perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In such cases it is difficult to say which individual is “informed”—the one who is told of the perceived threat of a loss or the one who is told of the perceived threat of foregoing a gain. In this and other contexts, preferences are not preexisting but rather “constructive, context-dependent,” analogous to the balls or strikes that do not predate the situation of choice and that “ain’t nothing till” the umpire calls them.184 
Suppose now that the agreed-upon goal is not to foster “informed decisionmaking,” but to discourage particular types of behavior. Conventional economics would view this as a desirable goal at least to the extent that fullyinformed consumers would not engage in the behavior in question, and to an even greater extent if the behavior in question produces externality effects. And to achieve this goal, conventional economics would again prescribe, as one possible means, “more information.” (Other, probably more usual, means include taxation and regulation designed to discourage the unwanted behavior.) Quite obviously, though, some ways of providing information are more effective than others. There is nothing surprising about this statement. Presumably, when firms pay millions of dollars to advertising agencies to create splashy new ad campaigns, they think they are getting something for their money. Likewise, there is of course an enormous marketing literature about how best to shape people’s behavior in desired directions. These points apply equally to the government. Below we develop briefly some specific prescriptions for achieving goals that involve changing people’s behavior. 
First prescription: Exploit loss aversion. As just noted, individuals tend to weight losses far more heavily than gains. As a result, framing consequences in terms of losses rather than gains is likely to be far more effective in changing behavior.185 A well-known illustration of this sort of framing averse attitudes towards gains but risk-seeking attitudes toward losses, and these attitudes imply concavity of the value function for gains and convexity for losses. See id. This pattern of concavity and convexity has received considerable empirical support. See id. at 268, 278; Peter C. Fishburn & Gary A. Kochenberger, Two-Piece Von Neumann-Morgenstern Utility Functions, 10 DECISION SCI. 503, 509-10 (1979). 
79, 91. 
Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 VA. L. REV. 1341 (1995) (finding effect of gain versus loss framing on magnitude of damage awards). effect is a study involving breast self-examination; pamphlets describing the positive effects of breast self-examination (for example, women who undertake such examinations have a greater chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage) are ineffective, but there are significant changes in behavior from pamphlets that stress the negative consequences of a refusal to undertake self-examinations (women who fail to perform such examinations have a decreased chance of finding a tumor at a treatable stage).186 Note that this example illustrates how the provision of information may be a more natural tool than taxation or regulation for discouraging some forms of behavior (such as the failure to perform a self-examination). 
Second prescription: Exploit salience. Effective prescriptive strategies need to take account of the fact that vivid and personal information will often be more effective than statistical evidence. This sort of information has a high degree of salience, and, as a result of the availability heuristic, people will tend to respond to it by attaching a higher probability to the event in question. Thus an antidrug advertisement, showing a frying egg with the announcer’s voice claiming, “this is your brain on drugs,” appeared to have a significant effect on behavior.187 Availability suggests that the ad produced a higher perceived probability of negative effects than a flatter ad would have. 
previous section, a common feature of human behavior is overoptimism.188 This behavior is not specific to the young, although it may be diminished as people move beyond middle to old age, as Richard Posner has suggested.189 What does this feature of behavior imply about government provision of information? Consider the choice between a safe-driving campaign focused on drivers’ own driving and the ingenuous campaign actually adopted by the government: “Drive defensively: Watch out for the other guy.”190 The government’s campaign, perhaps self-consciously, responded to the fact that most people tend to believe that they are unusually safe drivers. This is a model of the sort of prescriptive approach advocated by behavioral analysis. 
Our discussion of prescriptive analysis has thus far focused on bounded rationality. But bounded willpower may also play a role. Consider the question of deterring criminal behavior. Economic analysis of this question typically starts from the premise that potential offenders will be deterred from criminal acts if the expected costs of those acts exceed their expected benefits.191 Potential offenders are imagined to make at least a rough calculation of these costs and benefits in the process of making their decisions. Bounded rationality suggests that people may make systematic (as opposed to random) errors in computing these costs and benefits; for example, as described above, individuals tend to judge the likelihood of uncertain events (such as getting caught for a crime) by how available such instances are to the human mind, and this may depend on factors unrelated to the actual probability of the event. This analysis suggests the desirability, from a prescriptive standpoint, of making law enforcement highly visible, holding constant the actual probability that offenders will be caught; it suggests, for example, the good sense of the familiar method of parking-ticket enforcement—sticking large, brightly-colored tickets that read “VIOLATION” in large letters on the drivers’ side window, where they are particularly noticeable to drivers passing by—as opposed to a less costly approach (putting small, plain tickets under the windshield wiper on the curb side of the street, convenient for the parking officer to reach). Another example here is “community policing,” now widely practiced across the country; by making more visible and memorable the presence of police (as, for example, by having them walk their beats rather than ride in patrol cars), authorities can, it is suggested, increase the deterrence of potential criminals without altering the actual probability of apprehension. 
But even if one assumes that potential offenders can accurately compute the costs and benefits of crime, bounded willpower suggests that they will often behave in ways at odds with conventional economic analysis, due to problems of self-control. A central feature of much criminal behavior is that the benefits are immediate, while the costs (if they are incurred at all) are spread out over time—often a very long time. Economic analysis assumes that such future costs are discounted to present value, and A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell have recently suggested that potential criminal offenders may have unusually high discount rates, so that years in prison far in the future will be discounted very heavily.192 Behavioral economic analysis carries this idea further by incorporating self-control issues often emphasized by criminologists.193 
As just noted, the existing economic analysis assumes a constant discount rate (although perhaps a high one); this means that the difference between the attractiveness or aversiveness of a reward or punishment today versus tomorrow is the same as the difference between a year from now and a year and one day from now. In contrast to this theory, there is considerable evidence that people display sharply declining discount rates.194 This means that impatience is very strong for near rewards (and aversion very strong for near punishments) but that each of these declines over time—a pattern referred to as “hyperbolic discounting.”195 Such attitudes reflect “dynamic inconsistency”; one’s present desires for the future are at odds with one’s future desires for the future.196 In an illuminating overstatement, Jon Elster has referred to this as the “absolute priority of the present”—akin to the “absolute priority [of the self] over other persons: I am I—while they are all ‘out there.’”197 Richard Posner has recently applied these ideas to issues of aging and old age,198 and their application to criminal offenders is supported by the idea that such offenders often behave “impulsive[ly]” and then have to “exaggerat[e] the benefits of crime” in order to justify their behavior to themselves later.199 Such a need for justification would not occur with the ordinary discounting assumed by most conventional economic analysis; decisions would not be regretted later because with that form of discounting there is no dynamic inconsistency of preference.200 
What does hyperbolic discounting imply for effective deterrence of criminal behavior? With this sort of bounded willpower on the part of potential offenders, the difference between not getting caught and being imprisoned for, say, a year differs dramatically from the difference between being imprisoned for ten years and being imprisoned for eleven years (even apart from any fixed costs that may accompany the fact of conviction). While the standard theory says that these two things differ only insofar as the costs of imprisonment in year eleven must be discounted to present value in order to be compared with the loss of wages and personal freedom in year one, behavioral economic analysis (and basic common sense) tells us that this is not so. Short punishments will thus have much more effect than long punishments as a result of the “priority of the present”; adding years onto a sentence will produce little additional deterrence.201 This idea is reflected in policy recommendations such as Mark Kleiman’s “coerced abstinence” proposal, under which drug offenders on probation or parole would be swiftly and automatically punished, but with modest sanctions, for any positive drug result.202 Short punishments are also desirable under Polinsky and Shavell’s approach, but for a different reason. 
Our analysis is consistent with empirical evidence suggesting that criminal behavior is correlated with high levels of self-control problems. It appears, for example, that drunk-driving behavior is significantly correlated with not wearing a seat belt—itself a behavior that seems to suggest a very high weight on the present, and thus a lack of self-control in the sense used here.203 Another interesting piece of empirical evidence concerns offenders’ views of sentences of different lengths. One study found that they view a five-year term of imprisonment as, on average, only twice as bad as a oneyear term; the five-year term had a perceived severity of 200, compared to 100 for the one-year term.204 This alone is also consistent with a high discount rate—a rate of roughly 0.5. But with that discount rate, the difference between a five- and ten-year term should be quite small (approximately 6 on the severity measure); in fact, the difference was 300.205 This difference is also somewhat higher than hyperbolic discounting would suggest; if the difference between 100 and 200 represents a .25 weight on all years after the first year (so that the five-year term’s severity is 100 + 25 + 25 + 25 + 25 = 200), then the ten-year term’s severity would be 325—much closer than the 206 predicted by the nonhyperbolic approach, although still less than the actual severity rating of 500. These data are of course only suggestive; we have not shown that the bounded willpower approach leads to improved predictions of actual criminal behavior. Empirical work on actual behavior of this sort is notoriously difficult, but scholars such as Steven Levitt have begun to demonstrate the possibilities in this area.206 A full analysis of criminal behavior would also need to incorporate other factors not considered here (such as the role of community); our goal is only to sketch some of the many ways in which conventional economic analysis of criminal law can be usefully extended using the tools of behavioral economics. 
In its normative orientation, conventional law and economics is often strongly antipaternalistic. The idea of “consumer sovereignty” plays a large role; citizens, assuming they have reasonable access to relevant information, are thought to be the best judges of what will promote their own welfare. Yet many of the instances of bounded rationality discussed above call this idea into question—and also, as we will emphasize below, call into question the idea that intervention by government actors, who themselves may face the same cognitive or motivational problems as everyone else, can improve matters. In this way bounded rationality pushes toward a sort of antiantipaternalism—a skepticism about antipaternalism, but not an affirmative defense of paternalism.207 We also note (although we do not explore this point here) that while bounded rationality may increase the need for law (if government’s failings are less serious than citizens’), bounded self-interest may reduce it, by creating norms that solve collective action problems even without government intervention.208 
Many of the forms of bounded rationality discussed above call into question the idea of consumer sovereignty. For example, overoptimism leads most people to believe that their own risk of a negative outcome is far lower than the average person’s. Similarly, the effect of salience may lead to substantial underestimation of certain risks encountered in everyday life (for example, the risks from poor diet), since these harms may not be very salient. 
on Crime, 87 AM. ECON. REV. 270 (1997); Steven D. Levitt, The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence from Prison Overcrowding Litigation, 111 Q.J. ECON. 319 (1996). 
selfinterested people will create collective irrationality; if people are boundedly self-interested, however, this problem may tend to disappear. When overoptimism is combined with salience, people may underestimate risks substantially. We emphasize that these problems are not ones of insufficient information per se; they are ones of insufficient ability to process accurately the information one possesses insofar as that information bears on one’s own risks. Thus, for example, people may have reasonably adequate information about the risks of smoking,209 but this does not at all imply that they have adequate perceptions of the risks of smoking that they themselves face.210 Even if people can obtain accurate statistical knowledge, statistical knowledge may not be enough to inform actual choices.211 It does not follow from this that information is useless; it is just that having information per se does not automatically imply optimal behavior. 
Further questions about the idea of consumer sovereignty arise from the gap between “decision” and “experience” utility. The utility of actual experience may diverge from the anticipated utility as revealed by people’s decisions.212 The identity of decision and experience utility in conventional economics is often treated as an axiom, or at least as a proposition that could not be falsified. But behavioral research shows that people’s judgments about their future experience at the time of decision can be mistaken, in the sense that people are sometimes unable (even apart from the sorts of informational issues recognized by conventional economics) to assess what the experience will actually be like. Thus, for example, people appear not to predict accurately the consequences of becoming seriously ill or disabled.213 They tend to underestimate their ability to adapt to negative changes, a point that may bear on law and policy in such areas as global climate change.214 
But this suggestion about adaptation raises a complex normative question: Is a person’s measure of welfare after (for example) becoming ill the appropriate measure of value? Perhaps people, through coping mechanisms, are able to adapt to disease better than they anticipate in advance, but does this mean that disease is a less severe problem than prior attitudes would have suggested? On conventional utilitarian grounds, the answer is probably affirmative; the subjective experience is what counts. But a well-established challenge to utilitarian analysis suggests the possibility of a negative answer, on the ground that subjective experience may not be all that counts.215 What we mean to suggest here is a simple point: People sometimes do mispredict their utility at the time of decision, and on conventional grounds, this phenomenon raises serious problems for the idea of consumer sovereignty. 
Any suggestion that the government should intervene in response to people’s mistakes raises the question whether the government will be able to avoid such errors. The prospects for productive and useful intervention may be smallest in the case of populist government; the actions of such a government, based heavily on pressures coming from citizens, may tend to be subject to the very same biases and errors that afflict citizens. (Thus behavioral analysis complements existing accounts of the problems with populism.) An example of the effects of populism is the Superfund statute, discussed in Part III.C; irregular perceptions of risk by ordinary people may tend to produce irregularities in regulation, as the cognitive errors that ordinary people make are replicated in statutory and administrative law.216 The effects of social interaction may even make government action worse, and more dangerous, than individual errors. Our earlier discussion suggests a possible mechanism: Availability entrepreneurs in the private sector can heighten the demand for regulation, and public sector availability entrepreneurs can take advantage of, and heighten, this effect, by advocating anecdote-driven policy. Thus public choice accounts of legislation can work productively with behavioral accounts; there is a good deal of synergy between behavioral mechanisms and interest group leaders, many of whom are amateur (or professional?) behavioral economists. The pollutant-of-the-month syndrome in environmental law is paralleled by many measures responding to the crisisof-the-month. These difficulties with populist government also point to problems with the referendum process. 
But populist government is not the only worry. Government will often be subject to cognitive and motivational problems even if it is not populist. (Bureaucrats may also lack appropriate incentives to make decisions in the public interest.217) Thus, for example, there is no necessary reason to think AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES (1985). 
RISK 149 (1992); VISCUSI, supra note 137, at 85-88, 94-97; Noll & Krier, supra note 137, at 
89 COLUM. L. REV. 1703, 1719-20 (1989). that government officials are, by virtue of their offices, able to avoid overoptimism or predict experience utility. On the other hand, a degree of insulation from populist pressures, combined with knowledge of behavioral economics, might produce some improvement. New institutions may play a role; consider Justice Breyer’s plea for an insulated body of specialized civil servants, entrusted with the job of comparing risks and ensuring that resources are devoted to the most serious problems;218 Howard Margolis’ behaviorally-informed suggestion that government should be required to ensure that all initiatives “do no harm”;219 even proposals for cost-benefit analysis, understood in a behavioral light as an attempt to overcome biases and confusions in both perception and motivation.220 We also emphasize that government intervention need not come in highly coercive forms; perhaps distortions in people’s decisionmaking can be overcome by information campaigns falling well short of coercion. For instance, in the contexts of risks such as smoking, might debiasing techniques work to link the statistical evidence with the personal reality? 
All of the foregoing ideas raise many complexities; and we have not even touched upon the complicated philosophical literature on the legitimacy of paternalism. Application of these ideas to any specific topic in law would require a much fuller development of many issues than the space in this article permits. But we need not leave the ideas in purely abstract form; consider the following simple illustration of their application. Imagine that sunlamps are being sold in an unregulated market and that it is learned that many consumers fall asleep under the lamps, burning themselves badly. Consumers make this mistake in spite of warnings included on the package and in the instructions, perhaps because they fail to anticipate that lying in a warm place with one’s eyes closed is likely to induce sleep. Let’s call this an “unintended risk,” meaning a risk that consumers fail to appreciate. The existence of this unintended risk leaves open the possibility of welfareenhancing regulation. Suppose, for example, that an automatic timer can be added to the sunlamp at a cost of twenty-five cents, and that manufacturers have not included this feature because consumers do not anticipate that they will need it. We do not discuss here the issues raised by the possibility that a government mandate of the timer interferes with freedom, rightly conceived. Nor do we address possible distributive issues (all will pay more for sunlamps, although perhaps only some failed to appreciate the risks of falling asleep). All we suggest is that an important part of the analysis involves asking whether the cost of requiring this safety-promoting feature (twentyfive cents per customer) is less than the cost of the unanticipated burns. 
solutions stated in the text may also be attractive to conventional economists on a variety of grounds. 
A central point of this example is that from the perspective of behavioral law and economics, issues of paternalism are to a significant degree empirical questions, not questions to be answered on an a priori basis. No axiom demonstrates that people make choices that serve their best interests; this is a question to be answered based on evidence. Of course the case for intervention is weakened to the extent that public institutions are likely to make things worse rather than better. What we are suggesting is that facts, and assessment of costs and benefits, should replace assumptions that beg the underlying questions. 
Traditional law and economics is largely based on the standard assumptions of neoclassical economics. These assumptions are sometimes useful but often false. People display bounded rationality: They suffer from certain biases, such as overoptimism and self-serving conceptions of fairness; they follow heuristics, such as availability, that lead to mistakes; and they behave in accordance with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory. People also have bounded willpower; they can be tempted and are sometimes myopic. They take steps to overcome these limitations. Finally, people are (fortunately!) boundedly self-interested. They are concerned about the wellbeing of others, even strangers in some circumstances, and this concern and their self-conception can lead them in the direction of cooperation at the expense of their material self-interest (and sometimes spite, also at the expense of their material self-interest). Most of these bounds can be and have been made part of formal models. 
In this article we have sketched some of the implications of enriching the traditional analysis by incorporating a more realistic conception of human behavior. We have insisted on the value and importance of using the three bounds in the economic analysis of law; more tentatively, we have explored a series of legal problems in which the bounds may be significant. Obviously there is a great deal of research to be done, and one of our principal goals has been to outline areas that could benefit from further work, both analytic and empirical. 
We do not doubt that replacing the simple maximizing model of economics with a more complicated psychological treatment comes at some cost. Solving optimization problems is usually easier than describing actual behavior. It has been said (we believe by Herbert Simon) that economics makes things hard on agents, but easy on economists; behavioral economics, we suggest, does the opposite. We recapitulate here some of the reasons we think the enriched model is worth the trouble for those interested in the economic analysis of law. example, people can be both more spiteful and more cooperative than traditional analysis predicts, and this matters a great deal to law. It is also important to know that even in a world without transaction costs and wealth effects, the assignment of property rights alters the ultimate allocation of those rights, and that this may be particularly true for certain forms of property-rights assignment (such as court orders). These features of the world matter greatly for making predictions and formulating policy. of no effect). Prominent in this category are the effects of presentation; since economic theory assumes that choices are invariant to the manner in which a problem is framed, it falsely predicts that the language of a media account or advertisement has no effect on behavior, holding the information content constant. In contrast, it is well established that people react differently to potential outcomes depending on whether they are perceived as foregone gains or out-of-pocket costs (losses), and that they are likely to think, mistakenly, that salient events are more common than equally prevalent but more subtle ones. These points bear on the supply of and the demand for law, and on the behavior of agents in their interactions with the legal system. limited range of potential explanations, namely optimal (or second-best) rules set by judges and rent-seeking legislation determined by selfinterested log-rolling. Behavioral economics offers other sources of potential explanation—most prominently, perceptions of fairness. We have tried to show that many laws which are seemingly inefficient and do not benefit powerful interest groups may be explained on grounds of judgments about right and wrong. 
A behavioral approach to law and economics offers a host of novel prescriptions regarding how to make the legal system work better. Some stem from the improved predictions mentioned in point 2 above. Cognitive difficulties and motivational distortions undermine or alter conventional economic prescriptions about the jury's role, most notably in the context of assessing negligence and making other determinations of fact or law. We have taken some preliminary steps in suggesting ways to reduce the costs of some of these problems. 
A behavioral approach to law and economics produces new questions about possible mistakes by private and public actors. On the one hand, it raises serious doubts about the reflexive antipaternalism of some economic analysis of law. On the other hand, it raises equivalent questions about whether even well-motivated public officials will be able to offer appropriate responses to private mistakes and confusion. 
We hope that this article will encourage others to continue the inquiry and research, both theoretical and empirical, that will be needed to flesh out the behavioral approach for which we have argued here. This approach will use traditional economic tools, enhanced by a better understanding of human behavior. Thirty years from now, we hope that there will be no such thing as behavioral economics. Instead we hope that economists and economically oriented lawyers will simply incorporate the useful findings of other social sciences, and in so doing, transform economics into behavioral economics, and economic analysis of law into one of its most important branches. 
This appendix summarizes our framework for behavioral law and economics. It also lists the law and economics issues we analyze within each category of the framework. The specific behavioral mechanisms we draw upon, which are summarized here, do not constitute an exhaustive list of the mechanisms that might be relevant to law and economics; they simply reflect the mechanisms we have used here. For each mechanism, we provide a reference to the literature, as an overview of or entry to the existing research; we refer the interested reader to the text of our article for additional references on each topic. 
reference: Linda Babcock & George Loewenstein, Explaining 
ECON. PERSP., Winter 1997, at 109. our applications: bargaining around court orders; failed negotiations. 
reference: Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY 3 (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky eds., 1982). our applications: environmental legislation, government advertising, anti-antipaternalism. 
EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOL. HUM. PERCEPTION & PERFORMANCE 288 (1975). 
our applications: negligence determinations; other determinations of fact or law. our applications: negligence determinations; other determinations of fact or law. reference: Neil D. Weinstein, Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events, 39 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSCYHOL. 806 (1980). 
our applications: government advertising, anti-antipaternalism. 
Assumption, in THE RATIONAL FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMIC BEHAVIOUR 203 (Kenneth J. Arrow, Enrico Colombatto, Mark Perlman & Christian Schmidt eds., 1996). 
our applications: anti-antipaternalism. 
Decisionmaking behavior 
reference: Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, 47 ECONOMETRICA 263 (1979). 
our applications: government advertising. 
reference: Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch & Richard H. 
Coase Theorem, 98 J. POL. ECON. 1325, 1327 (1990). our applications: bargaining around court orders, mandatory contract terms, prior restraints on speech. 
reference: David Laibson, Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting, 112 Q.J. ECON. 443 (1997). reference: Colin Camerer & Richard H. Thaler, Anomalies: Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners, 9 J. ECON. PERSP., Spring 1995, at 209. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION......................................... 
I. THE GENERAL PROBLEM ....................... 
II. THE INDEPENDENT COUNSEL ACT ................. 
A. MOTIVATIONS ............................ 
B. STRUCTURE-AND OBSERVATIONS ON STRUCTURE... 

III. SMALL BENEFITS, LARGE COSTS, AND THE PROBLEM OF 
INCENTIVES ......................................... 
C. NONDELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY AND THE CITIZENRY ........... 
IV. How TO HANDLE HIGH-LEVEL ILLEGALITY, WITH A NOTE ON THE 
FUTURE ........................................... 
CONCLUSION ............................................ 
INTRODUCTION 
The Independent Counsel Act' is a case study in the law of unintended consequences. The Act was designed to increase trust in government. But it * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Dan Kahan, Martha Nussbaum, and Judy Shih for excellent comments, and to Shih for valuable research assistance as well. 
Stat. 1842, 1824 (1978) (current version at 28 U.S.C. §§ 591-599 (1996)). I refer to it as "the Independent Counsel Act" or "the Act." ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 
2267 2269 2271 2272 2272 2273 2274 2275 2275 2276 2276 2277 2279 2280 2280 2282 actually reduces trust in government, not because of serious misconduct on the part of high-level officials, but because of scandal mongering, and because of the transformation of political disputes into criminal allegations. 2 The Act should be allowed to expire in 1999; even better, it should be repealed. 
The fundamental problem with the Act is that it imposes harmful incentives on Members of Congress, the media, and the independent counsel itself. An important effect of these harmful incentives is to damage processes of democratic deliberation by deflecting attention from serious issues involving the effects of policy on human lives, and instead focusing people-representatives, media, and citizens alike-on scandals that are often imaginary and that, even if real, usually do not deserve the prominence that the Act gives them. 
One of the most central problems of American democracy in its current form consists in its emphasis on sensationalistic anecdotes, eye-catching accusations, and dehumanization of political opponents, accompanied by insufficient focus on the nature of actual problems and how they might be solved. It would be good to devote far more attention to measures to alleviate poverty and far less attention to questions about where, exactly, the Vice President was when he engaged in fund-raising. This problem is especially serious in Congress, which should be less focused on alleged law-breaking and more fundamentally concerned with the effects of existing and proposed laws on citizens. The principal effect of the Independent Counsel Act is to fortify bad tendencies in current practice. In doing so, the Act does a great deal of harm and little good. 
I argue in this essay that the Act should be repealed as soon as possible or permitted to expire in 1999. 3 Part I sets out the general problem created by the Act-that it encourages scandal-mongering, thereby undermining the Constitution's structural goal of creating deliberative democracy. Part II discusses the motivations underlying the Act and its basic structure. Part III explores the incentives that the Act creates for politicians, the media, and independent counsels themselves. Part IV briefly explores some alternatives designed to remedy the Act's shortcomings, including total repeal of the Act, reliance on political checks, and relocation of investigatory responsibility to a specialized office of the Department of Justice. 
produced by the 1998 events involving Monica Lewinsky and President Clinton. 
dissenting opinion in Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 703-05 (1988) (Scalia, J., dissenting). On the constitutional issues, see Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, The Presidentand the Administration, 94 COLUM. L. REv. 1, 14-22 (1994). But many of Justice Scalia's objections do point to serious problems in the Act, and I stress those problems as a policy matter here. See Steven G. Calabresi, Some Normative Arguments for the UnitaryExecutive, 48 ARK. L. REv. 23, 90-95 (1995) (arguing Independent Counsel Act costs outweigh benefits and old tradition of politically agreed upon independent counsel for serious scandal is adequate). 
I. THE GENERAL PROBLEM 
The American constitutional tradition aspires to be a deliberative democracy, in which issues are debated by reference to reasons and principles.4 Officials are supposed to be accountable to the people, but they are also intended to be in a position to reflect and to deliberate on appropriate policies, rather than to implement mechanically some aggregation of pre-existing desires. The institutional safeguards of the original Constitution, including both national representation and checks and balances, were designed to implement this deliberative ideal.5 In particular, the Framers wedded an understanding of likely incentive effects to the basic topic of institutional design, attempting to ensure that institutions would create the appropriate incentives. 6 Attention to the relationship between institutions and incentives was, in fact, one of their central preoccupations. The basic goal was to ensure that the structure of the national government would permit representatives to act in a reasoned fashion, above the fray of factions and (misplaced) passions.7 National institutions, for example, would have a comparative advantage over smaller bodies, and the system of checks and balances would permit ambition to check ambition.8 
It should not be controversial to say that in current politics, a general and pervasive problem is that deliberation and reason-giving are too frequently absent. 9 Many of those concerned with institutional reform have attempted to produce solutions to precisely this problem.1 ° On the part of the media, many politicians, and numerous interest groups, there is particular pressure toward sensationalism. Real or imagined scandals therefore play a significant role in coverage of political issues. Emphasis on scandals can, of course, be in the political self-interest of elected representatives, who may be able to achieve a large name for themselves by identifying and attacking corruption whether or not it actually exists-particularly if the call is for further or more independent investigation. Emphasis on scandals can also be in the economic self-interest of the media, especially when a basic concern is inevitably to attract viewers, readers, and sponsors." 
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT 1-2 (1994). 

(1993). 

CAMPAIGN COVERAGE, 1968 AND 1988, at 4-6 (Joan Shorenstein Barone Ctr. on the Press, Pol. and Pub. Pol'y, John F. Kennedy Sch. of Gov't, Harvard Univ. Research Paper R-2, 1990). 
institutional reforms designed to improve risk regulation by increasing systematic overview of risk problems). 
(Vol. 86:2267 
Indeed, market pressures often lead away from substance and firmly in the direction of media sensationalism, and thus can produce sensationalism even if journalists, acting as individuals, would seek a better route. In this way, competitive forces often disserve deliberative or democratic ideals. Coverage of this kind may even be consistent with the public-spirited convictions of both representatives and the media, if it is believed that the real or imagined scandals bear on governance, or otherwise contain and produce illumination of one kind or another. But this type of coverage can have an extremely damaging effect on democratic self-government, especially if scandalous charges are frequent. Part of the problem is that sensational coverage tends generally to breed cynicism and distrust, whether or not these are merited. 
A conceivable result is a form of "cascade," as people tend to believe that a scandal is important or real simply because others believe, or appear to believe, that it is important or real. 12 Individual citizens, even individual representatives and media members, often have little information about an apparent scandal, and any belief on each individual's part is likely to be greatly affected by what others say, or seem to believe. Without much in the way of individual information, it is possible that millions of people will come to believe in the possibility of a scandal whether or not it is real. The worst possible outcome is a general, falsely held view that government officials are corrupt or engaged in criminal activity, and that effective improvements are improbable or impossible, so that government is less able to do anything at all. 
Sensational coverage creates distinctive problems, because it tends to crowd out discussion of other issues and to divert the attention of public officials. When the question is whether the Vice President committed a criminal act by raising funds from the White House, it is harder to discuss whether the Administration's welfare policy is producing good results, or how to handle the problem of global warming, or whether the well-being of Americans is getting better or worse. Substantive discussion of issues actually affecting American citizens is increasingly replaced by questions, often impossibly technical, about official criminality. The time of public officials becomes spent less on solving public problems and more on the public management of scandals. It is hard to quantify this cost, but there can be no doubt that highly publicized congressional hearings cost a nontrivial amount of dollars. 
A focus on the possibility of technical illegality is unquestionably costly to the extent that it means that substantive questions of governance receive less or little attention. But it is possible to go further. To be sure, official law-breaking is almost always objectionable, and sometimes it is far worse than that. But at least under ordinary circumstances, the likely forms of official law-breaking in the United States are relatively trivial, and far less important, and far less worthy of public attention, than questions involving the direct effects of government policy on human lives. The central question for American government, almost all of the time, is not whether some official has acted improperly, but whether current policies are making lives better or worse, and how they might be improved. Attention to the question of whether the Attorney General or the Secretary of Commerce has committed some technical violation of the law is far less urgent. 
This is not to deny that sometimes official law-breaking can be a serious problem. Nor is it to deny that in some nations, official corruption may indeed be enmeshed with government performance harmful to ordinary lives. But in the United States, it is far more probable that any official illegality will involve technical violations, not serious criminality. I return to the significance of this point below. 
A. MOTIVATIONS 
The original goal of the Independent Counsel Act was simple, laudable, and entirely appealing: to ensure that the decision whether to prosecute high-level government officials would not be made by high-level government officials. In the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, a genuine constitutional crisis, the Act seemed indispensable as a way of promoting public trust in government, by giving an assurance that high-level officials would be investigated by people who were not controllable by their hierarchical superiors. The idea that no person should be judge in his or her own cause is deeply rooted in American constitutional traditions;13 it seems only natural to think that those investigating high-level criminality should be insulated from control of the highest executive officers. In this way, the Independent Counsel Act might be seen as continuous with the Founders' effort to design institutions so as to respond to the natural incentive effects of different governmental arrangements. It might even be seen as a Madisonian effort to ensure that "ambition [will] ...counteract ambition." 14 
A possible response to this concern is that impeachment is the appropriate remedy for high-level official misconduct. But in the context of the Watergate era, it seemed sensible to reply that impeachment is extremely difficult and unnecessarily strong medicine, and that it should be used very rarely. The Act seemed far more precisely targeted. It would create an assurance, ex ante and ex post, that a disinterested person would investigate and if necessary prosecute high-level officials, in such a way as to give the public assurance that the investigation would be entirely neutral, and unaffected by politics. The question, hardly an unfamiliar one, is whether legislation driven by particular events might not have unintended consequences and create problems more serious than those that it was meant to prevent. 15 
B. STRUCTURE-AND OBSERVATIONS ON STRUCTURE 
As a matter of law, what sort of structure has emerged? Every year, of course, many complaints are made by people asserting that a high-level official has violated the law and that an independent counsel should be appointed. The Independent Counsel Act specifies a rigid procedure for handling these complaints. 
More specifically, the Attorney General is required to act in accordance with three simple steps. First, she must conduct a "preliminary investigation" whenever she receives "information sufficient to constitute grounds to investigate whether" any covered person may have violated Federal criminal law.' 6 Covered persons include (but are not limited to) the President and Vice President, the Attorney General, any Assistant Attorney General, the Director of the CIA, the Deputy Director of the CIA, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, heads of the cabinet departments, and the chairman and treasurers of the principal national campaign committees seeking the election or reelection of the President. 17 To consider whether a preliminary determination is warranted, the Attorney General is allowed to consider only two factors: the specificity of the information received and the credibility of the source of information.' 8 The Attorney General has thirty days in which to make the key decision.' 9 
Second, if the Attorney General decides that a preliminary investigation is warranted, the Attorney General must decide within ninety days whether "there are reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted .... ,2o During the preliminary investigation phase-and this is a crucial provision-the Attorney General is not authorized to convene grand juries, plea bargain, grant immunity, or issue subpoenas. 2 ' Moreover, the statute was amended at the end of the Reagan Administration so that the Attorney General cannot decline further investigation because the defendant lacked the necessary state of mind, "unless there is clear and convincing evidence" of that fact. 2 
Third, if the Attorney General concludes that "there are reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted," the Attorney General must apply to the court for the appointment of an independent counsel; 23 this step is mandatory. The independent counsel, once appointed, has "full power and independent authority to exercise all investigative and prosecutorial functions A CrrzEN's GUIDE TO ENVIRONmENTAL HEALTH AND SAFETY IssuEs (1995). There is a frequent problem with legislation based on anomalous recent events; often the events are not likely to be replicated in anything like the same form, and the solution introduces a host of new problems. 
and powers of the Department of Justice, the Attorney General, and any other officer or employee of the Department of Justice .... Among the expressly enumerated authorities are the power to receive appropriate national security clearances, to apply for grant of immunity for any witness, to inspect, obtain, and use the original or copy of any tax return, and to bring indictments.2 5 The independent counsel is also authorized to hire, fix the compensation, and assign the duties of "such employees as such independent counsel considers necessary .... ,,6 The independent counsel may be removed by the Attorney General "only for good cause, physical or mental disability, or any other condition that substantially impairs the performance" of her duties.2 7 
Let us make a few observations about this simple and quite rigid structure. How can the process of appointing an independent counsel be stopped if it is undesirable? There are several methods. The first is via a preliminary determination that the charges are insufficiently credible and specific. But credibility may be hard to deny if, as is often the case, the allegation has been reported in the newspaper and Members of Congress think that there is reason for concern. If so, a preliminary inquiry must be undertaken. 
The second possible step is to conclude that there are no reasonable grounds to believe that further investigation is warranted. This is indeed a possible safeguard; judgments of law can stop the investigation at this stage. Attorney General Reno's controversial decision not to seek an appointment of an independent counsel for certain campaign-related activities by President Clinton and Vice President Gore attests to the fact. But under the Act, any such judgment must be reached without convening grand juries, granting immunity, or issuing subpoenas, and without considering, in the normal fashion, the issue of intent. Often, of course, a prosecutor will drop a case at an early stage, after issuing subpoenas, or considering the defendant's state of mind, or simply deciding, after an "all things considered" judgment, that this is not the kind of case that calls for a formal criminal investigation, even if there was a technical violation of law. 
overlooked, safeguard of liberty under law. Not every technical violation of law is subject to criminal prosecution, or even serious criminal investigation. Indeed, it is likely that a significant percentage of American citizens have, at one point in the last decade, committed an action that would subject them to a jail sentence if the law books were taken extremely seriously. For high-level public officials, the percentage is probably even higher, if only because of the complex network of statutes that regulate their behavior. The fact that criminal prosecu24. Id. § 594(a). tors have limited budgets, and exercise common sense in deciding to which cases to allocate their limited resources, is an important protection against liberty-threatening intrusions on human beings-whose frailties produce criminality that ought not to result in an actual jail sentence, or even the realistic fear of a jail sentence. 
As it has operated in practice, the Act offers several examples. Consider just a few. It was alleged that White House Chief of Staff Hamilton Jordan used cocaine, and an independent counsel was appointed to investigate the allegation. It was alleged that Assistant Attorney General Theodore Olson lied before Congress in the context of a hotly disputed set of issues involving the behavior of EPA Administrator Anne Gorsuch, and an independent counsel was appointed to investigate. Is it really reasonable to think that an Assistant Attorney General should have to fend off a criminal indictment because of the possibility that he has acted as something of-or very much-an advocate in discussing constitutional issues relating to executive privilege? It is conceivable, though highly debatable, that Vice President Gore violated an old statute, the Pendleton Act, by making certain phone calls from the White House. But no reasonable criminal prosecutor would bring an indictment in such a case, unless he was attempting to grandstand, or to make a name for himself. It is not worth belaboring the point that in cases like this, calls for an independent counsel are politically motivated, and have nothing to do with a realistic claim that people should actually face criminal charges. 
These points raise an important question of law and fact: To what extent is the independent counsel within the technical control of the Department of Justice? As a matter of law, the question is not easy to answer. The counsel can be dismissed for "good cause," as the Supreme Court emphasized in Morrison v. Olson,28 and indeed the basis for discharge was broadened from the original "extraordinary improprieties" to that current language. It would therefore be reasonable to think that the Attorney General has considerable authority to discharge an independent counsel, and perhaps also to control the counsel's performance. Certainly the Court did not rule otherwise in Morrison. But however the legal issues might be resolved, the practical reality is that any Attorney General will inevitably give a great deal of autonomy to the independent counsel. An Attorney General who discharged an independent counsel, or attempted to control an independent counsel's operations, would face enormous political pressure, and any Attorney General will know this. It is thus clear that while the technical law leaves room for dispute, in practice the independent counsel is an independent agent. 
Since the 1978 enactment of the Independent Counsel Act, every administration has been investigated by an independent counsel. There have been sixteen total investigations. Taxpayers have paid out well over $100 million on these investigations. 29 Thus far ten of the sixteen have produced no indictments. These include the following "scandals": " Hamilton Jordan, President Carter's chief of staff, was said to have used cocaine. " Timothy Kraft, President Carter's national campaign manager, was said to have used drugs. " Theodore Olson, an assistant attorney general under President Reagan, was said to have committed perjury in testimony before Congress. " Members of the Bush administration were said to have searched President 
Clinton's passport files. " HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros was said to have lied to the FBI about his private life. 
In each of these cases, an independent counsel was appointed, and in none of them has the independent counsel decided to indict the prospective defendant. But the investigations cost the taxpayers significant sums of money. Surely one of the most revealing, and absurd, was the investigation of Theodore Olson, who was subject to an extended criminal investigation growing out of his testimony defending the Department of Justice's position in connection with the executive branch's refusal to hand over to Congress the EPA's law enforcement files. This intensely political debate, over the environmental policies of the Reagan Administration, produced an utterly ridiculous charge-that Olson had committed the crime of perjury and should be indicted-and the result was a multimillion dollar investigation. 
One of the most successful set of investigations was undertaken by Lawrence Walsh, who managed to obtain seven guilty pleas and four convictions as a result of the "Irangate" scandal (at a cost to taxpayers of $47.9 million). Arlin Adams and Larry Thompson have done even better, obtaining seven guilty pleas and eleven convictions from the HUD scandals of the Reagan Administration (at a cost of $30 million). Kenneth Starr's ongoing investigations have produced six guilty pleas and three convictions (at a cost of over $30 million). Of course it is unclear what will ultimately emerge from these investigations. (See Appendix for details.) 
A. BENEFITS? 
Has the Act produced more good than harm? It would not be unreasonable to answer this question by saying very categorically that the Act has produced no 
GEORGETOWN LAW JOURNAL good at all. But this would be too harsh. It is possible, even likely, that the Act has discouraged official illegality by letting high-level officials know of the seriousness with which any such illegality will be treated. To the extent that the Act has reduced criminal behavior, it must be counted as having produced some benefits as a deterrent. Moreover, some of the allegations under the Act cannot be dismissed as trivial, and the record suggests that in some cases the availability of the Act has ensured that justice has been done, by forcing people to face criminal liability for their crimes. 
But are these gains worthwhile? If we look only at the investigations themselves, it is not at all clear that, on balance, the Act has made things better. A large number of the investigations appear to have been a waste of taxpayer resources, in the process frightening public servants, and possible defendants, with the prospect of a jail sentence and in any case tarnishing their reputations. It is not clear that the twenty total convictions, and the twenty-four total guilty pleas, offset these costs. It is clear that the Independent Counsel Act makes it more hazardous for someone to agree to a high-level position in government. But the more important point is that the Act breeds distrust of government and in the process diminishes substantive discussion of real questions, by focusing attention on imagined scandals or wrongdoing. 
B. INCENTIVES 
What incentives are created by the Act? What are the likely effects of the Act on the behavior of politicians, the media, citizens, and independent counsels themselves? 
Consider first the incentives of politicians as these incentives are altered by the Act. It is hard to imagine any presidential administration in which there will not be at least a colorable claim of official illegality by someone covered by the Act-a proposition supported by the fact that every administration has been subject to at least one independent counsel investigation since the Act's passage. And among political opponents of any administration, a number are likely to find it very much in their political interest to call for an independent counsel to investigate some real, possible, or even wholly imagined wrongdoing. Every political opponent of any administration knows this, and that knowledge increases each opponent's incentive to move first, or to join any bandwagon, or to speak about the value of future investigation of improprieties and illegalities. 
Any call for criminal investigation has the appearance of neutrality and statesmanship; how can a mere investigation do any real harm? From the standpoint of political self-interest, such a call is far more likely than silence or a reasoned objection to a policy initiative to produce attention. And if most politicians know that eventually, some politician is likely to call for an independent counsel, for a nontrivial number of politicians there may appear to be a special advantage in being among the first to do so. Once one or two politicians have done this, "cascade" 3 or bandwagon effects may well arise-and those who do not favor an independent counsel in the particular case, especially in the opposing party, may seem timid, or unduly allied to the interests of the current administration. It is thus likely that members of an opposition party may well find themselves in the seemingly odd position of publicly favoring-and by significant numbers-no less than a sustained criminal investigation and a possible jail sentence for their political opponents. What is especially important is that everyone knows this before any scandal begins, and this knowledge will make the unfortunate scenario all the more likely. 
From the media's standpoint, there are likely to be substantial and damaging incentive effects as well. If members of Congress have asked for an independent counsel, there is reason to think that high-level officials have actually committed crimes, and perhaps some of them should, or will, go to jail. That is certainly newsworthy; to say the least, it is worth considerable attention. Here are the critical points: A large part of the job of newspapers is to sell newspapers and advertisers. In many quarters, corruption sells. A large part of the job of television broadcasters is to attract viewers and sponsors, and a news program that is focused on a "growing scandal," or a call for official investigation of high-level criminality, is likely to attract viewers. 
Newspapers and broadcasters are far more likely to attract readers and viewers if attention is focused on a call for an independent counsel-on the ground that a high-level official may deserve to go to jail-than on some issue of policy, such as the effects of minimum wage legislation, or the consequences of the recent welfare reform. 31 There is a kind of vicious circle in which 1997 (as of 11/9/97) 0 0 3 15 12 11 12 13 40 91 41 19 12 10 22 
1 39 72 108 120 politicians and media members follow their self-interest to the detriment of the public as a whole. The problem seems to be getting worse over time. Consider the following evidence, reporting references to the independent counsel in the New York Times and Washington Post in the years since the Act's passage: 
Front Page Stories Mentioning Independent Counsels32 
To be sure, this is not the whole story. Responsible editorial writers also seek to be, or to appear, statesman-like, and it is quite easy to assume the posture of the concerned outsider favoring appointment of an independent counsel on the Less News is Worse News, supra; Mark J. Rozell, PressCoverage of Congress,1946-92, in CONGRESS, THE PRESS, AND THE PUBLAC, supra). (4) "There are now more than 40 firms specializing in opposition research, and their number has grown by 200 percent in the 1990s .... Charles S. Clark, PoliticalConsultants,8 CQ RESEARCHER 867, 868 (1996) (citing LARRY J. SABATO & GLENN D. SIMPSON, DIRTY LITTLE SECRETS: THE PERSISTENCE OF CORRUPTION IN AMERICAN PoLrrTcs (1996)). 
collect the figures since that time. ground that otherwise there can be no assurance that justice will be done. This is, for example, the typical stance of the New York Times editorial page, which is often focused, with all imaginable seriousness and sobriety, on the legitimate concerns raised by the allegations and the need for "the air to be cleared." (The utter predictability of these editorials, admittedly, can make them appear a bit hilarious to long-time readers.) Of course, politicians are aware of this fact. No one really loses by calling for an independent counsel. A kind of cycle is therefore likely to build, in which political and media incentives fortify the interest in scandal-mongering. The Independent Counsel Act creates extremely damaging incentives, in a kind of bizarre parody of the Founders' effort to match incentives to institutional design. 
In this light it should not be at all surprising that the Act is used in a partisan manner. A special problem is that it enlists the criminal justice system in partisan maneuvering. Such charges are easy to make and hard to rebut. They tend to stick. 
What about the standpoint of the criminal justice system itself?. What incentives are placed on the independent counsel? The best way to answer such questions is by comparing the independent counsel to an ordinary prosecutor. As I have noted, any ordinary prosecutor has a limited budget and a large set of actual or potential targets of investigation. Thus, the prosecutor herself has a wide rather than narrow focus. 3 3 Every prosecutor also knows that criminality of some sort or another is extremely widespread. In any law school class, for example, a large percentage of students are likely to have committed some crime within the last decade. 
The Act eliminates some of the key safeguards built into the ordinary role of the prosecutor-safeguards that are frequently overlooked, but that operate as crucial contributors to liberty under law. It thus creates an incentive toward zealotry. An independent counsel who uncovers nothing is likely to look as if he has more or less wasted his time, or done nothing, whereas an independent counsel who brings a prosecution, or several prosecutions, is likely to look, in at least some circles, like another Archibald Cox, a kind of hero of democratic ideals. In this way, the Act creates an incentive for independent prosecutors to do what prosecutors should not be unduly ready to do: to prosecute. 
One of the great achievements of the Framers of the American Constitution was to link the analysis of institutions to an understanding of incentives. As noted, the system of national representation was designed to protect against the influence of factions, creating an incentive to serve the public good, and the system of checks and balances was designed to ensure that "ambition" would "counteract ambition."-34 Some of the most valuable developments in institu33. See supra Part 11B2. tional reform-including the oversight role of OMB with respect to both the budget and regulation-have also attempted to link incentives to institutions. From this point of view, the Independent Counsel Act is especially poorly designed because it creates, predictably, the wrong incentives for everyone involved. 
To say this is emphatically not to say that the independent counsels have been dishonorable people, or even that any of them has behaved dishonorably. In most cases, no one has been indicted. But the Act creates a strong incentive to focus intensely on particular persons and to resolve doubts in favor of further investigation or even indictment. Past practice confirms this statement insofar as it shows protracted investigation of groundless or trivial charges (consider the Olson case supra, and see the Appendix). 
C. NONDELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY AND THE CITIZENRY 
What are the aggregate results of all this? We do not have sufficient information to know with precision. But some speculations seem reasonable. The Act contributes to a general aura of distrust of government, distrust grounded not on an assessment of what existing or potential policies actually do, but instead on a belief that officials are basically corrupt. Hence it is possible for Americans to be doing relatively well, in part because of government policies, while also believing that their government is very bad, in part because they "know" that every recent administration contains many likely criminals. Political deliberation is likely to be crowded out if the national news is focused on whether the Vice President should be investigated for a crime. And political alienation is extremely likely if officials on all sides are accused of criminality. Such accusations can easily be exploited by conspiracy-mongers and third party candidates such as Ross Perot, themselves subject to character assassination, but able in the process to draw many officials under a skeptical cloud. 
It cannot be said that the Independent Counsel Act is the basic cause of the American people's distrust of government. But it defies belief to think that the Act has done anything to relieve that distrust, and it is ludicrous to suppose that it has not contributed to it. 
IV. How TO HANDLE HIGH-LEVEL ILLEGALITY, WITH A NOTE ON THE FUTURE 
The most obvious question raised by these points is how to handle the problem of high-level criminality. If not the Independent Counsel Act, then what? For most of the nation's history, this problem was handled without any special procedures, and it is not at all clear that special procedures are indispensable or even desirable. The vigilance of opposing parties and the press is likely to be an obstacle to official wrongdoing and corruption. Until the enactment of the Independent Counsel Act, scandals were handled in successful ways, through such initiatives as the voluntary appointment of an investigator known to be relatively impartial and free from partisan control. Political checks worked reasonably well.3 5 
Usually invoked as a counterexample, the Watergate scandal is actually a case in point. Archibald Cox was made independent by Justice Department regulations. After Robert Bork fired Cox, Leon Jaworski was appointed, did his job well, and President Nixon had to resign. The system worked. And there was no Independent Counsel act. The true lesson of the Watergate scandal is that political safeguards and ordinary prosecutors are perfectly sufficient. 
Disgrace and ultimately impeachment are of course available for the most serious wrongs, and public opinion, in a highly politicized, two-party system filled with incentives to ferret out corruption, the possibility of disgrace and impeachment are likely to do most of what needs to be done. Indeed, it is plausible to say that the rise of "attack journalism" has rendered independent prosecutors far less necessary. Because the relevant investigations generally begin with suspicions voiced by the press in any case, it may well make sense to require the press to do its own investigatory work, especially if markets reward such investigations. If journalists are able to amass enough inculpatory evidence, either political safeguards or legal reprisals are highly likely. This argument carries particular force if the primary purpose of these investigations is to deter wrongdoing. Reputational effects of press investigations are already high. 
If the choice is between the continued use of the Independent Counsel Act and its repeal, the appropriate course is repeal. Indeed, this would probably be the best approach. But an intermediate step is possible. It may well make sense to create a particular, highly professionalized institution with a degree of independence, one of whose functions is to explore questions of this kind. 
The simplest approach would be to establish an office within the Department of Justice, perhaps modelled on the FBI, and entrusted with several sensitive jobs, including that of investigating reports of illegality involving a small band of officials: the President, the Vice President, and the Attorney General. Crucially, people in such an office would have a history to draw on and a basis for reasonable comparisons. They would also have a menu of past cases rather than one-shot special appointees, and as career officials, they would have no special tendency toward zealotry. It is not necessary to discuss this proposal in detail; it has multiple analogues in existing offices in the Department of Justice, dealing, in a highly professional manner, with ethical issues and Freedom of Information Act requests. 
Might a reform of this kind happen in the near future? On the one hand, there is some reason to think that it will. Almost everyone who has thought about it-including almost everyone in Washington-knows that the Act has been a dismal failure, that it creates bad incentives, and that its repeal would be a great service to the nation. Privately, most Members of Congress firmly believe that AND THE INDEPENDENT COUNSEL: ExEcuTivE PowER, ExEcutnvE VICE 1789-1989 (1989). repeal would be desirable. If a secret vote were possible, I suspect that the Act would be repealed by a substantial majority. 
On the other hand, most people now agree that it is far from clear whether the Act will be repealed or allowed to expire. There is a real paradox in the fact that while people privately agree that the Act should be eliminated, many tend to support it in their public capacity. What accounts for this? The answer is illuminating and complex. First, there is an intriguing kind of collective action problem here; any particular official who calls for the Act's repeal might appear to be signalling a lack of concern with violations of the public trust, an excessive alliance with the current administration, or perhaps even his own corruption. The result is that each official, acting in his self-interest, will not call for repeal even when all officials, if able to act in concert, might well support exactly that. 
But there is a further point. It is very hard to repeal any statute designed to produce "ethics in government" after that statute is in place. Public opinion is likely to stand firm against any such repeal; at least influential elements of the public sector might well mobilize in opposition. It is for this reason that even if the collective action problem could be solved and all Members of Congress could make their positions public at the same time, the statute might be preserved. A public outcry from repeal of the Act is entirely possible. Certainly such an outcry is to be expected from the media, with predictable damaging effects. In this way, we have come full circle. 
CONCLUSION 
The principal problem with the Independent Counsel Act is that it imposes predictable and harmful incentives on Members of Congress, the media, and the independent counsel himself. By so doing, it makes all relevant institutions work less well. Congress intended the Act to increase trust in government; instead it has diminished trust in government. The Act aggravates some of the most serious problems in Congress by deflecting attention from substantive issues and turning disputes about policy into allegations of criminality. 
There are other problems, too. From the standpoint of the prospective defendant, the Act eliminates some of the principal safeguards of liberty under law-the fact that a prosecutor has a wide agenda, cannot easily focus on any single person, faces a budget constraint, and will not initiate proceedings against everyone who has committed a technical violation of the law. By contrast, an ordinary prosecutor has a menu of possible crimes to pursue, and must proceed only in the most serious cases. This is an important and overlooked guarantor of personal freedom. The Independent Counsel Act is thus a kind of cruel parody of the achievement of the Founders of the American Constitution, who merged an understanding of incentives and an understanding of appropriate institutions. 
This is not to deny that the Act is a response to a legitimate concern: favoritism in the criminal prosecution of high-level wrongdoing. The problem is genuine. In some democracies, it is a fundamental problem. It is not, however, 1 BAD INCENTIVES AND BAD INSTITUTIONS one of the more serious problems facing American government, either now or in the foreseeable future. The most serious problems involve the actual effects of policies on people's lives; the Act deflects attention from those problems. In any case, official wrongdoing can and should be handled through other, less destructive means. These include impeachment, political controls of the ordinary sort, threats of prosecution from executive authorities, and perhaps new institutions that avoid the risks created by the independent counsel. 
Most people who have explored the subject knows that the Act is a disastrous failure and that it should be repealed. On the merits there is no serious question. The only serious questions are how many people who have explored the subject will be willing to say that this is so, and how many members of Congress will have the courage to say it publicly as well as privately. 
There have been seventeen special prosecutors or independent counsels appointed to investigate wrongdoing by senior government officials since the Ethics in Government Act was passed in 1978. Their jurisdictions, durations, and expenses have grown over the years. As of September 30, 1996, the total cost of the probes, including three still under way, was $ 128.8 million. Carter administration 
Duration: 1979-1980 Counsel: Arthur Christy Issue: Cocaine use Outcome: No charges filed Cost: $ 182,000 
Outcome: No charges filed Cost: $ 3,300 
Duration: 1981-1982 Counsel: Leon Silverman Issue: Lying about ties to organized crime Outcome: No charges filed Cost: $ 326,000 
Duration: 1984 Counsel: Jacob Stein Issue: Incomplete financial disclosure Outcome: No charges filed 
Cost: $ 312,000 
Duration: 1986-1989 Counsel: Alexia Morrison Issue: Lying to Congress Outcome: No charges filed 
Cost: $ 2.1 million Subject: Michael Deaver, White House deputy chief of staff Duration: 1986-1989 Counsel: Whitney North Seymour Issue: Lying about lobbying activities Outcome: Convicted 
Cost: $ 1.6 million 
Duration: 1986-1994 Counsel: Lawrence Walsh Issue: Lying to and obstructing Congress, destroying documents Outcome: 7 guilty pleas; 4 convictions (Oliver North's and John Poindexter's) 
Duration: 1989 Counsel: Sealed Issue: Confidential Outcome: Confidential Cost: $ 15,000 
Duration: 1990-1996 Counsel: Arlin Adams (1990); Larry Thompson (1995) Issue: Influence-peddling by senior HUD officials and others Outcome: 16 convictions 
Cost: $ 26.4 million 
Issue: Confidential Outcome: Confidential Cost: $ 93,000 
Counsel: Robert Fiske (1994); Kenneth Starr (1994) Issue: Whitewater; White House travel office firings; misuse of FBI personnel files Outcome: 9 plea agreements; 3 convictions; 2 acquittals; ongoing. 
Cost: $ 27.3 million Subject: Henry Cisneros, former secretary of Housing and Urban Development Duration: 1995-present Counsel: David Barrett Issue: Lying to FBI about payments to a former mistress Outcome: Ongoing 
Cost: $ 1.9 million 
Duration: 1995-1996 Counsel: Daniel Pearson Issue: Financial improprieties Outcome: Probe closed after Brown's death 
Cost: $ 2.5 million SOURCES: General Accounting Office, CQ research Globe staff chart 
Meese Ell House Counselor 
1984 
Congress 
$182,000 
Justice Scalia's Democratic Formalism 
Cass R. Sunstein t 
INTRODUCTION: RULE-BOUND JUSTICE AND THE STATUTORY STATE In 1982, Guido Calabresi published a provocative book, A Common Law for the Age of Statutes,' based on his Holmes Lectures at Harvard Law School. Judge Calabresi's basic argument was that the common law has certain virtues-above all, flexibility across time and space-that are at serious risk in a statutory era.2 Judge Calabresi's central concern was to find a way to import the values of common law judgment into a legal fabric governed by statutory law. His most dramatic proposal was that courts should be given the authority to declare statutes that were out of step with the prevailing legal landscape void for "obsolescence."3 Judge Calabresi's particular proposal has been very controversial, but it is of a piece with more standard views about statutory construction having common law origins: judge-made exceptions to plain language for absurd results; judicially developed "clear statement" principles; judicial invocation of statutory purpose in a way reminiscent of a precedent's "rationale"; judicial treatment of many statutes as the foundation for judge-made common law; and "dynamic" statutory interpretation.' And * Associate Justice, United States Supreme Court. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor. Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Scott Brewer. Elizabeth Garrett. Jack Goldsmith. Don Herzog, Lawrence Lessig, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Pildes, and Richard Posner for valuable comments on an earlier draft. 
Judge Calabresi's views are reflected in the common law characteristics of much constitutional law, characteristics which have given rise to a general claim, usually meant as both description and praise, that constitutional law is merely a species of Anglo-American common law. 
The central essay in Justice Antonin Scalia's new book,6 based on his Tanner Lectures at Princeton, offers an argument that is in many ways the converse of Judge Calabresi's. Where Judge Calabresi sought to celebrate the common law and to authorize courts to introduce far more of common law thinking into a statutory era, Justice Scalia seeks to demote, even to exorcise, the common law, to complain of its ascendancy in an age committed to the principles of democratic government and the rule of law. Hence the essay's title: Common-Law Courts in a Civil-Law System.7 In Justice Scalia's view, the use of common law methods is simultaneously anachronistic and hubristic. It is anachronistic because it is out of touch with the values and operations of modern government.8 The charge of hubris is the more serious one. Justice Scalia thinks that common law methods compromise democratic values, by allowing judges an excessive role in policymaking.9 He also thinks that common law methods introduce a high degree of unpredictability, increasing judicial discretion and at the same time depriving others, citizens as well as legislators, of a clear background against which to work.'" 
Justice Scalia intends, then, to defend a species of democraticformalism. We might even say that Justice Scalia is the clearest and most self-conscious expositor of democratic formalism in the long history of American law. Justice Scalia is a democrat in the sense that much of his jurisprudence is designed to ensure that judgments are made by those with a superior democratic pedigree. Above all, he seeks to develop rules of interpretation that will limit the policymaking authority and decisional discretion of the judiciary, the least accountable branch of government. Justice Scalia is a formalist in the particular sense that he favors clear rules, seeks to treat statutory and constitutional texts as rules, and distrusts the view that legal texts should be understood by reference either to intentions or to canons of construction that live outside of 1997] men."' authoritative texts."1 
in textualism. Thus Justice Scalia writes: "Of all the criticisms leveled against textualism, the most mindless is that itis 'formalistic.' The answer to that is, of course it's formalistic! The rule of law is about form ... 
formalism. It is what makes a government a government of laws and not of 12 
As a judicial creed, democratic formalism is intelligible and coherent in part because it argues in favor of interpretive principles and statutory default rules that will create a clear background for Congress. in the process imposing the right incentives on lawmakers. Justice Scalia's preferred default rules are intended to make the law readily predictable and to ensure that Congress will legislate in the constitutionally preferred fashion. 
Where does all this leave the common law? For the democrat and for the formalist, the common law raises many doubts. The common law, of course, owes its content not to electoral processes but to decisions by people who are mostly unelected. 3 And common law judges are free to eschew rules and to act on a case-by-case basis. Indeed, the glory of the common law is often said to consist in its particularism-its careful attention to the facts of the particular case, its provision of an individualized hearing for each litigant.' " Justice Scalia's attack on the common law legacy is thus rooted in distrust of particularism-especially judicial particulaism-and in enthusiasm for rulebound interpretation that relies, in both statutory and constitutional interpretation, on a single foundation: the meaning of the relevant legal text as it was understood at the time of enactnent." 
This is an elegant book, and it is a great pleasure to read. My central objection is that Justice Scalia's argument on behalf of democratic formalism does not come to terms with three important problems for democratic formalism: the internal morality of the democratic ideal; the existence of reasonable, alternative, nonformalist approaches to interpretation, designed to limit judicial discretion, promote stability, and enhance democratic self1i.The best discussion of formalism is FREDERICK SCHAUER. PLAYING BY Tiff RULEs (1991) Schauer sees that whether formalism makes sense depends on a pragmatic inquiry. promincntl) involving the capacities of various institutions. See id. at 196-206 A dillerent kind of formalsm-the kind that makes the term "formalism" appropriately an epithct-refers to the masking of a value judgment by relerencc to a judgment of law that actually encodes the value judgment An especially good discussion of this type of formalism is JOSEPH RAZ, ETHics IN THE PUBLIC DOMAIN 314-19 (1996) competing view would say that the common law has a democraic pedigree because and to the extent that it simply tracks custom. There is an interesting current revival of attention to the role ofnorms and genuinely customary law. See, e.g., ROBERT C ELLICKSON, ORDER WIDO7T LAW (1991) words would mean in the mouth of a normal speaker of English. using them in the circumstances in which they were used .... Oliver Wendell Holmes. The Theorn of Legal hlterpreration.12 HARv L REV 417. 417-18 (1899). The view is criticized, by an admirer ofHolmes. in RICHARD A POSNER. THE PROBLEMS OF JURISPRUDENCE 262-69 (1990). government; and (most surprising) the place of administrative agencies in the structure of modem public law. It is not clear that democratic formalism actually promotes democracy, rightly understood. Moreover, there are other ways of limiting judicial power and judicial discretion, ways that are familiar to, even constitutive of, the common law tradition as it has come to be understood in the United States. The principal virtue of democratic formalism is that it may be the best way of promoting predictability, 6 but even here there are reasonable alternatives, and it is far from clear that predictability trumps all other values. 
In a short, vivid essay of this kind, originally presented as a public lecture, Justice Scalia cannot be expected to have laid all doubts to rest, or to have answered all questions in legal theory. But his defense of his own position works too often by hyperbolic slippery slope arguments, by opposing democratic formalism to positions that no one really holds, and most of all by invoking the specter of untrammeled judicial control over political outcomes. It is as if those who reject Justice Scalia's particular approach hope to give, and inevitably will give, unelected judges the power to do whatever they wish. But the choice between democratic formalism and the real alternatives calls for more fine-grained and, in part, empirical judgments about the capacities of real-world institutions. If, for example, judges interpret statutes in accordance with the original meaning of their text, will legislative drafting be improved, and will legislatures correct obvious mistakes? Ifjudges do not use legislative history, might ambiguous texts be interpreted by reference to the judges' own views about policy and principle? Ifjudges abandon the original understanding of the constitutional text, are there alternative positions that would limit judicial discretion and allow appropriate space for electoral politics? And just what is the role of administrative agencies, which might, in a post-Chevron7 era, perform, and be authorized to perform, the role formerly carried out by common law courts? Justice Scalia's silence on the last question is especially disappointing: At this stage in American history, no treatment of legal interpretation is complete if it neglects the enormous de facto and de jure interpretive function of administrative agencies. 
If a goal of a system of interpretation is to constrain judicial discretion, and particularly if we attend to the role of regulatory agencies, it is far from clear that Justice Scalia's approach is superior to the alternatives actually favored by the American tradition of public law. And if (as Justice Scalia rightly insists) a goal of a system of legal interpretation is to promote democratic self-government, it is not at all clear that Justice Scalia's approach change over time, and because there may be hard questions in deciding how to understand original meaning when facts and values have changed. See infra text accompanying notes 137-144 (discussing FDA regulation of tobacco products). 
is better than that favored by our tradition, which uses interpretive principles to promote democratic goals, not only in the area of statutory construction but also in administrative and constitutional law. A great defect of democratic formalism is that it identifies democracy with whatever happens to emerge from majoritarian politics. If we insist (with the Constitution's Framers)'" that there is a difference between a well-functioning system of deliberative democracy and simple majoritarian politics, we may well favor principles of interpretation that promote that very system, perhaps by allowing administrative agencies some license to adjust text to circumstance, certainly through "clear statement" principles, and not least by invalidating outcomes that are inconsistent with what we might consider the internal morality of democracy. 
In any case, this will be my basic argument here. Part I summarizes Justice Scalia's essay. Part II deals with the topic of statutory interpretation-Justice Scalia's particular passion and the highlight of his essay here. This part outlines the stakes, explores the great case of Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States, 9 and examines the role of administrative agencies in legal interpretation. Its principal theme is that Justice Scalia's discussion neglects the possibility that administrative agencies can discharge some of the functions of common law courts without compromising democratic values. Part III explores the Constitution. It argues that the interests in ensuring stability, constraining judicial discretion, and promoting democratic self-government do argue for some version of the principles of stare decisis and judicial restraint, but not the particular form of originalism favored by Justice Scalia. 
I. AGAINST THE COMMON LAW 
The principal essay in A Matter ofInterpretationcomes in three parts. The first part is an attack on the common law. The second part is a discussion of statutory interpretation. The third part deals with constitutional law. A. Broken-Field Runners 
Justice Scalia's discussion of the common law is sharp, clever, and at times hilarious. In some ways it amounts to an indictment of legal education. Justice Scalia thinks that the first year of law school has "an enormous impact upon the mind,"' and much of that impact comes from the student's immersion in judge-made common law. There is a difference, for Justice Scalia, between law that is common in the sense of "customary" and law that by the Framers on democratic deliberation and rellection) is "common" in the sense that it is the creation of judges. That latter form of law is not created through practice but is the stuff of law schools, hypotheticals, and analogical thinking: 
What intellectual fun all of this is! It explains why first-year law school is so exhilarating: because it consists of playing common-law judge, which in turn consists of playing king-devising, out of the brilliance of one's mind, those laws that ought to govern mankind. How excitinogw!n2' The student comes to have a distinctive picture of the great judge, with a large influence on American legal culture, as-the person who has the intelligence to discern the best rule of law for the case at hand and then the skill to perform the broken-field running through earlier cases that leaves him free to impose that rule: distinguishing one prior case on the left, straight-arming another one on the right, high-stepping away from another precedent about to tackle him from the rear, until (bravo!) he reaches the goal-good law.22 
What is wrong with this picture? Justice Scalia thinks that the problem is simple: "a trend in government that has developed in recent centuries, called democracy. ' 23 Legal realism has taught us what is now obvious, that common law judges make and do not find law. This does not mean the common law should be eliminated from its own domain, but it does mean the attitude of common law judges is inappropriate for most of the work of federal judges and much of the work of state judges. 24 "We live in an age of legislation, and most new law is statutory law."5 And the common law method has two basic problems. First, it is insufficiently democratic, since it threatens rule by judges.26 Second, the common law method is insufficiently formal, because it is too highly particularistic, too unpredictable, too rule-free. 27 B. "What a Waste" 
Justice Scalia brings these points to bear on the topic of statutory interpretation, a real highlight of the book and clearly one of his passions.28 His basic complaint is that American judges and academics 'are unconcerned with the fact that we have no intelligible theory" of statutory construction. "' His central claim is that what matters is the objective meaning of the text, not the subjective intentions of Congress. "It is the law that governs, not the intent of the lawgiver."" Interpretation actually turns on "a sort of 'objectified' intent-the intent that a reasonable person would gather from the text of the law, placed alongside the remainder of the corpus juris."" Because subjective intent is so murky, Justice Scalia thinks that its use risks substitution of judicial policy preferences for those of the legislature. 
His case in chief in this regard is Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States.32 There the Court held, contrary to the apparently plain language of the governing statute banning the importation of foreign labor, that a church could pay for the transportation of a rector to the United States." Justice Scalia reads Holy Trinity (not at all unreasonably) as a case about the substitution of legislative intent for text. In his view, what the church did violated "the letter of the statute, and was therefore within the statute: end of case." Thus Justice Scalia adopts textualism. But he offers two important clarifications. First, he disfavors "strict construction": "I am not a strict constructionist, and no one ought to be ....." Textualists give to the text its ordinary meaning, construing it neither broadly nor narrowly. Nor does Justice Scalia favor literalism.36 He emphasizes that meaning is a function of context. What he urges is that courts should refuse to go beyond the range of meaning offered by a reasonable understanding of statutory terms, taken in their context. 
Justice Scalia is aware that some cases involve a fairly wide range of textual meanings, and that the text can leave ambiguities. What aids are permissible? It is entirely acceptable to interpret statutory terms with structural aids, resolving ambiguities so as to make statutes both internally consistent and consistent with previously enacted laws. His textualism is thus supplemented with the structure of the relevant statute and indeed the structure of the law as a whole.37 Eskridge and Philip Fnckey. See ESKRIDGE. 3tpra note 4. WILLA,i N ESKRIiDGI-. JR & PHILIP P FRICKEY, CASES AND MATERIALS ON LEGISLATION STATL-IS AND Tlu- CRi-ATioN 0F PLBLIC PoLIC" (2d ed. 1995). 
6, at 134. Page 134 offers a gloss on pages 16-17. in response toTribe's commentarN See LaurenceiH Tribe, Comment, inA NATTER OF INTERPRETATION. aupra note 6. at 81 
Justice Scalia also defends canons of construction as legitimate and helpful to the extent that they are common sense ways of understanding the meaning of text. This is true of the ancient canons with Latin names, such as the old favorite, expressio unius est exclusio alterius (expression of the one is exclusion of the other). In urging the use of such canons, Justice Scalia takes a stand against Karl Llewellyn's famous attempt to demolish the canons by showing that for every canon there is an equal canon pointing in the opposite direction.3" Justice Scalia says, very reasonably, that there are not really opposites on almost every point, and he thinks that the most that Llewellyn has shown is that the canons are not absolute,39 which is not exactly news. 
Justice Scalia is much less enthusiastic about substantive canons and presumptions, as in the idea that courts should construe statutes favorably to Native Americans, leniently on behalf of criminal defendants, narrowly if they are in derogation of the common law, narrowly if they waive sovereign immunity, and so forth. For textualists, substantive canons are "a lot of trouble." They lack clear legitimacy (because it is not clear where courts get the authority to use them), and they have indeterminate weight, thus increasing the unpredictability and possible arbitrariness ofjudicial decision. On the other hand, some substantive presumptions may be reasonable if they attempt to get at meaning or if they have the warrant of antiquity. Thus, extraordinary acts, like the congressional elimination of state sovereign immunity or perhaps the waiver of sovereign immunity, require a clear statement, because that is what one would expect were extraordinary acts intended. And the rule of lenity may be justified by its age. But others, like the rule that statutes in derogation of the common law will be narrowly construed, look like "a sheer judicial power' 41 grab. 
For a long time, Justice Scalia has been critical of judicial use of legislative history.42 Here he makes two central points. First, legislative intent is not the proper basis of interpretation, and hence legislative history focuses judicial attention on the wrong question,43 away from meaning and toward subjective understandings of meaning. Second, use of history involves a lot of time and expense, and it is "more likely to produce a false or contrived legislative intent than a genuine one."" This is because there is in 99.99% of cases no such thing, and the archives are unreliable in any case. "In the only case I recall in which, had I followed legislative history, I would have come About How StatutesAre To Be Construed,3 VAND. L. REv. 395, 401-06 (1950). 

(Scalia, J., concurring). 

out the other way, the rest of my colleagues (who did use legislative history) did not come out the other way either.... What a waste."5 C. "A Rock-Solid, Unchanging Constitution" 
Constitutional interpretation, for Justice Scalia, is a place not for special principles but for the usual ones just described. His basic argument is that the Constitution's meaning is set not by the original intention but by the original meaning of its text. Alexander Hamilton and James Madison receive attention not because they were Framers whose subjective intentions matter, but because they (no more than John Jay and Thomas Jefferson, who were not Framers) can help us identify the original meaning. For Justice Scalia, originalism opposes those who think, in common law fashion, that the Constitution is "living" and should be understood by reference to "current" meaning.' The notion of a "living constitution" is an invitation to the broken-field running characteristic of common law thinking, or decision by reference to cases instead of authoritative text. Justice Scalia particularly deplores the fact that constitutional law is made after consulting recent cases rather than original intention. For Justice Scalia, the result is "a common-law way of making law, and not the way of construing a democratically adopted text."4'7 The consequence is that the Constitution means whatever the judges think it should mean. 
Against the view that the "living constitution" is necessary to promote flexibility over time, Justice Scalia argues that the "living constitution" approach actually reduces the capacity for democratic experimentation, by allowing judges to prevent elected officials from engaging in new experiments.48 Against the view that the "living constitution" is necessary to protect an ample category of rights, Justice Scalia argues that it need not increase the category of rights at all. In many cases-property rights, Second Amendment rights,49 Confrontation Clause rights--originalism offers a more expansive rather than less expansive understanding of rights." That understanding may be ill-suited to current social desires. But it is emphatically not a truncated understanding of rights. 
Justice Scalia's fundamental objections to a common law understanding of the Constitution are that it lacks legitimacy and that it is too discretionary. Freed from the original meaning, judges consult their own judgments of policy 
the constitutional validity of gun control laws at the national lcvcl See Scalia..iupra note 7. ,at 43 and principle and are effectively untethered. "[T]here is no agreement, and no chance of agreement, upon what is to be the guiding principle of the evolution., 52 To be sure, originalists disagree among themselves; history can be ambiguous and, importantly, as Justice Scalia notes, there are questions about applying the original meaning to "new and unforeseen phenomena," such as sound trucks and television.53 But these are minor problems compared to those raised when people who, believing in a "living constitution," take the Constitution to mean what it should and hence authorize judges to understand the Constitution to be whatever "the majority wants."54 "This, of course, is the end of the Bill of Rights, whose meaning will be committed to the very body it was meant to protect against: the majority. By trying to make the Constitution do everything that needs doing ... we shall have caused it to do nothing at all." 55 
A. Interpretive 
Restraint 
Goals: Decisional Burdens, Stability, Democracy, and 
What are the goals of Justice Scalia's approach to interpretation? 56 One goal is to reduce the sheer costs of decision, so that the burden on courts and litigants is relatively low. A closely related goal is to make law relatively certain and predictable, so that people know where they stand and do not have to puzzle much over the content of law. Yet another goal is to control the discretion of those institutions whom we trust least or fear most. A system of interpretation might well be designed to reduce the role of courts in establishing social policies or governing principles, certainly if it seems that courts ought not to be entrusted with that kind of business. 7 Justice Scalia thinks that his version of textualism will effectively control judicial power, while at the same time increasing the policymaking primacy of the legislature, in part by giving it appropriate incentives. If, for example, legislative history will not be used, legislators will be under considerable pressure to increase 
STAN. L. REv. 395 (1995) (arguing that maintaining interpretive fidelity with past understandings of the Constitution may require adapting old readings to new social reality). I do not discuss that kind of objection here, though some of what I say below bears on it. See infra text accompanying notes 137-146. 
theory of authority or the accompanying claim that reference to lawmaker intention is therefore a part of the appropriate theory of interpretation. See ANDREI MARMOR,INTERPRETATION AND LEGAL THEORY 11323 (1992). Scalia's general approach might be aided by assessing claims of this sort. 
principles. See, e.g., ALEXANDER M. BICKEL, THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH 23-33 (1962); RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 375 (1986). statutory clarity. These points are about reducing the burdens of decision and the costs of uncertainty. 
But Justice Scalia seeks most fundamentally to promote democratic selfgovernment and the primacy of the system of lawmaking set out in Article I of the Constitution. The reduction of judicial discretion via textualism serves both of these fundamental goals. 58 In so doing, democratic formalism ensures that statutory and constitutional provisions will not be given "spirits" and "purposes" attributable to the (unenacted) political morality of any particular era. A ban on "dynamic" interpretation, and a requirement of fidelity to enacted law, ensures that courts will not bow to political will or bend statutes to prevailing political winds except to the extent that they have produced actual legislation.5 9 
It is worth speculating about why and how Justice Scalia, educated at Harvard Law School in the era of Hart and Sacks,' actually came to this position. Henry Hart and Albert Sacks, of course, saw continuity between the common law and statutory interpretation; they placed a large emphasis on the collaborative role of courts, not least in the process of statutory interpretation, which they thought was best rooted in identification of statutory "purpose," supplemented by an array of judge-made clear statement principles."' Justice Scalia has suggested that years ago he was sympathetic to this position, or at least to judicial particularism. 6 2 
We may speculate" t that Justice 
Scalia's self-professed shift in view may have emerged from the nation's experience with both particularism and purposive interpretation in the period between, say, 1965 and the present. In this period, particularism occasionally has produced a high degree of confusion, as case-by-case decisions allow judges to have of it which may be involved; and then 
best it can, making sure, however, that it does not give the words either(a) a meaning they will not bear, or (b) a meaning which would violate any established polic% o cleasrtatement Id. at 1374. 
Scalia's own experience, at least it might be said to reflect the possible expenente of some people disaffected with the use of statutory purpose or with common law decisionmaking in public lass continuing room to maneuver and make predictability hard to maintain. 
Perhaps even worse, resort to statutory and, above all, constitutional purpose has led Justices in directions that, by Justice Scalia's lights, must seem highly ideological-much less a matter of finding something than a matter of making things up.64 And what is made up might well seem to reflect the views of a "new class" of intellectuals having political commitments very different from those of Justice Scalia himself and perhaps the nation as a whole. 
In brief: When particularism and purposivism invite courts to take stands on the great issues of the day, or on "Kulturkampf,"65 formalism reemerges as an appealing alternative.66 A shift from particularism and purposivism to formalism represents a natural odyssey for students of Hart and Sacks, disappointed by personal experience with an apparently ideological, particularistic, and purposive judiciary, and seeking to impose sharp constraints on judicial discretion.67 Some help in this regard emerges from work in cognitive psychology suggesting that people often overstate the value of caseby-case, intuitionistic judgments, and understate the value of (admittedly somewhat crude) rules.68 
What I will be arguing here is that, despite appearances, Justice Scalia's argument cannot really rely on abstract or a priori claims about Article I of the Constitution or on arguments about democratic rule.69 Those claims do not support Justice Scalia's distinctive approach. Instead, that approach must be defended by a set of pragmatic and empirical claims about various governmental institutions and how those institutions are likely to respond to J., dissenting); Romer v. Evans, 116 S.Ct. 1620, 1629 (1996) (Scalia, J., dissenting); J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel T.B., 511 U.S. 127, 156 (1994) (Scalia, J., dissenting). These are recent cases, but the same general point holds, for many observers, as the general symbol of the Warren Court. 
(discussing Hitler's judges). 
whereas another response involves general claims of indeterminacy or of the illusory character of the distinction between law and politics. It will emerge from the discussion that I believe both of these responses are inadequate. 
interpretation in extending the agenda of the Nazi party. The German judges read longstanding statutes consistently with the prevailing political order, both purposively and dynamically, in a way that very much promoted Hitler's goals. MUlIler's book is a valuable warning about the ideological uses of purposive interpretation and the possible advantages, from the standpoint of liberty, of formalism; it casts Scalia's argument in a vividly appealing light. If formalism is less appealing for America than it was for Germany during or immediately after the Nazi era, it is because of America's common law tradition, which embeds an enduring political morality that can hardly be treated as a transient pathology, and which contains values that are compatible with both democracy and the rule of law. Consider, for example, background principles requiring criminal statutes to be construed leniently, see, e.g., United States v. R.L.C., 503 U.S. 291, 305-06 (1992), or so as not to raise serious constitutional doubts, see, e.g., Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 128-30 (1958). I am grateful to Richard Pildes for referring me to Maller's book and for helpful discussion of the issues in this paragraph. 
Perspectiveon Risk Taking, 39 MGMT. SCI. 17, 19-20 (1993). 
different interpretive strategies. Justice Scalia does not defend those pragmatic and empirical claims. Thus, he has not shown that his approach is preferable to reasonable alternatives, including those that stress the role of administrative agencies in the modem state. 
The most basic point is that no context-free view of legal interpretation will make much sense. 7' And while judgments about the future are inevitably speculative, America's own experience, with its distinctive history, suggests that democratic formalism is likely to be inferior to the alternatives actually favored by the American legal tradition. 7' We might take this to be a neoBurkean point, intended as a challenge to Justice Scalia's neo-Benthamite attack on the common law.72 
It is highly revealing in this connection that there is a substantial overlap between the interpretive practices of common law and civil law courts, each of which uses similar presumptions and canons, not only linguistic but also substantive.73 Thus, Justice Scalia's attack on common law practices cannot easily survive an encounter with civil law systems, whose courts are only intermittently textualist, and which are permeated by interpretive practices of the kind he disfavors.74 
ANGLOAMERICAN LAW 298-335 (1987). which connects different styles of interpretation to differences in legislatures in America and England. 
REv. 845, 868-74 (1992), for a similar conclusion on a point stressed by Justice Scalia One qualification is necessary: Our own legal tradition has yet to come to terms with the sca-change inaugurated by the rise of administrative agencies, and that development calls for some new analysts. See infra text accompanying notes 123-125. It is here, for example, that Judge Calabresi's proposal might be faulted on the ground that the principal updating role should come from regulatory agencies Bur see CALABRESi. supra note I. at 56 ("To allow the truly dependent agency to act to update our laws would, in fact, be to cut through our checks and balances by allowing a majoritarian but unrestrained executive to enforce its vievs of the popular will .... "). 
movement, see Scalia, supra note 7, at 11-12. Bentham's own view on the role of common law particularism was quite complex. See GERALD POSTEMIA. BEN'HAM AND THE COMiMON LAw TRADmITON 440-64 (1986). 
222 (D. Neil MacCormick & Robert S. Summers eds.. 1991): D. Neil MacCormick & Robert S Summers. Interpretationand Justification,in INTERPRETING STATUrS. supra. at 511. 514-15. 518-21. 535-39. Robert S. Summers & Michele Taruffo. Interpretationand Comparative Analysis. in IrT-.RPRETING STATUTI.S. supra, at 461, 468-69, 485-86. 
73, at 123, 142-43; Robert Alexy & Ralf Dreicr, Statutory Interpretation tn the Federal Republic of Germany, in INTERPRETING STATUTES. supra note 73. at 73. 90; La Torte et al ,supra note 73. at 213. 22223, 244; Michel Troper et. al., Statutory Interpretationiit France,tii INTERPRI-.ING STATUTI-S. supra note 73, at 171, 189; see also Summers & Taruffo, supra note 73. at 485 (suggesting that when there is "a conflict between an argument from ordinary or technical meaning, on the one hand. and the argument that this meaning leads to an absurd or manifestly unjust result, on the other." the "latter argument is recognized in virtually every system in our study, though not always in the same form"), id at 486 (suggesting that "[w]ithin limits, the higher courts of all countries in our study adjust the ordinary or technical meaning of a statute to take due account of its datedness or obsolescence Iso] Itihe theory would appear to be that the force or weight of any 'old' meaning is outweighed"). 
Holy Trinity, Excessive Generality,and Presumptions 
Let us approach these points by focusing on Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States7,5 Justice Scalia's bete noire. The Holy Trinity case raises a large number of the issues dealt with in Justice Scalia's discussion of statutory interpretation; by discussing Holy Trinity, we can discuss many of the issues raised in the book. In 1885, largely in response to an influx of immigrant labor, Congress made it unlawful for any person, company, partnership, or corporation, in any manner whatsoever, to prepay the transportation, or in any way assist or encourage the importation or migration of any alien or aliens, any foreigner or foreigners, into the United States ... under contract or agreement, parol or special, express or implied, made previous to the importation or migration of such alien or aliens, foreigner or foreigners, to perform labor or service of any kind in the United States .... 76 The problem arose because the Church of the Holy Trinity made a contract with E. Walpole Warren, an alien residing in England, to pay for his transportation to the United States, where he was to work as a rector and pastor. The United States claimed that the church had acted unlawfully.77 The Supreme Court disagreed. It said that the text of the statute was not controlling.78 
The Court's opinion was very complex, with multiple strands. It can be read in three different ways, each with support in the opinion itself. 
(1) General language will not be taken to produce an outcome that would, in context, be absurd, at least if there is no affirmative evidence that this result was intended by the enacting legislature. 
[F]requently words of general meaning are used in a statute, words broad enough to include an act in question, and yet a consideration of the whole legislation, or of the circumstances surrounding its enactment, or of the absurd results which follow from giving such broad meaning to the words, makes it unreasonable to believe that the legislator intended to include the particular act.79 On this view, Holy Trinity is a rerun of the famous case of Riggs v. Palmer," in which the New York Court of Appeals held that a statute governing 
1997] inheritance would not be interpreted to allow a nephew to inherit from his uncle's will when the uncle's death resulted from his murder at the nephew's hands.8 
(2) General language will not be taken to produce an outcome that was clearly not intended by the enacting legislature, as those intentions are revealed by context, including legislative history. 
[A]nother guide to the meaning of a statute is found in the evil which it is designed to remedy; and for this the court properly looks at contemporaneous events, the situation as it existed, and as it was pressed upon the attention of the legislative body ... 
. . . It appears . .. in the testimony presented before the committees of Congress, that it was this cheap unskilled labor which was making the trouble .... 
... We find, therefore, that the title of the act, the evil which was intended to be remedied, the circumstances surrounding the appeal to Congress, the reports of the committee of each house, all concur in affirming that the intent of Congress was simply to stay the influx of this cheap unskilled labor8. 2 On this view, Holy Trinity advocates legislative history and consideration of legislative intent. 
(3) General language will not be taken to depart from longstanding social understandings and practices, at least or especially if the departure would raise serious constitutional doubts. 
[N]o purpose of action against religion can be imputed to any legislation, state or national, because this is a religious people. This is historically true. ... 
. . [S]hall it be believed that a Congress of the United States intended to make it a misdemeanor for a church of this country to contract for the services of a Christian minister residing in another nation?83 On this view, the background tradition of religious liberty operates as a "clear statement" principle, one that requires Congress to speak unambiguously if it wishes to intrude on that tradition. Congress will not be taken to have barred a church from paying for the transportation of a rector unless there is affirmative evidence that Congress intended to do precisely that. Congress will not be taken to have interfered with religious liberty through inadvertence or loose language. 

Justice Scalia appears to think that each of these three principles is wrong, certainly as applied to Holy Trinity.84 Let us take up these principles in turn. 
Understood according to principle (I), Holy Trinity presents a familiar, even mundane problem, that is, the problem introduced by linguistic generality. In a famous passage, 
Wittgenstein describes the problem in this way: "Someone says to me: 'Shew [sic] the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says, 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order?"8 5 
Wittgenstein's clear implication is that it need not. 
In daily communication, and without thinking about it, we carve out exceptions from general language;86 we do not consult the dictionary meaning of the words and act in accordance with what we find there. It is tempting to respond that there is a difference between daily communication and a legislative command; perhaps the latter should be presumed not to be sloppy. But this response misses the point, which has nothing to do with sloppiness and everything to do with the cognitive limits of human beings. Because of the inevitable limitations of human foresight, even the most carefully chosen words can become unclear because and not in spite of their generality.87 Textualists who fail to see this point can be found only in science fiction novels populated by androids and aliens,88 whose misunderstandings and befuddlement are a direct consequence of their textualism. Now, Justice Scalia is not a literalist; he is at See Scalia, supra note 7, at 20 n.22 (acknowledging a role for principle (3) but seeing it as inapplicable to Holy Trinity); see also Green v. Bock Laundry Mach. Co., 490 U.S. 504, 528 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment) (arguing for statutory interpretation based on context, ordinary usage, and compatibility with surrounding law). 
1960) (1953). 
quickly and naturally. For example, "Don't bother me during the next hour" (but what if the house catches fire?), or "Clean up your room completely" (but what if a certain level of messiness is standard in the family?). 
[W]e are men, not gods; it is a feature of the human predicament (and so of the legislative one) that we labour under two connected handicaps whenever we seek to regulate, unambiguously and in advance, some sphere of conduct by means of general standards tobe used without further official direction on particular occasions. The first handicap is our relative ignorance of fact; the second is our relative indeterminacy of aim. If the world in which we live were characterized only by a finite number of features, and these together with all the modes in which they combine were known to us, then provision could be made in advance for every possibility .... Plainly this world is not our world; human legislators can have no such knowledge of all possible combinations of circumstances which the future may bring. This inability to anticipate things brings with it a relative indeterminacy of aim. 
Id. at 128. 
by consulting the dictionary definitions of each word (assume these definitions are stored in his brain) and the relevant grammatical and syntactical principles."). Science fiction enthusiasts may wish to consider Star Trek's android character Data. See Star Trek: The Next Generation (Paramount syndicated television broadcast). pains to distinguish textualism from literalism, and he knows that the meaning of text is a function of context. But once we insist on that point, just why is principle (1) so bad? Why is it not an ordinary application of the idea that the meaning of words depends on context? 
Perhaps Justice Scalia would respond that this principle increases the costs of decisions for judges; perhaps an approach that takes Congress "at its word" produces more mechanical (simpler, more predictable) jurisprudence. Perhaps Justice Scalia would add that absurdity is in the eye of the beholder, so that principle (I) also introduces risks of error in the form of judicial misjudgments about what counts as absurd. And perhaps Justice Scalia would insist that Congress would respond well to his approach to Holy Trinity. Knowledge of judicial refusal to make exceptions for absurdity might increase legislative care with drafting and thus decrease excessive generality before the fact. Or perhaps Congress would respond promptly and effectively to mistakes introduced by excessive generality; Congress would therefore correct the outcome in Holy Trinity if it really objects. 9 If all this is true, Justice Scalia's approach would produce few mistakes, and those mistakes that it does produce would find easy correction.90 
If we understand Justice Scalia's argument to be defensible in these terms, 9' the debate over principle (1) is really a debate about the costs of decision and the costs of error.92 More particularly, it is a special case of the debate over rules and standards. The Holy Trinity Court treated the text of the statute as a kind of standard, inviting inquiry into underlying purposes. Justice Scalia wants to treat it as a kind of rule, fully specifying outcomes in advance. The dispute cannot be resolved on the basis of abstractions." It is better to ask about which approach will (roughly speaking) minimize the costs of decision and the costs of error. Justice Scalia can be taken to suggest that his approach will reduce the sum of aggregate decision costs and aggregate error costs, and under imaginable assumptions, he is entirely right. 
Eskridge, Jr., Overriding Supreme Court Statutory hiterprerationDectwor. 101 YALE LJ 331 (1991) context in which that formalism may make sense. highly professional drafting and a responsive Parliament ready and willing to correct errors after they have arisen See ATYAH & SuhistiFRS. supra note 70. at 104. 315-23. 
statute means. 
be made about which errors are worst, both qualitatively and quantitatively There is also a question about what counts as an error at all. Perhaps Justice Scalia would contend that his approach-textualism-produces no errors. But this begs the question by defining errors as whatever emerges from other approaches. To be sure, it is not clear that errors can be defined as such apirt from some antecedent account of appropriate interpretation I am attempting to build on the common intuition that an interpreter blunders if he interprets a word to produce an outcome that would generally be taken as absurd. 
formalism as a possible approach to interpretation 
But are the assumptions correct? This is far from obvious. Perhaps a judicial role of the sort suggested in Holy Trinity will not introduce much uncertainty; perhaps cases in which textual generality produces absurdity are few in number and easily recognized as such. If so, principle (1)may not much increase decision costs, and it may greatly reduce error (understood as such if the outcome would be by general agreement absurd). And perhaps it is very hard for legislatures to anticipate cases of this kind in advance-and also costly and complex for legislatures, with so much business to transact, to spend all the resources necessary to fix the errors of excessive generality. Formalism may decrease costs at the judicial level while also increasing costs, perhaps dramatically, at the legislative level. If all this is true, Holy Trinity is right as an example of principle (1). 
If we are talking about the modem state, it makes sense to say that administrative agencies should be permitted to act as the Court did in Holy Trinity (a point to which I will return94). And a reasonable assessment of the practical issues would suggest that courts should feel free to make exceptions for applications that seem unquestionably absurd. Then the question would be whether the application in Holy Trinity falls in that category. To know that, we have to know some cjetails, but certainly it cannot be said that the outcome is implausible or an abuse. 
Justice Scalia is correct in objecting to principle (2) if he understands that principle to suggest that clearly expressed legislative history (in, for example, committee reports) should trump clearly expressed text. He is also right to say that the text, and not the history, is the law; no one should doubt that point. And it is sensible for Justice Scalia to insist on a distinction between subjective intent (something actually in the minds of legislators) and "objectified intent," understood as "the intent that a reasonable person would gather from the text of the law, placed alongside the remainder of the corpus juris.' 95 But suppose that we do not trouble ourselves with the complexities of psychological inquiry into the subjective intentions of collective decisionmaking bodies, and suppose that we use legislative history only in cases of interpretive doubt, not because it is "the law" but because it helps identify the meaning of the law. Suppose too that interpretive doubt can be created either by ambiguous terms or by what appears to be excessive generality. Here legislative history would matter for the same reason that Madison and Hamilton matter. Words are hard to understand without some conception of their purpose, and the distinction between purpose and intention (suitably "objectified") is thin. 
Indeed, textualism itself cannot do without some crucial subjective elements. Recall that meaning is, for Justice Scalia, to be determined by 
1997] exploring what was commonly understood at the time of enactment. But common understandings are best uncovered by figunng out what people thought. Thus the movement from "intentions" to "ineaning," while entirely sensible, is not a movement from something (entirely) subjective to something (entirely) objective. If the question is what relevant people understood a term to mean, legislative history may well be useful. Of course, legislative history should not be used when it is uninformative, or when it is so extensive and broad that a judge is using it not to figure out what Congress meant, but instead to support judicial policy preferences. Of course the text has priority, and it is right to insist that what appears in the legislative history may be the view of one side in a debate, or of a private interest group unable to get its way with Congress.97 But these points do not support a bar on use of legislative history; they lead in the direction of pragmatism and caution." 
Justice Scalia's suggestion that the use of legislative history is akin to "posting edicts high up on the pillars, so that they could not easily be read"" is certainly relevant, but standing alone it cannot carry much weight. Citizens do not always have easy access to statutory text (ask a nonlawyer neighbor to track down 42 U.S.C. § 7521j)(2)(B)(ii), by, say, tomorrow morning), and those who can find the text can often, without expending a lot more effort, find the history. And where there are amnbiguities and doubts, might it not be better to look at legislative history than to consult dictionaries, or one's own views about policy and principle, at least if the ordinary meaning of the term, taken in its context, is what governs? Why might not legislative history be useful in showing that the term in question is not sensibly interpreted to cover the problem at hand? 
These questions need hardly be taken as decisive. We can imagine a world in which resort to legislative history would be more trouble than it is worth, because courts and legislatures, in that world, would respond well if courts relied only on text and applicable canons of construction. In that imaginable world, legislative history would not be very helpful (because it would be impossibly ambiguous); courts would use legislative history to reach the results that they liked best, which (let us suppose) would be independently very bad; and the use of legislative history would have unfortunate effects on the legislature by discouraging it from legislating clearly. Perhaps some state court systems do not use legislative history for this reason,'" and what Justice Scalia says helps support their practice. But we can also imagine a legal a good example. 
OF LAWS 5 (1972) ("Use of legislative history by the statceourts has .one more sloppaInd is stimlulch less extensive than in the federal courts ") culture in which legislative history helps to discipline judges, by giving them a sense of context and purpose, without creating serious problems at the legislative stage. There is no way to know whether, in the abstract, the use of legislative history is good or bad. So long as courts proceed sensibly, first principles involving political legitimacy cannot resolve that question. Whether it makes sense to use legislative history depends on such issues as the simple costs of using the history, the likelihood that it will increase rather than decrease errors, the availability of other more reliable sources of meaning, and the consequences for the legislature itself of using legislative history or not using it. 
Justice Scalia is convincing in urging that legislative text and structure deserve priority. He is right to say that courts have often misused legislative history and that the use of history can increase costs of decision while also creating more rather than fewer mistakes. Certainly a movement in the direction of a firm judicial principle of textual primacy would make a good deal of sense."' But he has not demonstrated that where other sources of meaning leave doubt, courts should not consult legislative history. Perhaps a legal system starting from scratch would do best to forbid courts from consulting history. Perhaps American public law would be better if a ban on the use of history were enacted; this is far from implausible. But in light of our longstanding traditions, a dramatic shift of the sort proposed by Justice Scalia bears a heavy burden of justification, and he has not met that burden here. 
What about principle (3)? Justice Scalia does not discuss it in any detail. But it is not hard to imagine how clear statement rules might be defended. Justice Scalia willingly acknowledges that extraordinary acts are not expected and that courts should not find such acts unless there is clear indication that they were intended;" 2 this idea is part of a defense of principle (3). Justice Scalia also insists that courts should try to fit ambiguous texts with the rest of existing law, and Holy Trinity was written very much in this spirit. 3 And there is a third possible defense of principle (3); it has to do with the nondelegation doctrine, whose purpose is to ensure that legislatures, rather than bureaucracies or courts, actually make the most important decisions of policy.' 4 Perhaps courts should require Congress-not the executive branch-to decide, with particularity, if it wants to force judges to resolve a serious constitutional problem. On this view, vague or general language should not be taken to require judicial resolution of a hard constitutional judgment; there is too great a likelihood that, if it is so taken, Congress itself will not have thought about the constitutional issue at all. Certainly it is most unlikely 
(1990). 
1997] that the Congress that enacted the statute at issue in Holy Trinity actually decided to apply the ban on importation of labor to churches."' 
Of course, the nondelegation doctrine is effectively dead, in part because courts cannot easily enforce it." But many clear statement principles or substantive canons-prominently including the principle requiring Congress to speak clearly if it wants to raise a serious constitutional problem-can be seen as narrower, more modest, more targeted nondelegation doctrines. The basic defense of principle (3) is that it has a democracy-forcing character. It requires the national legislature to make a highly focused decision, reflecting its own choices about constitutionally sensitive issues. Many substantive canons of construction have this purpose. They are designed to ensure that the legislature focuses with particularity on some issue, largely for reasons with roots in the Constitution, American history, or both. Thus, ambiguous statutes will be read so as not to preempt state law, or favorably to Native Americans, or so as not to apply extraterritorially, or favorably to criminal defendants, or so as not to intrude on the traditional authority of the President.' 
We can agree that the statutory text deserves priority over legislative history and that courts should ordinarily rely on a reasonable understanding of the text at the time of enactment. But Justice Scalia provides no convincing argument against principles (1), (2), or (3). A general conclusion follows. Any approach to statutory interpretation depends on judgments, partly pragmatic and empirical in nature, about the capacities of both courts and legislatures, and about the likely effects on both institutions of different interpretive approaches.' Those who endorse principles (1), (2), and (3), or imaginable cousins and variations, have to defend those principles against the objection that they increase uncertainty (thus jeopardizing rule of law values) and also the number and magnitude of mistakes. Justice Scalia's approach must be defended not only on the ground that it increases certainty (a reasonable proposition, though a questionable one if textual ambiguity is pervasive) but also on the ground that it will not lead to errors that are large in number and subjective intentions, and for legitimate reasons I make this point here not to support psychological investigation but to say that the generality of the statute should not be taken to suggest that the relevant words, understood tn accordance wtth "objectified intent." would have been understood to apply to churches within the relevant community--that ts, the ordinary audience ol the statute 3, at 323-28. 
statutory terms seem to invite changes of a sort, and thus Congress sometimes seems to ,.ontemplate changed readings. Dynamic interpretation, undertaken with regard to statutory purposes, might be justified as part of the interpretive project, on roughly the same ground as Riggs t Paulier. 22 N E 188 (N Y 1889). See supra text accompanying notes 80-81, 95-101 O1 course a great deal tums on w.hat the statute actually says. Some statutes, understood in accordance with their original meaning. .,all for dynamic interpretation; some do not; and sometimes there is no clear understanding one way or the other For discussions of this, see ESKRIDGE, %upranote 4, at 9-105. and CASS R SUNsTI-LN. AM-'R T'. RIGHTS REVOLUTION 174-78 (1990). serious in magnitude. A good deal turns on the likely performance of courts and legislatures and on legislators' responsiveness to judicial interpretation. 
Justice Scalia has offered only the beginning of a defense in the necessary terms. He does not show that the actual practices of American courts reveal systematic abuses of principles (1), (2), and (3). Certainly a more extended empirical study would be helpful here. 
C. A 
Dog That Did Not Bark: Have Administrative Agencies Become Our Common Law Courts? 
There is a notable and surprising gap in Justice Scalia's argument: the administrative state. Justice Scalia is, of course, a specialist on administrative law, whose rise has, in practice, greatly transformed the practice of interpretation in public law. Most of the key work of statutory interpretation is done not by courts at all, but by federal agencies. Justice Scalia has also written an important and illuminating essay 1° 9 on Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council,"' which is unquestionably the most important case about legal interpretation in the last thirty years. Note in this regard that in its relatively short period on the scene, Chevron, a kind of counter-Marbury "ll for the administrative state, has been cited more frequently (3977 times)"l2 than Marbury v. Madison (948 times), Brown v. Board of Education"13 (1520 times), or Roe v. Wade 14 (1556 times), and if present trends continue it will soon have been cited more frequently than all those cases put together. Indeed, Chevron may qualify as the most cited case in federal courts. 
Chevron holds that where statutes are ambiguous, courts should accept any reasonable interpretation by the agency charged with their implementation." 5 Chevron also appears to accept the legal realist suggestion, central to Justice Scalia's essay here, that the decision of how to read ambiguities in law involves no "brooding omnipresence in the sky""' 6 but an emphatically human judgment about policy or principle. And Chevron concludes, in a way endorsed by Justice Scalia and very much bearing on the democracy prong of his argument, that where underlying statutes are ambiguous, Congress should be taken to have decided that agencies are in a better position to make that judgment than courts." 7 Agencies are in that better position because, Chevron emphasizes, the President is generally in charge of their policy judgments, and hence agencies have a kind of democratic pedigree, certainly a better one than the courts."'S Administrative agencies are, of course, influenced by shifting political judgments, and their approaches are likely to reflect the President's basic commitments."'9 I am speaking here of the comparative advantages of agencies over courts in the interpretation of ambiguous statutes because of the agencies' greater accountability and their greater technical specialization. For this reason, agencies are better equipped to decide on the appropriate definition of vague or ambiguous statutory terms. An emphasis on these points does not embrace simple majoritarianism, nor does it neglect the internal morality of democracy, which authorizes courts to constrain agencies both through clear statement principles' :' and through constitutional law.' 2 ' To say that agencies have comparative advantages in the interpretation of statutes is to say very little about constitutional interpretation. The special case for deference to agency interpretations has a great deal to do with the agency's immersion in technically complex issues, a consideration that has far less importance in the context of constitutional law. 122 
If this is so, debates over statutory interpretation must include not only Congress and courts but also administrative agencies, which may be in an especially good position to carry out the updating and particularizing functions of common law judges. This is a point missed both by Justice Scalia and by Judge Calabresi in his vigorous argument for more federal common law.' Justice Scalia has argued elsewhere that plain text always counts against an agency interpretation; 24 in his view-consistent with his argument in this book-Chevron deference is never due to an agency that counteracts text (defined by reference to ordinary understandings). But perhaps this view is itself anachronistic. Indeed, we ultimately might conclude that we can obtain the right mix of democratic and common law virtues if and only if we decide that the adaptation of statutory text to particular applications (including the exemption of absurd outcomes), and the use of applicable construction, is an entirely appropriate administrative task.'15 canons of 
On this view, Holy Trinity might be seen very differently in the context of the twenty-first century, whose public law would pose as a central question: What are the views of any agency charged with implementation of this law?"2 To the suggestion that this position means that some statutes (more accurately their terms in some applications) might be lost or misdirected as a result of new agency rulings, a response might be given in Justice Scalia's own words: "[L]ots of once-heralded programs ought to get lost or misdirected, in vast hallways or elsewhere. Yesterday's herald is today's bore-although we judges, in the seclusion of our chambers, may not be at courant enough to realize it.' ' 27 
As against Judge Calabresi's plea for judicial updating, we might claim that the argument itself needs to be updated: For the most part, appropriate solutions to the problem of statutory obsolescence should come from administrative agencies, immersed in the problems at hand and having both technocratic and democratic virtues as compared to courts. And as against Justice Scalia, we might urge that administrative agencies should be authorized to reject the "text" in a way that would go well beyond the common law role envisaged by Holy Trinity, at least when there is no evidence of a considered 
If this is so, those judgments may be unconstitutional or interpreted as exceeding statutory authority. See, e.g., Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116 (1958) (interpreting a statute narrowly so as to allow a communist to travel abroad). My point here is that whatever one's account of democracy, agency adaptation ol text to circumstance is generally legitimate, at least where there is no clear congressional instruction the other way. The dictionary definition of the term ought not to be taken to be decisive. 
States, 143 U.S. 457, 457-58 (1892); hence there would be no deference under ordinary understandings of the reach of Chevron. But see Dan M. Kahan, Is Chevron Relevant to Federal CriminalLaw?, 110 HARV. L. REv. 469, 493-506 (1996) (arguing for Chevron deference to the Department of Justice). Even if Holy Trinity is not itself a case for Chevron deference, other cases involving the molding of text to unanticipated applications might well be such cases. See, e.g., Babbit v,Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Greater Or., 115 S.Ct. 2407, 2410 (1995) (deferring to agency interpretation of the Endangered Species Act); Les v. Reilly, 968 F.2d 985, 987, 989 (9th Cir. 1992) (literally interpreting the Delaney Clause, which banned carcinogens in food additives); Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108, 1113 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (same). 
17 SUFFOLK U. L. REv. 881, 897 (1983). 
1997] legislative judgment against the agency's interpretation.'2 ' In modern Holy Trinity cases, courts would not do the work on their own, but would permit agencies to engage in a degree of statutory adaptation, not at all on the theory that agencies can violate the text, but on a finding that agencies reasonably concluded that despite the generality of the text, there was no considered legislative judgment that the text should be applied in a way contrary to the agency's view. 29 
Consider, for example, a fairly conventional case, American Mining Congress v. EPA. 3' Congress had not clearly dealt with the problem of how to handle materials held for recycling, and the relevant EPA regulation defined certain materials involved in recycling as "solid waste." In particular, the regulation said that spent materials, sludges, scrap metal, and the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry's ongoing production process."' The EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were associated with the same kinds of environmental harms as materials that were abandoned or disposed of in some final way. "2 The court of appeals struck down the EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid waste as "'garbage, refuse, sludge . and other discarded material"';'" for the court, material held for recycling was not 'discarded."" Citing the dictionary, the court thought that the "'ordinary plain-English meaning" was decisive.1 35 If the question was an internal dispute in a court of appeals about the best interpretation of a statutory term, perhaps the majority would be right. But the question involved the validity of an EPA regulation, produced after a complex process involving a number of political interests, an extended process of intergovernmental deliberation, and an elaborate inquiry into the underlying issues of substancc. Even if a court would be reluctant to adapt the meaning of a term like "discarded" to fit with context-even if this is a weaker case than Holy Trinity for contextual adaptation-is it not hubristic for judges, unelected and relatively unknowledgeable about the enormously complex subject at hand, to invoke dictionaries (compiled after all by human beings) to invalidate executive branch decisions that cannot reasonably be said to run understanding of the problem at hand and subject to democratic controls, is pemitted to adapt a statutory term as it sees fit, regardless of what dictionanes say See Sitert Home Chapter. 115 S Ct at 24 1N (referring to agency competence). This is only a possible example because the statutor) term. "ham." might well be taken as ambiguous. See id. at 2411-18 
968 F.2d at 990; Public Citizen, 831 F.2d at 1123 afoul of any judgment from Congress? The EPA's decision followed a sustained period of public comment, and undoubtedly the government would be held accountable for any decision about the reach of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976.136 If the EPA's decision runs afoul of dictionary decisions but of no actual decision by Congress, should it really be struck down? 
Or consider an especially important recent case, upholding the power of the FDA to regulate tobacco products as "drugs" or "devices. ' 37 The FDA contended that the current meaning of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 3 " as enacted in 1938, allows it to regulate tobacco products.' At first glance, it seems clear that in 1938, the terms "drug" and "device" were not understood to include tobacco products. 4 But might not an executive agency, subject as it is to political checks and immersed as it is in the technical details, be entitled to interpret those terms to include tobacco products in 1997? The statute defines "drug" to include articles "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals,"'' and it defines "device" to include any "article" that is similarly intended and that "does not achieve its primary intended purposes" through chemical action or through being metabolized.' 42 The court held that the FDA could rely on foreseeability, consumer use, and internal manufacturer memoranda to establish intended use "to affect the structure or any function of the body.' 1 3 And the court added that the FDA could conclude that tobacco products contain "device components" designed to ensure an (admittedly indirect) effect on the structure or function of the body.'" What is striking about the court's conclusions is that they were based not on the ordinary understanding of the statutory terms at the time of enactment, but on the agency's authority to interpret those terms in a way consistent with (what accountable and informed officials could conclude is) their current meaning. 
Without attempting to resolve the underlying issues here, I think that the court's decision is reasonable and probably correct. To be sure, the original meaning of "drug" and "device" may not, to the relevant community, have 
take Congress to have referred to existing understandings of what count as drugs and devices or to have set out ageneral concept whose particular content would or should vary over time, with new understandings of fact and value. If the second view is correct, then Coyne Beahmn is rightly decided even under Justice Scalia's view of interpretation. What I am suggesting here is that the case is probably right even if the first view is correct. In reality it is unlikely that there was a general understanding one way or the other. 
included tobacco products.4 5 But Congress enacted general terms, not its particular understandings of what those terms meant. And in view of new judgments about relevant facts and belief-influenced changes in values, it seems appropriate to allow a specialized agency, accountable as it is to political forces, to interpret these (general and ambiguous) terms as it did in of legitimate political influences and that it emerged after a sustained period of highly visible deliberation on the issues at hand, with involvement from the President himself. And, of course, Congress can override the interpretation if it chooses. 
A broader conclusion follows. It is one thing to say that courts should be permitted to reject original meaning in favor of current meaning' it is quite another thing to say that agencies, with their comparative advantages, should be permitted to do precisely that. These are separate debates, and it is possible to resolve the first question against the courts while at the same time resolving the second question in favor of the agencies."' What is disappointing is that Justice Scalia does not discuss these issues, which link his interests in statutory interpretation and administrative law, and which cast a new light on the courtlegislature interactions that concern him here. 
D. An Analogy 
Allowing appropriate adjustments for administrative law, we can better understand statutory interpretation if we borrow from the law of contract. It is now familiar to see contract law as consisting largely of default rules, specifying how to understand gaps or silences from the parties and also how to understand provisions that seem vague or ambiguous. ' The law of contract contains three kinds of default rules. First, some default rules are designed to find out the instructions of the parties. What would they have done, if they had made provision on the point? Such default rules are marketmimicking.4" 8 Second, some default rules are designed not to implement the parties' will, but to impose on the party who can do so most cheaply the incentive to make a clear provision on the point.' Default rules of this kind understanding of the term's meaning, but with a complementary understanding that themeaning ,lthe term may and should shifotver time; consider the terms "public polic%" "reasonable.' and *p,.Lhopatht. "See ESKRIDGE, supra note 4, at 61-64; SUNSTEIN, 3upra note i0s, at 174.7h 
it is permissible forthe courts. See generally Lessig. 3upranote 53 targuing 101 insiati0 OfLUitsttutinal meaning). 
Default Rules, 99 YALE L.J 87 (1989) 
281 N.W.2d 210 (Neb. 1979) (applying the statute oi Irauds) are information-eliciting, intended not to mimic the parties' wishes but to make sure that those wishes are made clear by the parties themselves. It also seems clear how to choose between market-mimicking and information-eliciting default rules. If the court is clear on what the market-mimicking rule is, it should choose that rule. But if the court is unsure on that question-if the costs of decision and costs of error for the judge seeking to discern the market mimicking rule are very high-the court might do better to impose an information-eliciting default, designed to penalize the party in the best position to make explicit provision for the matter at hand. 
Courts also have a third kind of default rule. Some such rules are based on considerations of public policy that have little or nothing to do with implementing or eliciting the parties' instructions.' Such considerations might involve, for example, the protection of third parties, or they might be intended to shift the parties' preferences and values in a certain direction. 
Much of legal interpretation is, or is about, default rules.'5 Now, it may be tempting to suppose that federal courts, lacking common law authority, ought not to use such rules, and that statutory construction should proceed without them. But a moment's reflection should show that statutory default rules, in some form, are not so much desirable as inevitable. As the law of contract helps reveal, words cannot have meaning without background understandings of various sorts. Usually those understandings are so taken for granted, so highly internalized, that they seem invisible, and part of the necessary meaning of words. But they are nonetheless in place; they make communication possible. And often legal interpretation is possible only because of background principles or rules, some of them so taken for granted that they are invisible, some of them contested enough to be visible but not highly controversial, some of them at the heart of spirited debates in public law. If, for example, a federal statute does not say whether state law is preempted, what happens? If a statute is silent on the existence of private rights of action, do such rights exist? A default rule, principle, or presumption is necessary one way or the other. The legal system cannot proceed without them. The question is not whether to have statutory default rules but which statutory default rules to have. 
Some default rules152 may be designed to find out the legislature's actual to more fully effectuate the state's declared policy against perjury, the civil law, too, must deny the employer his generally unlimited right to discharge an employee whose employment is for a unspecilied duration, when the reason for the dismissal is the employee's refusal to commit perjury"). 
405, 453-54 (1989). 
background understandings operate as presumptions or principles, not as rules. I use the term "rules" as aplaceholder for awide range of background understandings, many of them, technically speaking, not rules at all. 1997] instructions. Such rules are the analogue, in statutory interpretation, of marketmimicking default rules. But statutory default rules might also operate to elicit information, with the purpose of encouraging Congress to act in a certain way, by creating appropriate incentives. Courts might, for example, ask which party is in the best position to correct any errors in Congress or ask which approach is likely to ensure that Congress will legislate clearly. Some of Justice Scalia's jurisprudence is best understood as a series of information-eliciting default rules. Textualism itself has, as part of its defense, the idea that it will encourage Congress to state its will clearly. Similarly, the ban on use of legislative history imposes on Congress an incentive to say what it means in the constitutionally favored form. We can also understand some statutory default rules as having purposes not involving congressional instructions; these are the analogue to "public policy" defaults in the law of contract. Consider the ideas that statutes will be construed favorably to Native Americans, t ' that statutes will be construed so as not to raise constitutional doubts,"' and that statutes will be construed so as not to preempt state law.'" 
Justice Scalia is, as noted, skeptical of these kinds of interpretive principles, on the ground that they have unclear foundations in sources external to judicial will and are too likely to represent some judicial "power-grab." "t But some such principles are inevitable, and in any case Justice Scalia is not at all skeptical of the crucially important idea that statutory ambiguities will be resolved by the agency charged with implementing the relevant statute,"' nor is he unwilling to qualify that very principle by reference to some clear statement principles that operate as information-eliciting defaults.'5 The contract law analogy shows that terms have no meaning without default rules and that there is a place for default rules that serve purposes external to the will of the parties; it also helps us disentangle the diverse functions of the interpretive principles favored or, for that matter, disfavored by Justice Scalia. In any case much work remains to be done on the relationship between default rules in contract law and default rules in the law of statutory interpretation. ' U.S. 568, 574 (1988). 
(1988). 
(invoking a clear statement pnnciple against the extratemtonal application of American law. notwithstanding the view of the relevant agency), 
between contractual and statutory default rules 
III. THE CONSTITUTION AND THE COMMON LAW 
Justice Scalia's attack on a version of common law constitutionalism, in favor of a species of originalism, raises a number of questions, and I will attend to only a few of them here. 6 
Are we all originalists now? In the commentaries in this book, Ronald Dworkin 6 ' and Laurence Tribe 62 write as originalists, and with suitable qualifications, most of their work can fly comfortably under the originalist banner. For most participants in the continuing debates, the question is emphatically not whether the original understanding is controlling; it is how the original understanding is best understood. Some people think that the original understanding is best taken as setting out abstract moral principles.'6 3 Others think that the original understanding points to abstract principles' 6 -in the context of the ban on cruel and unusual punishment, for example, it "'forbid[s] whatever punishments are in fact cruel and unusual."" 65 Still others think that however the original understanding is described, its provisions must be "translated" in order to be applied to new problems. 66 
Justice Scalia claims that he does take the Constitution to embody "abstract principles." What it sets forth "is not a moral principle of 'cruelty' that philosophers can play with in the future, but rather the existing society's assessment of what is cruel."'' 67 Thus, the Eighth Amendment is to be understood not by "'what we consider cruel today"' but instead by "the moral perceptions of the time." ' 8 Of course, this formulation raises many originalist? (2) Did the Framers understand constitutional interpretation in originalist terms, or did they favor some other method? (3) Is it appropriate for an originalist to focus on the particular expectations the original community had of a provision's reach, or should originalists look elsewhere? 
"says," and claims that what it "says" is a matter of abstract principles. See id. at 119, 122, 126. But what it "says" is a function of our account of interpretation, and it does not contain abstract principles unless we have decided, according to our (pre- or extra-semantic) account, that it should do so. Thus, Dworkin's approach, insofar as it is about judicial review, must be rooted in arguments about institutional capacities. Dworkin expressly recognizes this point and makes some such arguments. See DwORKIN, supra note 57, at 373-79. 
supra note 161, at 115, 120). 
125, 131-35. 

1997] questions. How do we characterize the moral perception of the time9 At what level of abstraction? Apparently Justice Scalia believes that it must be characterized at a relatively low level of abstraction; his claim that the death penalty cannot possibly violate the Eighth Amendment's *'abstract moral principle"' 69 appears to be rooted in the fact that the moral prnciple held by the founding generation did not appear, to the Founding generation, to forbid the death penalty. But this raises many further questions. Does it follow that the Equal Protection Clause permits school segregation*? That the national government, not bound by the Equal Protection Clause, can discriminate however it wishes? That the First Amendment does not disturb the common law of libel? 
Justice Scalia does not answer these questions. I emphasize this point not to say that the originalist will necessarily arrive at unacceptable results," ' but to suggest that there is not one kind of (canonical) originalism but a wide range of (plausible) originalisms. Justice Scalia has not adequately defended the particular kind that he favors. 
Originalism and Stare Decisis 
There is a pervasive problem for originalists: how to handle precedents that depart from originalism. In many areas of constitutional law, onginalism as Justice Scalia understands it has been repudiated for a fairly long time, and key provisions now mean something other than what, on Justice Scalia's version of originalism, they were originally understood to mean. The question goes to the heart of the relationship between the Constitution and the common law method. Common law lawyers rely heavily on the doctrine of stare decisis; it is a foundation of their method. How should those skeptical of common law constitutionalism deal with the resulting doctnne? 
Commenting in this volume, Professor Tribe argues that Justice Scalia is not really an originalist at all. Tribe objects that in several First Amendment cases (involving flag burning. cross burning,": and animal sacrifice173 ), Justice Scalia has voted to strike down statutes not inconsistent with the original understanding, narrowly understood.'" But Justice Scalia acknowledges the problem. He answers that his votes are attributable not to a belief that the First Amendment sets out aspirations whose content changes over time, but to the unblinkable fact that for the First Amendment "the Court has developed long-standing and well-accepted principles (not out of accord with the general practices of our people, whether or not they were constitutionally required as an original matter) that are effectively irreversible.' The point of originalism is thus not to "roll[] back... accepted old principles of constitutional law" but to reject "usurpatious new ones."''7 Justice Scalia explains in this fashion his recent votes against "novel constitutional rights"-the right against excessive damage awards,'7 the right against being excluded from government contracts because of party affiliation,'78 and the novel constitutional ban on some single-sex 79 schooling. 
Now, this is a large problem, faced in some form by every Justice, and Justice Scalia cannot be faulted for failing to resolve it in a brief essay and an even briefer reply to critics. But the difficulty with his claim here is that it is very hard to know when an originalist judge, concerned to respect precedent, is applying "accepted old principles" or instead creating "new constitutional rights." Would it not be equally plausible to say that in the nonoriginalist judgments that Justice Scalia joined the Court created new rights, for example the right to bum the flag and the cross, and the right to sacrifice animals? Would it not be plausible to say that in the judgments from which Justice Scalia dissented, 8 ° the Court largely applied principles developed in older cases forbidding government from using outmoded sex stereotypes as a basis faoffriliasteigorne?g'at2ing schools"' or from conditioning employment on party 
To answer these questions, everything depends on the level of generality at which old principles or new rights are described. The precedents in such areas as sex equality are well-entrenched, and Justice Scalia offers no basis on which to distinguish between a refusal to create "new rights" and a willingness to follow "old principles." There is also a risk that the originalist judge, refusing to extend the principles reflected in old cases, will ensure incoherence in the law, and thus a form of unfairness, since similarly situated people will not be treated similarly. This might be referred to as the Bowers v. Hardwick'83 problem: "Thus far and no more!" does not produce much understandings and consistency with "general practices of our people," a notion that raises questions of its own. 1997] coherence in the law.' 4 Perhaps this sacrifice is inevitable and worthwhile-if it is the only way to restore judicial legitimacy without renovating existing law-but it creates problems of its own. To decide whether the resulting incoherence, and dissimilar treatment of the similarly situated, are worthwhile, it is necessary to balance the extent of the unfairness against the value of preventing further mistakes. This is a large problem, faced by anyone with confidence in a particular method of interpretation, and I cannot resolve it here. 
Why (and Which) Originalism ? 
As Justice Scalia knows and acknowledges, the original understanding cannot be decisive simply because it was the original understanding. A defense of using the original understanding must itself be independent of the original understanding and thus must be made out in terms of political theory and good empirical assessments of institutional competence.t8 5 Lawyers cannot defend use of the original understanding, let alone any particular species of originalism, by reference to history. (Nor can they defend an approach other than Justice Scalia's by reference to originalism.) The question of whether the original understanding of an old text should bind current generations is not at all simple-why on earth should current Americans be bound by some understandings of some votes by some segment of the citizenry over two centuries ago?' 8 -- and a reference to "democracy," though a good start, cannot provide the necessary legitimation. 
Justice Scalia suggests that his version of originalism will limit the policymaking authority of federal judges, and this is very plausibly true. But he also 5uggests-and this is mostly how he makes his argument-that judges have only two real alternatives: Follow the original understanding as he understands it or basically do whatever they want. This is implausible. Both originalist and nonoriginalist judges come in many different stripes, and the supra note 57, at 176-224. 
and to democracy, see id. at 9-12. These are certainly good places to start, but as we will see they are no more than that. It is necessary to specify these concepts in order to get them to do the necessary work. and the ideal of democracy by itself does not support originalism or a constrained judicial role See MASHAW. supra note 118, at 201-02 (discussing flaws in the usual presentation of the countermajontanan difficulty) This ideal is too abstract and contested to support a particular view of interpretation, and. for reasons suggested below, see infra text accompanying notes 189-193, once specified, the ideal is best understood to allow courts a modest but hardly trivial role. 
why the Constitution itself is binding is not entirely simple. To say that it is not simple is not to suggest that we should not take it to be binding; undoubtedly we should, partly for simple, pragmatic reasons See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITtTION 93-102 (1993). But the mix of argumer.ts that make the Constitution binding do not make the original understanding, as Justice Scalia would describe it. binding See id. distinctions among them require a good deal of attention. Since Justice Scalia describes the alternative to his brand of originalism as free floating constitutional creativity, the discussion is unduly loaded from the beginning. The debate over methods of constitutional interpretation cannot sensibly be resolved by suggesting that anyone who disagrees is inviting judges to rule as they wish. 
Let us imagine some more reasonable alternative positions. We can imagine judges who care a great deal about history, but who explore history to identify not particular understandings of particular problems, but overall goals and purposes. We can imagine judges who think, for example, that the First Amendment, understood in light of its historical roots, is centered above all on the preconditions for democratic self-government,'87 and that this idea calls for some particular results contrary to the originalist understanding-for example limits on use of the law of libel by public officials. We can imagine judges who think that interpretation calls for something like an act of translation to accommodate new circumstances, including unforeseen developments not only of fact but also of value. 8 8 Attentive to issues of democratic theory and the rule of law, such judges may well try to devise strategies to reduce their own discretion and policymaking authority. They might, for example, care a great deal about precedent, using previous holdings and rationales to discipline their own discretion. They might also think that courts should be reluctant to invalidate outcomes of electoral processes unless it is very clear that something has gone wrong. 
Such judges might emphasize-and this is particularly important-that the case for judicial intrusion is strongest, under an ambiguous constitutional provision, when there is some defect in the process of democratic deliberation that gave rise to the relevant law.'89 Despite Justice Scalia's presentation here, democracy should not be identified with the outcomes of majoritarian politics; it is no mere statistical affair. Whatever emerges from a particular political process should not be identified with the ideal itself. 9 ' Democracy comes equipped with its own internal morality,'9' which constrains what a S. Ct. 1174, 1204 (1997) (Breyer, J., concurring). 

position. 
relevant work from quite different angles, see AVISHAI MARGALIT, THE DECENT SOCIETY (Naomi Goldblum trans., 1996), which suggests that a decent society ensures that its own citizens will not be "humiliated" by official institutions; and MASHAW, supra note 118, at 202, which suggests that "a moment's reflection on the teaching of voting theory makes clear that whatever the difficulty with judicial review, countermajoritanism is an odd way to put the problem." Margalit's suggested ban on official humiliation might well be taken to be part of democracy's internal morality. Cf. Romer v. Evans, 116 S. Ct. 1620 (1996) (holding that an amendment to the Colorado Constitution denying legislative, judicial, and executive antidiscrimination protection to homosexuals violated the Equal Protection Clause). 
1997] majority may do, consistent with the commitment to democracy. A majority may not, for example, disenfranchise people, impose a regime of political inequality, or act solely on the basis of contempt for fellow citizens.' 
Judges of this kind come in many shapes and sizes; they might well think of themselves as originalists. What matters is that such judges are much influenced by the common law tradition, and it is by no means clear that judges of that kind have less legitimacy or are worse than oiginalist judges of the kind that Justice Scalia favors. A federal judiciary that proceeds in common law fashion and that treats constitutional rights as aspirations (given content by concrete cases and invoked sparingly to invalidate the outcomes of ordinary politics) might well, because of its very insulation, produce a better system of constitutional democracy. It might do so because it has certain advantages in deliberating on questions of basic justice,' or-in my view far more likely-it might do so because and to the extent that it focuses on ensuring the preconditions for a well-functioning democratic regime. Justice Scalia thinks that, even if this is true, a judicial role of this kind is fundamentally illegitimate and without authority, because it is not authorized by the Constitution. But the Constitution does not set out the principles governing its own interpretation; certainly the Constitution itself does not contain an interpretive principle of originalism. Any judgment about the appropriate content of governing interpretive principles must invoke not the Constitution but political theory of some kind. The claim that the text must be interpreted in light of the original understanding as Justice Scalia conceives it is not an implausible argument. But it depends both on contested ideals and on highly contingent and largely empirical claims about what system of interpretation is likely to be or to do best, all things considered. 
For America, what system of interpretation would in fact be or do best? The past offers no clear answer, but it is a good place to start. It is highly relevant that an originalist approach of the sort favored by Justice Scalia would have very dramatic consequences (not acknowledged or discussed in his essay). 94 Such an approach may well, for example, mean that Brown v. Board of Education,'95 the cornerstone of modem equal protection doctrine, is wrong; that New York Timres Co. v. Sullivan,'" the cornerstone of modern free speech doctrine, is also wrong; that the Establishment Clause does not Supreme Court, 1995 Term-Foreword:Leaving Things Undecided. 110 HARv L Riv 4. 59-64 t1996) DWORKIN, supra note 57, at 373-79. 
these outcomes. I am only suggesting that it is a serious possibility There are continuing disputes about whether originalism would support outcomes of the kind discussed in the text, and a possible reaction to those debates is that often the historical materials leave ambiguities or gaps and nonhitstoncal judgments must be used, and are being used, to resolve the ambiguities apply to the states; that affirmative action raises no serious issue; that the federal government can discriminate on the basis of race and sex however it wishes; that nearly all sex discrimination by the states is unobjectionable; that compulsory school prayer is constitutionally acceptable; that, in short, most of modern constitutional law, now taken as constitutive of the American constitutional tradition by Americans and non-Americans alike, now taken as symbolic of our nation's commitment to liberty under law, and, for the last decade in particular an inspiration for constitution-making and constitutionbuilding all over the globe, is illegitimate and fatally undemocratic. An approach that leads to conclusions of this kind may not be disqualified for that reason, but these possibilities show that slippery slope arguments can work in both directions. 
Justice Scalia may believe that consequences are irrelevant. 97 It is tempting to think that the choice among interpretive approaches should not depend on outcomes; an important guarantee of neutrality might even be found in indifference to outcomes. But I think that this is a confusion. There is this much to be said for indifference to outcomes: Once an interpretive approach has been properly selected, it should not be abandoned simply because it produces a bad outcome. But any approach to interpretation must be defended partly by reference to its consequences, broadly conceived, and the set of relevant consequences includes emphatically its effects on human liberty and equality. No approach to interpretation can be defended without reference to the human interests that it affects. If consequences, broadly conceived,198 do not matter, what does? 
My central point is that other approaches to interpretation, whether or in whatever sense originalist, can accommodate our constitutional tradition as it has come to be understood without, at the same time, authorizing judges to do whatever they want. Justice Scalia is correct to say that common law thinking lies at the heart of American constitutional law.' 99 But this way of thinking should be seen as part of judicial modesty, not judicial hubris. Certainly it allows for a degree of flexibility. But it also comes with its own constraints on judicial power, brought about through the doctrine of stare decisis, close remedy. If this is so, his argument would be much strengthened, but there is little reason to believe that this is the case. 
about consequences might be made out in terms of democracy, protection of basic rights, promotion of human capabilities and functionings, and much more. 
methods of civil law courts, or even by formalism, which will inevitably leave gaps. Indeed, there is a substantial overlap between the interpretive practices of common law and civil law courts, which use similar presumptions and canons, linguistical and substantive. See Summers & Taruffo, supranote 73. For a discussion comparing European civil lawyers to American lawyers, see Mary Ann Glendon, Comment, in A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION, supra note 6, at 95 passim. attention to the details of cases,2°' and a general reluctance to issue rules that depart much from the facts of particular disputes. It is part and parcel of the judiciary's distrust of large theories and its ordinary search for concrete outcomes and cautious principles on which theoretically diverse judges may agree. 2° Common law thinking is even connected with the Supreme Court's general and entirely appropriate reluctance to disturb the outcomes of political processes. To the extent that it partakes of ambitious theories at all, common law thinking, in its current incarnation in American public law, largely attempts to protect the workings of a well-functioning system of democratic deliberation. Of course, courts with the abilities of "broken-field runners" may be able to circumvent these constraints on judicial discretion. There are no guarantees here. All I mean to suggest is that the obligation to respect precedent and to proceed cautiously tend, in practice, to make constitutional law in its common law incarnation more open-ended than it might appear, even if less open-ended than those fearful of judicial discretion would wish. 
From the standpoint of promoting democratic ideals, it is hardly clear that Justice Scalia's form of originalism is preferable. I have said that the choice of an approach to interpretation requires a judgment about political theory, and that means that the choice requires the specification of the right content of the democratic ideal. If democracy is not identified with the outcomes of majoritarian politics, and if its internal morality constrains what majorities may do, the American constitutional tradition has converged on an alternative far superior to Justice Scalia's approach. 2 2 From the standpoint of constraining judicial discretion, the common law method of constitutional law, properly understood, is at least a plausible competitor to Justice Scalia's form of originalism, in light of the many difficult questions that historical inquiry leaves unresolved and the difficulty of matching that form of originalism with a theory of stare decisis. If we are concerned about limiting judicial intrusions itrnatdoitpioonlitiicns,itJsusmtiocdeemSncailniac'asrnfaotrimon.o2f3 orTighiantalfiosrmm mofayowrigelilnableis minfeisrioprrotboaobulyr better at promoting predictability and stability. But these are hardly decisive virtues, and it is not clear that there is any other dimension along which Justice Scalia's approach is preferable to the serious alternatives. 
(arguing that people commonly select particular acts based on buch acts"perlormance in simtlar circumstances). 
supra note 5,at 926-28 (discussing how common law constituttonalhsm influences judicial restruint) were incompetent at that task, it might make sense to adopt Justice Scahiaf'or,m ol onginrlism the current approach, in areas involving property rights, Second Amendment rights, and Confrontation Clause rights. See supra text accompanying notes 49-51 
The distinctive virtues of the common law stem from the relative independence of common law judges, their caution about high theory, and their intense focus on particulars. These virtues allow a high degree of flexibility over diverse circumstances, prominently including those produced by new facts and values. These virtues are inseparable from the distinctive vices of the common law: its imperfectly democratic character, its lack of theoretical ambition, and its particularity, which may impede planning and lead to unfairness because the similarly situated are not treated similarly and because the judges' own judgments of value or fact play an excessive role. An effort to evaluate the place of common law thinking would do well to come to terms with the realities of the modem state, prominently including the large role of regulatory agencies, which engage in statutory interpretation far more frequently, and with far larger consequences, than do federal courts. Administrative agencies are law-interpreters, both in fact and in law, and it is striking that modern theories of statutory interpretation rarely come to terms with that phenomenon." 
Justice Scalia's approach to interpretation-democratic formalism-has two foundations: a strong commitment to rule-bound justice and a desire to ensure that discretion is exercised by democratically elected officials rather than by judges. Hence his overriding goal is to exorcise the common law from public law. He is correct to emphasize the common law heritage of the American legal tradition and much of modern public law: judicial treatment of many statutes as standards rather than rules; doctrines of interpretation that operate as standards or factors; and, perhaps above all, a system of case-based constitutional law that owes a great deal to the common law heritage. 5 Many observers, above all Judge Calabresi, have celebrated common law methods and sought to reintroduce the virtues of common law judgment into a regulatory state founded mostly on statutory enactments. Justice Scalia's goal is the opposite: to reduce particularity in the hope that it will increase predictability, constrain the abusive exercise of discretion by judges, and increase democratic self-government by imposing good incentives on Congress. 
Others might urge courts to make regulatory agencies a central ingredient in their theory of interpretation, on the theory that the traditional common law role of courts would be best carried out by administrative agencies authorized to make sense of statutory text2" when new applications arise, or when facts administrative state has yet to be introduced into general accounts of legal interpretation. Here there is a great deal of room for positive and normative work. 
and justifies current American constitutional law. 
allow agencies to handle ambiguities and excessive generality, subject, of course, to judicially administered and values change. This is an approach toward which I have gestured in this Book Review, on the ground that it has the virtue of fitting nicely with the needs, values, and actual practices of modem government. Thus, I have attempted to sketch an alternative approach to interpretation, one that also places a premium on democratic values and that uses clear statement principles, agency interpretations, and democratic ideals to supplement and occasionally countermand the text as understood at the time of enactment. In statutory interpretation, this approach would allow regulatory agencies some room to adapt text to particular circumstances and would authorize courts, supplementing that agency role, to use canons and presumptions to make sense rather than nonsense out of the statutory law. In constitutional interpretation, this approach would combine a large dose of judicial modesty, favoring incompletely theorized agreements, with an occasional willingness to invoke the internal morality of democracy to look skeptically at laws that compromise the political process or attempt to impose second-class citizenship on members of disadvantaged social groups. My suggestion is that an approach of this sort would do far better than democratic formalism from the democratic point of view, that it would impose sufficient constraints on judicial power and judicial discretion, and that its only comparative defect, a modest one, is that it may suffer along the dimension of promoting predictability. 
There is nothing wrong with Justice Scalia's arguments in the abstract. In an imaginable world, not unrecognizably far from our own, some or all of those arguments might become convincing. But there is also nothing right about Justice Scalia's arguments in the abstract. Whether those arguments are convincing depends on a range of practical and predictive judgments about the capacities of different governmental institutions. Justice Scalia does not defend the necessary practical or predictive judgments or even identify them as such. He writes instead as if his particular, sometimes radical, conclusions can be grounded in apocalyptic arguments about the slippery slope 7 and in highsounding abstractions about democracy. 
It is to Justice Scalia's credit that he has laid out an approach to interpretation with a high degree of clarity and coherence. It is to his credit too that he has sketched an approach to interpretation that might make sense in some imaginable world. What he has not shown is that it makes sense in ours. 
FOUNDED 1852 
VOL. 147 
NO. 2 
The American Constitution allows the removal of the President for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors."' 
I U.S. CoNsT. art. II, § 4. 
" This Essay represents a witten and updated version of the Owen J. Roberts Memorial Lecture, delivered at the University of Pennsylvania on November 10, 1998. 
t"Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. The author is grateful to Akhil Amar, Bruce Ackerman, and Susan Bloch for helpful discussion, to Jack Goldsmith, Richard Posner, and Adrian Vermeule for helpful comments on a previous draft, and to Brian Lehman and Margaret Peterlin for excellent research assistance. Professor Sunstein testified before the Committee on the Judiciary of the United States House of Representatives on November 9, 1998, and this Essay overlaps to some extent with that testimony. See Testimony Before the UnitedStates House ofRepresentatives Comm. on the Judiciary,Subcomm. on the Constitution (Nov. 9, 1998) (statement of Cass R. Sunstein), availablein LEXIS, Federal News Service. 
(279) interpretation, the place of text and history, the relevance of changed circumstances, the place of post-ratification practice, and the relevance of contemporary moral and political changes to constitutional meaning. 
This is, then, a valuable arena in which to test contending approaches to constitutional law. But the interpretive debate has practical importance too--perhaps growing practical importance. After a fifty year period in which no judges were impeached-from 1936 to 1986-three federal judges were impeached between 1986 and 1989.2 The 1998 impeachment of President Clinton may signal more frequent resort to the impeachment mechanism, especially in a world in which recent events are highly salient, and in which political opponents like to play "tit for tat." At least it can be said that, in an era in which scandals involving public or private behavior are an omnipresent aspect of news coverage and partisan politics, the country may well start to resort to impeachment more frequently. Is this desirable? How, if at all, does this possibility bear on constitutional interpretation? 
I offer two substantive claims here. The simplest is that, with respect to the President, the principal goal of the Impeachment Clause is to allow impeachment for a narrow category of egregious or large-scale abuses of authority that comes from the exercise ofdistinctlypresidentialpowers. On this view, a criminal violation is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for impeaching the President. What is generally necessary is an egregious abuse of power that the President has by virtue of being President. Outside of this category of cases, impeachment is generally foreign to our traditions and is prohibited by the Constitution. Outside of this category of cases, the appropriate course of action for any crime is generally3 not impeachment, but a prosecutorial judgment, after the President leaves office, whether indictment is desirable. This is not a claim that the President can never be impeached for decisions and acts that do not involve the abuse of distinctly presidential powers. The Nation has left that issue undecided, and it should continue to do so until it becomes necessary to decide it. 
2 These were Harry Claibome, impeached for income tax evasion; Alcee Hastings, impeached for taking a bribe; and Walter Nixon, impeached for perjuring himself before a grand jury by denying he made a phone call to a state prosecutor to ask him to drop a case. The Senate convicted all three. See STAFF OF THE IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, HOUSE CoMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 105TH CONG., 2D SESS., CONSTITUTIONAL GROUNDS FOR PRESIDENTIAL IMPEACHMENT: MODERN PRECEDENTS 4-14 (Comm. Print 1998) [hereinafter 105TH CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY] (discussing these three judicial impeachments of the 1980s); see also STAFF OF THE IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, HOUSE COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, 93D CONG., 2D SESS., CONsTITUTIONAL GROUNDS FOR PRESIDENTIAL IMPEACHMENT 43-55 (Comm. Print 1974) [hereinafter 93D CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY] (listing previous impeachments ofajfresident, a cabinet officer, a senator, and 10 federal judges). 
I offer an explanation of this qualification infra at note 110 and accompanying text. 
My second substantive claim is that in the current period, it is more, not less, important to insist on this particular understanding of the Impeachment Clause. There are grave systemic dangers in resorting to impeachment except in the most extreme cases. The prospect of impeachment can be highly destabilizing to government, and in an era in which the opposing party and the mass media are likely to be aligned in accusing political opponents of criminality or severe misconduct, there is a continuing risk that impeachment proceedings will become decreasingly exceptional. This risk is all the more serious in light of the central modem role of the American President both domestically and internationally. In the interest of national stability, the best course lies in legislative forbearance and self-restraint-a kind of "mutual arms control" agreement, to be entered into by both political parties, in the service of the Nation as a whole. 
I also offer two claims about constitutional interpretation. The first is that our tradition is, at least in part, a common law tradition,4 and the Nation's practice between ratification and the present is no less important for interpretive purposes than the Nation's understanding in 1787 and 1788. Indeed, that long-standing practice may be the most important clue to the appropriate meaning of the phrase "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." And with respect to the President, the Nation has shown a remarkable tradition of forbearance and restraint, by refusing to proceed in cases in which Presidents-including Presidents Reagan, Bush, Nixon,5 Kennedy, Eisenhower, Roosevelt, and Lincoln-might have been said, by some, to have committed impeachable offenses.6 With respect to the office of the President, there have been only three serious impeachment inquiries in Americanhistory. 7 This practice of caution is as important as anything else to my general argument. 
A striking aspect of the debate over impeachment between 1997 and 1999 has been its insistently originalist character. Many participants, on all sides, have urged that the meaning of the Impeachment Clause depends on the understanding of the Nation in 1787. Part of my argument speaks in originalist terms, and originalism does support my general conclusion. But post-ratification practice speaks even more unambiguously, and it is that practice that deserves to bear most of the argument's weight. Political 4 See David A. Strauss, Common Law ConstitutionalInterpretation,63 U. Cal. L. REV. 877, 884-88 (1996) (arguing that, in the American legal tradition, the Constitution is "part of an evolutionary common law system"). 
5 I mean to refer here to the allegation, against President Nixon, of income tax evasion. 6 For a discussion of these possible impeachable offenses, see infraPart II.B. 7 Two of these inquiries involved alleged abuses of public power. One of them was a grotesquely partisan affair that history has not treated well; I believe that the impeachment of President Clinton will be regarded in the same basic way. "precedents" are less articulate than judicial ones, but in this context, our political practice speaks very loudly indeed. 
It should be clear that one of my principal targets is the famous 1970 statement by Gerald Ford, then a Representative from Michigan, that an impeachable offense "is whatever a majority of the House of Representatives considers [it] to be."8 In a practical sense, of course, Ford was right-in the absence of extraordinary circumstance, no court is likely to review a decision to impeach. But in a constitutional sense, he was entirely wrong. The Constitution sharply circumscribes the power of the House of Representatives by limiting the category of legitimately impeachable offenses. 
This Essay has three basic parts. Part I discusses the original understanding of Congress's impeachment power, with reference to the Constitution's text and the founding era. Part II explores historical practice. Part III briefly applies the basic analysis to the effort to impeach President Clinton; much more importantly, it deals with modem political culture and its relationship to the topic of impeachment. 
I. 1788 
Some people believe that the meaning of the Constitution is settled by the original understanding,9 and debates about impeachment have had a striking and unmistakable "originalist" dimension. I have suggested that post-ratification practice is highly relevant, but of course the original understanding matters too. Let us begin, then, by examining the original understanding of the impeachment power. What was the impeachment power soon after ratification in, for example, 1788? 
A. The Text 
The text of the Constitution is the place to begin. It says that a President may be removed for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." 10 How much progress can be made by looking at the text alone, 11 at least if we attempt to read it as it would have been read in 1788? The basic answer is that while the text certainly does not answer every 8 116 CONG. REc. 11, 913 (1970) (statement of Rep. Gerald Ford). 
9 See ANTONIN SCALIA, A MATTER OF INTERPRETATION: FEDERAL COURTS AND THE LAW 38 (1997) (arguing that the Constitution should be interpreted after consulting the writings of delegates to the Constitutional Convention and other intelligent people of that era and determining "the original meaning of the text"). 
10 U.S. CONsT. art. II, § 4. 
11Of course no text can ever be read "alone"; it is always read in light of context, ineluding cultural understandings. question, it is highly suggestive. What it suggests is that to be impeachable, the President must have engaged in large-scale abuses of distinctly presidential powers. 
The opening reference to treason and bribery, together with the word "other," seems to indicate that high crimes and misdemeanors should be understood to be of the same general kind and magnitude as treason and bribery (as in the Latin canon of construction, ejusdem generisZ). For a reader in 1788, the terms "treason" and "bribery" would be unmistakable references to misuse of office, probably through betraying the country in one way or another.' 3 Thus, it would be reasonable to think that "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" must amount to a kind of egregious misuse of public office.14 The Constitution does not say "Murder, Assault, and other High Crimes and Misdemeanors," nor does it say, "Blasphemy, Disorderly Conduct, and other High Crimes and Misdemeanors."' 5 The opening references to treason and bribery seem to limit the kinds of offenses for which a president may be removed from office. 
Other provisions of the Constitution appear to support this judgment; they suggest that the choice of terms was no coincidence, that the words "treason" and "bribery" were carefully chosen, and that the term "high" was intended as a serious restriction on the legitimate grounds for impeachment. The Interstate Extradition Clause refers to persons "charged in any State With Treason, Felony, or other Crime,"'16 in striking contrast to the impeachment provision. Consider, also, the Speech and Debate Clause, which refers to congressional immunity from arrest "in all Cases, except Treason, Felony, and Breach of the Peace," 17 and the Fifth Amendment's Grand Jury Clause, which guarantees a right to a grand jury when someone is "held to 12 The phrase "ejusdem generis"means "of the same kind." 13See infraPart I.B for a discussion ofthe founding of the Constitution. 
14 By itself, the term "high" creates a problem of"scaling without a modulus," a problem that is bound to create arbitrariness and variability in individual judgments. See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Assessing PunitiveDamages (with Notes on Cognitionand Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071, 2106-07 (1998) (explaining that a "modulus" is a particular rating to a standard stimulus used "to assign ratings to other stimuli in relation to that modulus"). Much of the debate is about the search for a modulus. The terms "treason" and "bribery" might supply one; so too with the historical practice, as I emphasize. I am grateful to Akhil Amar for this analogy. 
See Letter from Jed Rubenfeld, Professor of Law, Yale University, et al. to Newt Gingrich, Speaker of the House of Representatives 1-2 (Nov. 4, 1998) (on file with Professor Rubenfeld) (arguing that the words "treason" and "bribery" indicate that impeachment is the appropriate remedy for only abuses ofexecutive power). 
U.S. CONST. art. IV, § 2, cl. 2. 17 U.S. CONST. art. I, § 6, cl.1. UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA WREVIEW answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime." 18 The different constitutional references to diverse "crimes" suggests that the impeachment provision had a special purpose. Because the phrase "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" is a dramatic contrast to other provisions in the text, it is reasonable to think that those terms are a reference to abuses that are, in both nature and magnitude, similar to treason and bribery. 
This reading does not entirely dispose of the interpretive problems. For one thing, the term "bribery" creates some ambiguity. Bribery could be the President's acceptance of a payment of money to act in a way that is inconsistent with the republic's needs or desires, or it could be a payment of money by the President himself, to convince people to vote for him. These would be abuses of power. But "bribery" could also be a payment by the President to a judge, to decide a case in favor of a childhood friend; or it could be a presidential payment of money to an athlete, to allow an opposing team to win some competition. In light of the wide range of possible "bribes," it would be possible to suggest that not every "bribe" is an abuse of office, or even connected in any way with office. And if this is so, it is not altogether clear what counts as "other" high crimes and misdemeanors. 
There is another textual puzzle. The word "high" precedes "crimes" but not "misdemeanors"; does this suggest that any misdemeanor is a legitimate basis for impeachment? Perhaps a "high crime" or a "misdemeanor" is sufficient for impeachment. And is there not a difference between "crimes" and "misdemeanors," as the text seems to suggest? Perhaps-the openminded contemporary textualist might wonder, trying to reconstruct the audience's judgment in 1788-misdemeanors are not crimes at all, but forms of relatively minor misconduct. It would thus be possible to think that the Constitution allows impeachment for the following: treason; bribery; other high crimes, of whatever sort; and misdemeanors, or crimes of a lower variety. Perhaps, then, treason and bribery are obviously impeachable offenses, but the text grants posterity a great deal of leeway to remove presidents for crimes or misbehavior that fall short of those things. At the very least, the text might seem to leave this possibility open. 
For someone in 1788, however, this would be a most unlikely judgment, and the apparent textual puzzles would be likely to dissolve fairly rapidly. If the Constitution has given Congress the authority to remove the President for the stated offenses ("Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors"), it would be extremely odd, textually speaking, to say that the Constitution has given Congress the authority to remove the President for any criminal offenses at all. It would be far more sensible, textually 18U.S. CONST. amend. V. speaking, to understand "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" to conform to "treason" and "bribery," and to require the relevant "misdemeanors" to have to meet a certain threshold of "highness" as well. Thus, the phrase "high Crimes and Misdemeanors" would be read as a piece, to suggest illegal acts of a serious kind and magnitude and also acts that, whether or not technically illegal, amount to an egregious abuse of office. 19 This is not an inevitable reading, but it seems to be the more natural one. 
Nor-in all probability-would the term "bribery" create serious puzzles. A reader in 1788 would likely read the word "bribery," in context, to mean taking or offering money in return for abuse of official office; the term would not likely be taken as a reference to private acts of bribery.20 The text thus supports the view that impeachment is designed for abuses of public authority. But it does not answer every question, and armed with the text alone, reasonable people could understand similar cases in quite different ways. It is certainly appropriate to look elsewhere. 
B. The Founding 
The founding of the Constitution of course occurred in two stages. The first involved the Constitution's actual drafting, which was done in secret; the second involved ratification, which was highly public. There is thus room for a debate over the appropriate sources of constitutional interpretation. It is possible to question whether the secret meetings of the drafters should play a large role in constitutional interpretation; but what happened there is extremely interesting. Impeachment was no marginal issue. It was central to the Framers' deliberations. What emerged from those deliberations was an effort to cabin the impeachment power in order to preserve the separation of powers, and also to define the grounds for impeachment in a way that would meet the Framers' stated concern: the large-scale abuse of distinctly presidential powers. 

Meeting in Philadelphia in the summer of 1787, the Framers sought to produce a form of government that would reject England's monarchical 19 There is historical support for this understanding. See RAOUL BERGER, IMPEAcHMENT: THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROBLEMS 59-67 (1973) (discussing the origins of the phrase "high crimes and misdemeanors" in English law and concluding that the meaning of the phrase is "confined to impeachments, without roots in the ordinary criminal law"). 
20 Thus, I do not believe that all briberies are impeachable offenses; a president who paid an athlete to lose a basketball game would not have committed an act of "bribery" within the meaning ofthe Impeachment Clause. heritage in favor of a system of republican self-government. 2 1 The Framers agreed that a president was necessary to head the new nation and they shared a commitment to disciplining public officials through a system of checks and balances. 22 But they sharply disagreed about the precise extent of presidential power and about how, if at all, the President should be removable from office. This question played a large role in the Constitutional Convention, as revealed by James Madison's detailed notes of the founding debate, which I summarize here. The extensive debates in the Convention strongly suggest a sharply limited conception of impeachment, one that sees the process as a targeted response to the President's abuse of public power through manipulation of distinctly presidential authority, or through procurement of his office by corrupt means. 23 
The initial draft of the Constitution took the form of resolutions presented before the members meeting in Philadelphia on June 13, 1787.24 One tohfethPerekseidyenretscooluutlidonbse, fiomupnedacihnetdhefoCro"nmvaeln-ptiroanc'tsicoef,fiocrianlejgoluercntalo, fsdauidtyt.h"a25t On July 20, this provision provoked an extended debate. Three positions dominated the day's discussion. One extreme view, represented by Roger Sherman and attracting very little support, was that the legislature should have the power to remove the Executive at its pleasure. Charles Pinckney, Rufus King, and Gouverneur Morris represented the opposing extreme view, that in the new republic, the President "ought not to be impeachable whilst in office. 26 This view did receive considerable support, and it played a large role in the day's debate. It was defended partly by reference to the system of separation of powers, which would be compromised by impeachment, and partly by reference to the fact that the President, unlike a monarch, would be subject to periodic elections, a point that seemed to make impeachment less necessary. The third position, which ultimately carried the day, was that the President should be impeachable, but only for a narrow category of abuses of the public trust-for example, by procuring office by unlawful means, or using distinctly presidential authority for ends that are treasonous. 
21 A good treatment of this issue is JOSEPH M. BESsETTE, THE MILD VOICE OF REASON: DELIBERATIvE DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT (1994). 
22 See generallyTHE FEDERALIST No. 51 (James Madison) (discussing checks and balances with regard to the relative powers of the legislative and executive branches). 
23 See 2 MAX FARRAND, THE RECORDS OF THE FEDERAL CONVENTION OF 1787, at 61 
George Mason took a lead role in promoting the compromise course. Against Pinckney, he argued that it was necessary to counter the risk that the President might obtain his office by corrupting his electors. "[S]hall that man be above" justice, he asked, "who can commit the most extensive injustice? '27 This question identified the risk, to which the Convention was quite sensitive, that the President might turn into a near-monarch; and it led the crucial votes-above all, Morris-to agree that impeachment might be permitted for, in Morris's words, "corruption & some few other offences." 28 James Madison promptly concurred with Morris, pointing to a case in which a president "might betray his trust to foreign powers." 29 Capturing the emerging consensus of the Convention, Edmund Randolph favored impeachment on the ground that the Executive "will have great opportunit[ie]s of abusing his power; particularly in time of war when the military force, and in some respects the public money will be in his hands." 30 The clear trend of the discussion was toward allowing a narrow impeachment power by which the President could be removed only for gross abuses of public authority. 
But Pinckney, concerned about the separation of powers, continued to insist that a power of impeachment would eliminate the President's "independence." 31 Morris once again offered the decisive response, urging that he was convinced of the necessity of impeachment, because the President "may be bribed by a greater interest to betray his trust; and no one would say that we ought to expose ourselves to the danger of seeing the first Magistrate in foreign pay without being able to guard [against] it by displacing him." At the same time, Morris insisted, "we should take care to provide some mode that will not make him dependent on the Legislature."3 3 Led by Morris, the convention thus moved toward a compromise position, one that would continue the separation between the President and Congress, but still permit the President to be removed in the most extreme cases. The discussion ended without agreement on any particular set of terms. 
The new draft of the Constitution's Impeachment Clause emerged two weeks later, on August 6. It would have permitted the President to be impeached, but only for treason, bribery, and corruption (apparently exempli27 2 id.at 65. 28 2 id. 29 2 id.at 66. 30 2 id.at 67. 31 2 id. at 66. 32 2 id. at 68. 33 2 id. at 69. fled by the President's securing his office by unlawful means). 34 With little additional debate, and for no clear reason, this provision was narrowed on September 4, to "treason, or bribery." 35 But in early September, the delegates took up the Impeachment Clause anew. Here they slightly broadened the grounds for removing the President, but in a way that stayed close to the compromise position that appeared to carry the day in July. 
The opening argument was offered by Mason, who complained that the provision was too narrow to capture his earlier concerns, and that "maladministration" should be added, so as to include "[a]ttempts to subvert the Constitution" that would not count as treason or bribery.36 Mason's strongest point was that the President should be removable ifhe attempted to undo the constitutional plan. But Madison insisted that the term "maladministration" was "[s]o vague" that it would "be equivalent to a tenure during pleasure of the Senate," 37 which the Framers had been attempting to avoid all along. Hence Mason withdrew "maladministration" and added the new, more precise terms "other high crimes and misdemeanors [against] the State. 3 8 The term "high Crimes & Misdemeanors" was borrowed from English law, as we shall see; but it received no independent debate in the Convention. During the debates, the only subsequent development-and it Uisnnitoetd tSritavtieasl"- winaosrdtehratto"raegmaoinvset atmhebigSutaittye".39was changed to "against the 
There is one further wrinkle. The resulting draft was submitted to the Committee on Arrangement and Style, which deleted the words "against the United States." 0 Hence there is an interpretive puzzle. Was the deletion designed to broaden the legitimate grounds for impeachment? This is extremely unlikely. As its name suggests, the Committee on Style and Arrangement lacked substantive authority (which is not to deny that it made some substantive changes), and it is far more likely that the particular change was made on grounds of redundancy. Hence the Impeachment Clause, in its final incarnation, was targeted at "high Crimes and Misdemeanors." 
The most reasonable reading of these debates is that in designing the provision governing impeachment, the Framers were thinking, exclusively 34 See 2 id. at 185-86 ("[The President] shall be removed from his office on impeachment by the House of Representatives, and conviction in the supreme Court, of treason, bribery, or corution."). 
2 id. at 499. 36 2 id. at 550. 37 2 id. 38 2 id. 39 2 id.at 551. 40 See 2 id. at 600. or principally, of large-scale abuses of distinctly public authority. The unanimous rejection of "maladministration" suggests that the Framers sought to create an authority that was both confined and well-defined. All of the alleged grounds for impeachment involved abuses of public trust through the exercise of distinctly presidential powers (or corruption in procuring those powers). There were no references to private crimes, such as murder and assault. We cannot over-read silence on that point; it is possible that the Framers would have considered some such crimes to be "high Crimes and Misdemeanors." But the debates strongly suggest that the model for impeachment was the large-scale abuse of public office. 

The same view is supported by discussion at the time of ratification and in the early period. The basic point is that impeachment was explained and defended as a way of removing the President when he used his public authority for treasonous or corrupt purposes. I offer a few brief notations here. 
Alexander Hamilton explained that the "subjects" of impeachment involve "the abuse or violation of some public trust. They are of a nature which may with peculiar propriety be denominated POLITICAL, as they relate chiefly to injuries done immediately to society itself."' This suggestion should be taken as an echo of the textual idea, on which the discussants wmeeraenournsamniumsotursuno"nagSaeipntsetmthbeerU8n,ittehdatSttahteesr.e'Ale2vant high crimes and misde 
One of the most sustained discussions came from the highly respected (and later Supreme Court Justice) James Iredell, speaking in the North Carolina ratifying convention: "I suppose the only instances, in which the President would be liable to impeachment, would be where he had received a bribe, or had acted from some corrupt motive or other.'A3 By way of explanation, Iredell referred to a situation in which "the President had received a bribe. . . from a foreign power, and, under the influence of that bribe, had address enough with the Senate, by artifices and misrepresentations, to seduce their consent to a pernicious treaty.' 4 
James Wilson wrote similarly in his great 1791 Lectures on Law: "In the United States and in Pennsylvania, impeachments are confined to politi41 THE FEDERALIST NO. 65, at 334 (Alexander Hamilton) (Max Beldoffed., 2d ed. 1987). 42 2 FARRAND, supranote 23, at 545. 43 2 THE FOUNDERS' CONSTITUTION 165 (Philip B. Kurland & Ralph Lerner eds., 1987). 442 id. cal characters, to political crimes and misdemeanors, and to political punishments. '" 5 Another early commentator went so far as to say that [t]he legitimate causes of impeachment... can have reference only to public character, and official duty.... In general, those offences, which may be committed equally by a private person, as a public officer, are not the subjects of impeachment. Murder, burglary, robbery, and indeed all offenses not immediately connected with office,... are left to the ordinary course of judicial proceeding.... 46 This was a contested view, and a few people suggested in the early period that murder and the like would be a legitimate basis for impeachment; but there was general agreement that the great office of impeachment was to remove from office those who had abused distinctly public power. In the ratification debates themselves, I have not been able to find a single example of an impeachable offense that did not involve this kind of abuse, and certainly the prominent examples all involved abuses of that sort. 

Thus far, I have said very little about the particular understanding in America in 1788 of the phrase "high Crimes and Misdemeanors." This term was not debated in the convention; it was treated as a term of art, satisfactory for the purpose. Because the term comes from English law, it is possible to contend that it should be interpreted in accordance with English understandings.47 
There is considerable sense in this view-the term certainly does come from English law-but serious questions might be raised about this basic proposition. The most important point is that it is not at all clear that the American understanding was the same as the English one. Recall that in the framing period, participants were aware of two exceedingly important differences between America and England: (1) the election of the President and (2) the separation of powers. As we have seen, these differences led many to suggest no impeachment power, or at least a narrow power of impeachment. It is possible that many of the Framers were aware of the content of English practice, but it is doubtful that most of them were, or they knew of every detail. It is even more doubtful that they meant to transport it 45 2 id.at 166. 46 2 id. at 179. 
47 See, e.g., BERGER, supranote 19, at 54 ("To understand what the Framers had in mind [regarding the phrase 'high Crimes and Misdemeanors'] we must begin with English law, for nowhere did they more evidently take off from that law than in drafting impeachment provisions."). unreformed into their new republic.48 Thus it is hazardous to suggest, as some have, that the American understanding essentially incorporates the English understanding.49 Especially because the impeachment device had fallen into disuse in England during the century preceding the American founding, there can be little support for the view that the Founders sought to introduce the English practice of, say, 1360 to 1600. With these qualifications, let me briefly investigate the English practice. As it turns out, that practice basically supports the argument I am making here. 
The English idea of "impeachment" arose largely because its objects were, for various reasons, not subject to the reach of conventional criminal law. Hence, ministers and functionaries of the King were subject to impeachment for public offenses. Under English law, the term "misdemeanor" was emphatically not a reference to what we would now call misdemeanor (as opposed to felony); it referred instead to distinctly public misconduct. pTohluisticthaelctreirmmes"haiggahinCstritmheesstaanted."M50isdemeanors" represented "a category of 
In English law, there was some ambiguity in the use of the word "high." Did the term refer to the seriousness of the offense, or to the nature of the office against which the proceeding was aimed? Probably the better view, based on the actual practice, was that the term referred to both.51 In any case a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" could be a serious crime, but it could also be a serious offense that was not a technical violation of the criminal law. Serious misconduct, as in the form of committing the Nation to "'an ignominious treaty,"' was said by some to be a just basis for impeachment in England.52 Whatever one thinks of the particular example, it is clear that there was no consensus in England that a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" had to be a violation of the criminal law. Indeed, the better view-based on what was said at the framing-is that an impeachable offense, to qualify as such, need not be a crime in the United States. 
48 See PETER CHARLES HOFFER & N.E.H. HULL, IMPEACHMENT IN AMERICA, 16351805, at 266-68 (1984) (arguing that the Framers were acquainted with English practice, but did not possess "intimate knowledge" of its details). 
49 See id. at 266-68. Hoffer and Hull examine numerous state practices, revealing that impeachment was relatively common in the colonies and the states. See id. at 78-95. This practice does not, however, show that impeachment of the President was intended to be relatively common, and I do not understand Hoffer and Hull to have so argued. 
50 BERGER, supranote 19, at 61. 
5 See id. at 59-60 ("Impeachment itself was conceived because the objects of impeachment, for one reason or another, were beyond the reach ofordinary criminal redress."). 
52 See id. at 63 (quoting 2 RICHARD WOODDESON, LAWS OF ENGLAND 602-03 (E. Lynch 
For present purposes, the more important point is that the great cases involving charges of impeachable conduct in England reveal a far readier resort to the practice than has been the case in America, probably for the reasons mentioned above. But those cases generally involved criminal or extremely inappropriate conduct in the form of abuse of the authority granted by public office, or, in other terms, the kind of misconduct that someone could engage in only by virtue of holding public office. A prominent listing of the key cases refers to the following: unlawful use of publicly appropriated funds;53 thwarting Parliament's order to store arms and ammunition in storehouses; 54 preventing a political enemy from standing for election and causing his unlawful arrest and detention;55 arbitrarily granting general blank search warrants; 56 and stopping writs of appeal. 57 In addition, a general list suggests that in the great run of cases, impeachment proceedings were brought for the abuse of the distinctive authority vested in public officers.58 It appears that the actual English practice was more wideranging,59 with some exceptions to the basic point I have been urging; but the most highly publicized and well-known cases fell within the category of the egregious use, or misuse, of official powers. 
We may summarize the discussion with two simple points. First, English practice shows a far readier resort to impeachment than the American practice. This difference makes sense in light of the fact that the President is subject to electoral checks and the American commitment to separation of powers. The place of impeachment in a monarchy is naturally different from the place of impeachment in a republic. Second, English practice was concentrated, at least as a general rule, on the abusive exercise of distinctly public authorities. 

I do not believe that the meaning of the Impeachment Clause was settled in 1787, any more than that the meaning of the First Amendment was settled in 1789. Two centuries of practice matter a great deal, especially, perhaps, in the context of separation of powers. But the original under53 See BERGER, supranote 19, at 67. 54 See id. at 68. 55 See id. 56 See id. 57 See id.at 67. 
58 See BERGER, supra note 19, at 69-71 (reducing a list of charges into "intelligible categories," all involving the abuse of authority by public officers). 
See HOFFER & HULL, supra note 48, at 64-67 (explaining that the American practice substantially narrowed prior practice by limiting impeachment to official misconduct). standing is certainly a part of the interpretive picture. The best judgment is that the Impeachment Clause was fundamentally designed for egregious or large-scale abuses of power that officials exercised by virtue of their office. In 1788, it would have been implausible to contend that a president could be impeached for the commission of any crime at all, or that a violation of his oath of office, through a failure to obey the laws, would be by itself sufficient for impeachment. Indeed, in 1788 it would have been close to implausible to suggest that a criminal act was necessary for impeachment; a largescale abuse of office could have provided a good basis for impeachment even ifno crime was involved. 
To be sure, there is no explicit suggestion that the President could not be impeached for misconduct that did not involve an abuse of office. In the framing of ratification debates, I have been unable to find any discussion of murder, rape, or assault, as grounds for impeachment. Although silence on this point is not decisive, it is highly revealing. Whether or not it resolves some barely imaginable cases, it suggests that the key cases, from which any analysis must start, involve close analogies to treason and bribery.60 
What have been our historical practices? This question is important for several reasons. Some people argue that America does and should have a 60 My colleague Joseph Isenbergh has argued that the House has the power to impeach the President for acts short of "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," and also that it is legitimate for the Senate to convict but not to remove the President in the face of a House impeachment; in his view, impeachment is mandatory for "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," but permissive for acts that do not meet that standard. See Joseph Isenbergh, Impeachment and Presidential Immunity from Judicial Process (Dec. 31, 1998) (unpublished manuscript, available at <http:/www.law.uchicago.edulPublications/Occasional>). This is a creative and ingenious argument. I cannot discuss it in detail here, but for three reasons, I do not believe that it should be accepted. The first problem is the sheer weight of history. For well over a century at least, the nation has agreed that without a high crime and misdemeanor, there can be no impeachment, and any effort to disrupt that agreement bears a heavy burden of justification. The second problem is practical: recognition of congressional power to impeach the President (or for that matter judges) for reasons that do not involve high crimes and misdemeanors would gravely threaten the separation of powers. The third problem is that despite its ingenious presentation, I do not believe that Isenbergh has shown that this view had the support of the founding era. Most of his evidence is speculative, inferential, and indirect, and the direct evidence supports the conventional view. Consider, for example, the crucial remark by George Mason, arguing, in his initial claim to include "maladministration," that "it is the more necessary to extend: the power of impeachments." 2 FARRAND, supra note 23, at 550 (emphasis added). This remark, and the following colloquy, would be senseless if Congress already had the power to impeach presidents for grounds falling short of high crimes and misdemeanors. Certainly someone, during the founding and ratification debates, would have been expected to make the mandatory/permissive distinction if it had been what was intended and understood. UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYL VANIA LA W REVIEW common law constitution-a constitutional order in which the meaning of constitutional provisions is settled less by the original understanding than by the practices and judgments that have been developed over time.61 It is controversial to claim that this is the way things should be, but it is undoubtedly part of the way things are. In the context of impeachment, any kind of common law constitution will reflect legislative rather than judicial practices. There are of course no judicial precedents with respect to what counts as an impeachable offense; but there is nonetheless a long line of historical practices, capturing a distinctive set of social judgments. We can build, from these practices, a set of understandings about constitutional meaning. Those understandings greatly fortify the basic proposition I am attempting to defend here. 
A. Impeachments andthe President: Two (ButNow Three) Cases The most important lesson of history is that the exceptional infrequency of serious impeachment proceedings against the President--even in circumstances in which such proceedings might have appeared legitimate-suggests a historical understanding that impeachment is appropriate only in the most extraordinary cases of abuse of distinctly presidential authority. We should notice at the outset that, before the impeachment of President Clinton, there had only been sixteen impeachments; only one President was impeached; and only one other President was subject to serious impeachment inquiry. 
President Nixon was of course subject to an impeachment inquiry because of a series of alleged abuses of the public trust. Thus, Article 1 of the Articles of Impeachment against President Nixon referred to an unlawful epnutrrpyosinetoofthseechueriandgqupaorltietircsalofinttheelliDgeenmcoec"raatnicd NaactoionnspaliraCcoymtomcitoteveer"iftorupth.6e2 Article 2 referred to the allegation that he "repeatedly engaged in conduct violating the constitutional rights of citizens," including the use of the Internal Revenue Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Secret Service. 63 Article 3 referred to repeated refusals to produce papers and things under subpoenas specifically signed "to resolve by direct evidence fundamental, factual questions relating to Presidential direction, knowledge or approval of actions demonstrated by other evidence to be substantial 61 See Strauss, supranote 4, at 877-80 (summarizing the "common law approach to constitutional interpretation"). 
62 HOUSE COMM. ON THE JUDICIARY, IMPEACHMENT OF RICHARD M. NIXON, PRES6I3DEIdN.TatO3F. THE UNITED STATES, H.R. REP. No. 93-1305, at 2 (1974). grounds for impeachment of the President."64 In retrospect, a remarkable feature of these Articles is their relative restraint-fastening on large-scale abuses of distinctly public authority. In exercise of that relative restraint, the House of Representatives declined to proceed against President Nixon with an allegation of unlawful tax evasion. 65 
The only President to have been impeached (though not convicted) was the unelected President Andrew Johnson, who was subject to an extraordinarily partisan battle. The key counts involved allegations that he discharged his Secretary of State in violation of the Tenure in Office Act, which Johnson believed (rightly, as it turned out) to be unconstitutional.6 6 President Johnson was impeached less because of a violation of lawthough there was a violation of law-than because radical Republicans were critical of Johnson on unambiguously political grounds. 67 History has not been kind to that impeachment effort, which weakened the presidency for a period of decades. 68 But even in the Johnson case, when partisan fervor was at its height, the allegations involved the allegedly large-scale abuse of presidential authority, through the lawless exercise of presidential power. With respect to the office of the President, at least, impeachment has been considered as a weapon of rare and last resort, in a way that vindicates the Framers' emphasis on the safeguards of the electoral process. 
64 Id. at 4. 
65 See The U.S. House ofRepresentatives Comm. on the JudiciaryHearingon the Impeachment of the President, 105th Cong. (1998) [hereinafter House Impeachment Hearing, 105th Cong.], availablein 1998 WL 846820 (statements of former Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman (D-NY), former Congressman Robert Drinan (D-MA), former Congressman Wayne Owens (D-UT)) (noting that because it was personal rather than official misconduct, Nixon's tax evasion was not impeachable). 
66 See Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926) (holding that the Tenure in Office Act of 1867 was unconstitutional because it prohibited the President from removing executive of6; See WILLIAM H. REHNQUIST, GRAND INQUESTS: THE HIsToRic IMPEAcHMENTs OF JUSTICE SAMUEL CHASE AND PRESIDENT ANDREW JOHNSON 245 (1992) (noting that a senator from Massachusetts viewed the impeachment issue as based on Johnson's obstruction of Republican policies and not on his violation of the Tenure in Office Act). 
68 See id. at 260 (noting that Henry Cabot Lodge believed that the executive branch was crippled and the balance of power was unduly shifted to Congress as a result of the Johnson impeachment). 
B. Dogs That Didn'tBark6 9 
To have a sense of American history, it is at least as important to have a sense of the cases in which impeachment did not occur as of cases in which it did occur. This topic has received far too little emphasis during discussion of the impeachment question. An examination of American history shows that even when impeachment might well have been contemplated, cooler heads prevailed, and both the Nation and Congress insisted on an extremely high standard. Consider here simply a few cases (they could easily be multiplied), mostly from twentieth-century history; in all of these the House acted with great restraint. The House was correct to do so, both as a matter of constitutional law and as a matter of prudence. I list the cases not to complain about the Nation's failure to pursue the impeachment route, but, on the contrary, to suggest the solidity of the American presumption against impeachment. 

In a decision that has received considerable publicity in the last weeks, the House refused to include, as an impeachment count, legitimate allegations of income tax evasion against President Nixon. A basic ground for the refusal was that income tax evasion-though hardly excusable and indeed a major breach of every citizen's7obligation-did not amount to a misuse of distinctly presidential authority. 0 

President Reagan was allegedly involved in unlawful misconduct in connection with the Iran-Contra controversy; at least he presided over an administration allegedly involved in such unlawful misconduct. Indeed, the Independent Counsel's investigation yielded no fewer than seven guilty pleas and four convictions, including convictions of relatively high-level executive branch officials. 
Many people believed or feared that President Reagan was personally involved in the unlawful acts. This allegation could have been sufficient to 69 See ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE, Silver Blaze, in 1 SHERLOCK HOLMEs: THE COMPLETE NOvELs AND SToRIES 455, 475 (1986) ("Before deciding that question I had grasped the significance of the silence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggests others .... Obviously the midnight visitor was someone whom the dog knew well."). 
70 See House Impeachment Hearing,105th Cong., supra note 65 (statements of former Congresswoman Elizabeth Holtzman (D-NY), former Congressman Robert Drinan (D-MA), former Congressman Wayne Owens (D-UT)) (noting that because it was personal rather than official misconduct, Nixon's tax evasion was not impeachable). commence impeachment hearings to investigate those chSa7r1ges. Nonetheless, impeachment was never considered as a serious option. 

Many people have alleged that Vice-President Bush was involved in aspects of the Iran-Contra controversy, and some people suggested that he had personal knowledge of the unlawful activity. An impeachment investigation would not have been hard to imagine. Here too impeachment never emerged as a serious possibility. 

In World War II, the Lend-Lease Act allowed the President to build and sell arms and ammunition to other nations, most notably England. Before the passage of the Act, the sale of arms to other nations, including England, was prohibited by law. Nonetheless, it is generally agreed that President Roosevelt was secretly and unlawfully transferring arms-including over 20,000 airplanes, rifles, and ammunition-to England. Indeed, illegal approval of such weapons transfers were quite routine in the two full months before Congress authorized it. Even President Roosevelt's Secretary of War "felt troubled by the illegality and deception." 72 It is often said that Roosevelt both deceived and lied to Congress and the American people in connection with the program. 

President Eisenhower lied to the country at least twice. After the Russian downing of a U-2 airplane, he publicly denied that the plane was engaged in intelligence-gathering, claiming that it "may have drifted across the Russian border," and that it was a weather plane. The story had to be retracted after the Soviets produced contrary evidence from the plane.7 3 In 71 This point was highlighted during a hearing of the Constitution Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, when Professor Arthur Schlesinger commented, "[lit seems to me that the Reagan administration systematically violated the Boland Amendments in the course of aid to the contras in Nicaragua." Representative Henry J. Hyde, Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, responded, "If I may answer, professor, I was on the Iran-contra committee, and we went all summer turning over every rock we could. Nobody ever filed a bill of impeachment against the president." HistoryandBackgroundofImpeachment andthe U.S.Constitution,Federal News Service, Nov. 9, 1998, available in LEXIS, News Library, Transcripts File. 
72 Aaron Xavier Fellmeth, A Divorce Waiting to Happen: FranklinRoosevelt and the Law ofNeutrality,1935-1941, 3 BUFF. J. INT'L L. 413, 486 (1996-97). 
See D. WISE & R Ross, TBE U-2 AFFAIR 57 (1960). addition, President Eisenhower shipped arms to a hostile foreign government-Indonesia--in return for the release of a hostage; the administration deceived the Senate and Nation about its activities, and probably violated domestic law as well. 4 

There were widespread claims of a secret "deal" between President Ford and President Nixon, culminating in the pardon granted by President Ford.75 At the time, many Americans suspected that such a "deal" had occurred. So far as I am aware, no evidence supports any such suspicion. But in view of the climate of the time, these claims might well have produced an impeachment inquiry. 

It was widely believed that President Kennedy was involved in a series of illicit sexual relationships while in office, including an illicit sexual relationship with a woman who was simultaneously involved with a member of the Mafia.76 This relationship-some people have suggested-could have compromised the efforts of the Department of Justice. Some people have alleged that whether or not it involved technical violations of law, this reckless behavior reflected a serious indifference to law enforcement efforts. Yet no one has suggested, at the time or since, that impeachment was the appropriate course. 

Consider, as just one further illustration, the fact that President Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus, a serious violation of civil liberties that was ruled unlawful.77 

These are simply a few random examples, and doubtless reasonable people will suggest that some or all of them involve conduct far less egregious, or less legitimately impeachable, than alleged in other actual or hypothetical cases, or with respect to President Clinton. Other reasonable people will disagree; and if these examples seem weak, it should not be hard to come up with others. My basic point is to establish a lengthy historical practice of great restraint. The fact that only one President has been impeached, when many others might have been, attests to the strength and longevity of our historical understandings. 
To be sure, it is not entirely clear how to read this history. A particular problem is that the practices are generally unaccompanied by reasons; we do not have an authoritative explanation of why impeachment was not taken seriously in these cases. A rejoinder to my suggestion would be that the cases of restraint and inaction reveal a practice of cautious exercise of prosecutorial discretion (and sometimes national ignorance of the misconduct). They do not establish a practice of considering wrongdoing that does not involve abuse of office, or wrongdoing that is not exceptionally egregious, to be a basis for impeachment. For various reasons, the Nation has not sought the impeachment route in many cases in which it might have done so. But this kind of forbearance is not relevant to constitutional interpretation. It does not suggest that the Nation was without power to undertake impeachment proceedings in these cases. The Nation might have been responding to political will, or to a lack of public concern about the particular wrongdoing at issue, or to competing considerations not bearing on the constitutional questions. 
This is not an implausible understanding of the relevant history. Certainly there was not, in most of the cases, a considered or explicit judgment against impeachment. Certainly there is a difference between a failure to exercise prosecutorial discretion and a judgment that a certain offense is not impeachable as a matter of law. But it is also entirely reasonable to understand the history as reflecting a national judgment that the impeachment device ought not to be used except in the most extreme cases, and to say as well that this judgment reflects a certain set of beliefs about what offenses are legitimately impeachable. 78 It would be very odd to begin to understand spective of whether the nation is in peace or at war). For the factual details and background of Milligan, the first significant civil liberties decision by the Supreme Court, see William Rehnquist, CivilLiberty andthe Civil War: The IndianapolisTreason Trials,72 IND. L.J. 927 (1997). 
78 Cf. Kent v. Dulles, 357 U.S. 116, 127-30 (1958) (reflecting a judgment that longstanding practice, under an apparently general statute, narrows the statute's reach). the Constitution in a way that would call for impeachment in current and future cases that are, in principle, comparable to those described above. The most reasonable inference is that the Nation has decided that impeachment is not a legitimate solution except in the most egregious cases of presidential wrongdoing.7 9 
C. Is the Office of the PresidentUniquefor Impeachment Purposes? The Constitution allows impeachment of all civil officers-not only the President, but also the Vice President, cabinet heads, and judges-for high crimes and misdemeanors. 80 Does this mean that the same standard applies to all such officers? Are there differences between the legitimate grounds for impeaching a president and the legitimate grounds for impeaching a federal judge? The question is extremely important for current purposes. If the same standards apply, it would make sense to say that the standards-perhaps the more lenient standards-applied to the impeachment of federal judges apply as well to the impeachment of presidents. My basic conclusion is that our history establishes that, as applied, the constitutional standard for impeaching the President has been distinctive, and properly so. 8 
By far the largest majority of impeachments in American history have involved federal judges. Even here, the number is extremely low. In all of American history, there have been just thirteen judicial impeachments. 2 This is an exceptionally small number of impeachments, as remarkable in its way as the corresponding number of presidents, especially when we consider the enormously larger number of judges than presidents. Of those cases, by far the largest number, indeed almost all, involved at least some 79 There is a great deal ofdifference between the argument I am proposing and a reasonable alternative: that the power to impeach is somewhat broader than what I have suggested, but that the House appropriately uses that power only in the most compelling cases. Some people might suggest, for example, that the House had the power to impeach President Clinton, but that it did not, all things considered, exercise its discretion wisely. On this view, the examples I have given show the wise exercise of discretion. I prefer an understanding involving power to an understanding involving the appropriate exercise of discretion because it seems to me to fit somewhat better with history, both in the framing period and throughout history, and because it greatly decreases the likelihood, to which the Founders were alert, that impeachment will be used as a political tool. 
80 See U.S. CONST. art. II, § 4. 
Sl I avoid the word "higher" because it is somewhat misleading. 
82 See 105TH CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supra note 2, at 4-14 (discussing the three federal judges who were impeached in the 1980s); 93D CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supra note 2, at 28-37 (listing 10 impeachments offederal judges between 1787 and 1974). allegation of abuse of distinctly judicial powers. It is possible to argue that three, and conceivably more, of those cases also involved egregious private behavior. But this interpretation is itself questionable, and I will suggest that the most extreme cases involving impeachment of federal judges should not be understood to set a precedent for impeachment of presidents, a point to which I will return. Let us now explore the non-presidential impeachments. 
One U.S. Senator has been impeached. In 1797, William Blount was accused of conspiring with the British to incite Native American forces against the Spanish and was separately expelled from the Senate.83 Justice Samuel Chase was impeached in 1804 for engaging in arbitrary and oppressive treatment of parties before the Court.84 William Belknap, the Secretary of War, was impeached in 1876 for bribery. In 1912, a judge on the U.S. Commerce Court, Robert Archbald, was impeached for influence peddling with litigants. 86 The bulk of impeached officials have been federal district court judges. Consider the following catalogue: 
John Pickering was impeached in 1803 for refusing to hear witnesses in a case, 8f7or violating an act of Congress, and also for drunkenness and blasphemy; of coJuarmt efsorHn.oPleecgkitwimaasteimrepaesaocnh;e8d8 in 1826 for holding a lawyer in contempt 
West H. Humphreys was impeached in 1862 for supporting secession and acting as a confederate judge;8 9 
Mark Delahay was impeached in 1876 for questionable financial dealings and drunkenness; 90 
Charles Swayne was impeached in 1903 for not residing in his district and unlawfully holding attorneys in contempt of court; 91 
George W. English was impeached in 1926 for disbarring lawyers and for threatening members of the press and jurors;92 83 See 93D CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supranote 2, at 29-30. 
84 For a general discussion, see REHNQUIST, supra note 67, at 59 (discussing the charges against Chase based on his conduct during the Fries trial in which he "conducted himself in a manner highly arbitrary, oppressive, and unjust"). 
85 See 93D CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supranote 2, at 34-35. 86 See id. 87 See id.at 32. 88 See id.at 34. 89 See id.at 33. 90 See id.at 32. 91 See id.at 34-35. 92 See id.at 33-34. 
Harold Louderback was impeached in 1932 for setting up a false residence in anticipation of a divorce action by his wife;93 ruptiHonalsintead rReciettievrerwshasipi mcapseea;9c4hed in 1936 for income tax evasion and corperjuHryarirny cColnanibeocrtnioenwwaisthi mthpaetaucnhleadwfiunl 1a9c8t6;95for income tax evasion and for Alcee Hastings was impeached in 1989 for taking a bribe;96 and Walter L. Nixon, Jr. was impeached in 1989 for perjury before a grand jury, in connection with a claim that he had called a prosecutor to obtain favorable treatment for the son of a friend.97 
Of the fifteen non-presidential impeachments, only seven were convicted: Pickering, Humphreys, Archbald, Ritter, Claiborne, Hastings, and Nixon. Delahay, Belknap, and English resigned before the Senate vote. 

In several impeachments, it would be possible to argue that the grounds invoked by the House of Representatives could not meet the test I have suggested for presidential impeachment. Harry Claiborne, for example, was not shown to have abused distinctly judicial powers, and it is possible to make the same argument about Walter Nixon, Jr. and Harold Louderback. Some of the counts for impeaching Mark Delahay and Charles Swayne also seem to fall short of my suggested standard. Do these practices suggest that the test I have suggested is wrong? If, as the text plainly suggests, the same standard governs both the President and the federal judiciary, the answer is that my test is indeed wrong. 
We can distinguish three possible positions here. First, it might be thought that the legitimate grounds for impeachment are the same for all officers. On this view, there is no difference among civil officers. Second, it might be thought that to impeach the President, Congress must meet an especially distinctive or high standard-what counts as a high crime or misdemeanor is context-specific. This view could be described as a suggestion that the same constitutional standard must be applied differently to different officers. An impeachable act for a judge might not be an impeachable act for a vice president. Third, it might be thought that the constitutional standard is the same, but that the House legitimately exercises prosecutorial dis93 See id.at 35, 60. 94 See id. 95 See 105TH CONG. IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY, supra note 2, at 21-23. 96 See id. at 25-27. 97 See id. at 23-25. cretion so as to match offense to office. On this view, for example, perjury may be a clear basis for impeaching a judge (who is charged with operating the system of justice), but not for impeaching the President. For constitutional purposes, we might collapse the first and third positions, since it seems plain that the House, in its exercise of prosecutorial discretion, might legitimately choose not to proceed against someone who has committed technically impeachable offenses,98 and that the nature of the office is relevant to the exercise of discretion. 
At first glance, the constitutional text seems to support the view that the constitutional standards are identical. As noted, the text is the same. But there are several problems with this apparently simple position. The first is based on the history recited above. The Framers' particular concerns involved protection of the President from the discretionary authority of Congress; they sought to insulate the President in particular from a high degree of dependence. They expressed no such concern about judges. It is certainly legitimate to suggest that interpretation should be affected by the Framers' and ratifiers' special concern with excessive use of the impeachment device with respect to the President. 
A second, more structural point involves the great difficulty of removing federal judges, who of course have life tenure. Judicial independence is, of course, important, but the fact that judges have life tenure might well be thought to justify a more expansive impeachment power. If judges can be impeached only for the most grotesque abuses, then the Nation will be stuck with judges whose abuse falls just short of that level for the remainder of those judges' lives. This practical concern argues in favor of a lower standard for impeaching judges, or at least for a different application of the standard. Indeed, this practical concern might reasonably be labeled a structural one, firmly rooted in the Constitution itself. The Constitution's structure-life tenure for judges and four year terms for presidentsstrongly argues in favor of a narrower impeachment power for the President. 
A third and more textual argument is that judges have tenure "during good behavior," a provision that does not, of course, apply to the President. The President may not be removed for "bad behavior." It might be suggested that with respect to judges, the "good behavior" provision qualifies, or works hand in hand with, the Impeachment Clause. It does so by allowing impeachment ofjudges on somewhat broader grounds-bad behaviorand not simply high crimes and misdemeanors, or perhaps high crimes and misdemeanors understood in the context ofjudges to include bad behavior. 98 But see generallyIsenbergh, supranote 60. 
I do not believe that this argument is convincing. Judges may not be removed from office for bad behavior; they may be removed only for high crimes and misdemeanors. The function of the "good behavior" clause is not to give Congress broader power to remove judges from office; it is simply to make clear that judges ordinarily have life tenure. There is no authority in Congress to remove judges who have not engaged in "good behavior." 
On the other hand-and this is the fourth and to me the most important point-judges have particular duties, and it may be that what counts as a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" is understood by reference to those duties. A judge who committed perjury might well be disqualified from the particular office of judge; the same need not be true of the Vice President. On this view, the power of impeachment is understood by the distinct functions of the officer. 
Finally, historical practice suggests a broader congressional power to impeach judges than presidents, and indeed, it suggests a special congressional reluctance to proceed against the President. We might say that our history has unambiguously converged on the judgment that there is a lower threshold for judges than for presidents. The theory is partly that judges cannot otherwise be removed from office. It is partly that it is uniquely destabilizing if presidents are too freely subject to removal from office. To remove a federal judge is an important act, but by itself it does not paralyze the Nation, or place in some doubt the continued stability of domestic and international policy. Presidential impeachment proceedings in this sense have no clear parallel. The existence of a wide range of political checks on presidential misconduct has apparently been thought to provide a kind of surrogate safeguard, one that makes impeachment a remedy of rarest resort.9 9 
III. APPLICATIONS: PRESIDENT CLINTON, MUTUAL 
ARMS CONTROL, AND BEYOND 
My basic purpose thus far has been to defend a particular understanding of the impeachment power. But two elements are missing from the picture. The first, of more immediate interest, has to do with the evaluation of the 1998 impeachment of President Clinton. Did President Clinton commit a 99 The cases in which judges have been impeached for perjury might be understood as suggesting that a judge, whose basic job is to preside over trials, cannot be entrusted with that job in the face of a perjury conviction. Presidential perjury is not excusable, but it is a different sort of problem. It should also be noted that Harry Claibome was impeached partly because he was in jail at the time, and that Walter Nixon, Jr.'s perjury involved a call to a prosecutor. high crime and misdemeanor? This is a time-bound question, of course; and to answer, it will be necessary to spend a little time on an extremely unpleasant and sordid set of events. The second question, of far more general interest, has to do with future uses of the impeachment power, and how the House of Representatives and the Nation should now understand that device. 
I suggest that the impeachment of President Clinton was unconstitutional, because the two articles of impeachment identified no legitimate ground for impeaching the President. Much more importantly, I suggest that it is essential for members of opposing political views to enter into a kind of "mutual arms control agreement," in which they self-consciously decide to use the impeachment weapon only in the most extreme cases, in a small but far from trivial effort to reduce the level of scandal-mongering and accusatio10n0 that has undermined American democracy for the last several decades. 
A. The PeculiarCase ofPresidentClinton 
Both the original understanding and-historical practice converge on a simple principle: The principal purpose of the impeachment provision is to allow the House of Representatives to impeach the President of the United States for egregious misconduct that amounts to the abusive misuse of the authority ofhis office. This principle does not exclude the possibility that a president would be impeachable for an extremely heinous "private" crime, such as murder or rape. But it suggests that outside of such extraordinary (and unprecedented) cases, impeachment is unacceptable. 

How does all this bear on the current allegations against President Clinton? The first implication is that the charges made by Judge Kenneth Starr and David Schippers did not, even if proven, constitute legitimately impeachable offenses under the Constitution. The second implication is that no impeachable offense was identified in the four Articles of Impeachment voted on by the House of Representatives, including the two Articles that were approved. These charges do not involve egregious misuse of the powers of the office of the President. Perjury and obstruction of justice-the basis of the two Articles that passed the House-are extremely serious charges, and they are legitimately the basis for a criminal indictment. There 100 1 discuss the lessons of the impeachment of President Clinton from other angles in FromImpeachment to Reform, 51 FLA. L. REV. (forthcoming 1999). is nothing trivial about these charges. But the alleged acts did not involve perjury or obstruction of justice in connection with an alleged abuse of office. There is no allegation, for example, that President Clinton attempted to obstruct justice with respect to an investigation of his misuse of the Central Intelligence Agency, or that he perjured himself in connection with unlawful trading of arms to a nation with whom the United States has an unfriendly relationship. There is no question that perjury and obstruction of justice could be legitimately impeachable offenses; but under the standard I have outlined, these acts fall far short of the constitutional standard if they involve an effort to conceal an illicit sexual relationship. 
The closest claim, not passed by the House, involves the suggestion that the President lied to his advisers and enlisted their help in covering up his illicit relationship and his lies about it. Perhaps the relevant acts involved, in some sense, the authority of the office of the President; it is reasonable to think that in some sense they did. But this suggestion falls far short of a legitimate basis for impeachment. We do not have, with this kind of misuse of authority, the level of misuse that would justify an analogy to treason (as understood at the time of the framing or since) or bribery. 

Let us explore several responses to this claim. One possible view, suggested by many observers, is that no matter the crime, it is simply unacceptable for a criminal to stay in the White House. If the President in fact committed a crime, it might be said he is legitimately removed from office. It should be clear that this view is not consistent with the Constitution as it is written. The President is palpably not removable for the commission of any crime. The question is whether he has committed a high crime or misdemeanor.10 1 Criminality is not a sufficient ground for impeachment. 
A related response would stress the possibility that the President has, by committing perjury and engaging in other unlawful acts, violated the rule of law, his oath of office, and his duty under the Take Care Clause of the Constitution. 102 This may well be true, but as grounds for impeachment it is a weak argument. It cannot be claimed that any violation of the oath of office, or any law, or the Take Care Clause, is a legitimate basis for impeachment, without rereading the Constitution in a quite fundamental way. Presi101 It is possible to understand "high" as referring to the office, not the crime, and this is not an implausible view of the English practice. But in America, the concern was so conspicuously to require serious criminality, not any criminality, that this view could not, for us, be seriously urged. 
102 U.S. CONST. art. II, § 3. dent Truman, for example, was held to have violated the Take Care Clause by seizing the steel mills, 10 3 and many of the cases described above involved presidential violations of law. Law violations that amount to a violation of the oath of office, or the Take Care Clause, cannot count as impeachable offenses without something more than that. 

In the present context, it would be possible to respond to my basic suggestion-that President Clinton's alleged wrongdoing does not meet the constitutional standard-in two more subtle ways. First, it might be urged that actual or possible counts against President Clinton-the two Articles for which he was impeached, and perhaps also frequent lies to the American public-are very serious indeed, and in a sense uniquely serious. No other president has been charged with lying under oath, and President Clinton is joined only by President Nixon in having been charged with obstruction of justice. It follows that if these very serious charges are deemed a legitimate basis for impeachment, little or nothing will be done to alter the traditional conception of impeachment. Perhaps some of these charges, involving interactions with his advisers designed to promote lies or continued procedural objections to the underlying inquiry, even amount to abuse of power. In any case, the acts of lying within the criminal justice system and enlisting others in the effort to do so are highly distinctive, different in kind from past allegations against any other president (with the exception of President Nixon). It might even be urged (as discussed below) that these acts are very close indeed to bribery. If the President may be impeached for bribing a judge or bribing a witness, may he not be impeached for lying under oath or encouraging others to lie on his behalf? Second, and more ambitiously, it might be said that whatever history and past practice show, we should understand the Constitution's text to allow the President to be impeached, via the democratic channels, whenever a serious charge, of one sort or another, is both made and proven. Let me take up these two responses in sequence. 
If the first claim is that certain kinds of falsehoods under oath, perjury, obstruction of justice, and so forth, could be a legitimate basis for impeachment, there can be no objection. As I have suggested, a false statement under oath about a practice of using the IRS to punish political opponents would almost certainly be an impeachable offense; so, too, would a false statement about the acceptance of a bribe to veto legislation. False state103 See Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer (The Steel Seizure Case), 343 U.S. 579, 587-89 (1952) (holding that the seizure ofsteel mills by the President could not be sustained under the provisions ofArticle II ofthe Constitution, including the Take Care Clause). ments under oath might well be a legitimate basis for impeachment. Indeed, lying to the American people may itself be an impeachable offense if, for example, the President says that a treaty should be signed because it is in the best interest of the United States when in fact he supports the treaty because its signatories have agreed to donate money to his campaign. Nor can it be denied that it is important to tell the truth under oath, no matter the subject of the discussion. But it does not diminish the universal importance of telling the truth under oath to say that whether perjury or a false statement is an impeachable offense depends on what it is about. The same is true for "obstruction of justice" or interactions with advisers designed to promote the underlying falsehood. 
Of course, anyone can be prosecuted for violating the criminal law, and if the President has violated the criminal law, he is properly subject to criminal prosecution after his term ends. 10 4 But it does not make much sense to say, for example, that an American president could be impeached for false statements under oath10 5 in connection with a traffic accident in which he was involved, or that a false statement under oath, designed to protect a friend in a negligence action, is a legitimate basis for impeachment. Just as sensible prosecutors make decisions about which perjuries are sufficiently serious to warrant prosecution, so a constitutional provision allowing impeachment for "high Crimes and Misdemeanors" should not be taken to treat all perjuries as of a piece. 
Probably the best general statement is that a false statement under oath is an appropriate basis for impeachment if and only if the false statement involves conduct that by itself raises serious questions about abuse of office. A false statement about an illicit, consensual sexual relationship, obstruction of justice, and a "conspiracy" to cover up that relationship, are not excusable or acceptable; the President can be made accountable for them via indictment after he leaves office; but they are not high crimes or misdemeanors under the Constitution. The same is true for the other allegations made about President Clinton thus far. It trivializes the criminal law to say that some violations of the criminal law do not matter or do not matter much. But it trivializes the Constitution to say that any false statement under oath, regardless of its subject matter, provides a proper basis for impeachment. 
104 It is an unsettled question whether a president may be indicted while in office. I believe that Clintonv. Jones, 117 S. Ct. 1636 (1997), would not be understood to allow a president to be subject to a criminal trial, which is far more likely to threaten the performance of the President's constitutional duties than a civil proceeding. In any case, it is clear that an effort to put the President injail could not be consistent with Article II. 
105 1 use this term as a placeholder for any allegations of conspiracy, obstruction ofjustice, improper use of legal privileges, and so forth in connection with the illicit sexual relationship in question. 

Of course, people of good faith could say that the President has a special obligation to the truth, especially in a court of law, and that it is therefore reasonable to consider impeachment whenever the President has violated that obligation. It is certainly true that as the Nation's chief law enforcement officer, the President has a special obligation to the truth. Perhaps such people also believe that false statements under oath, perjury, obstruction of justice, and associated misconduct are genuinely unique and that impeachment for such statements and misconduct would therefore fail to do damage to our historical practice of resorting to impeachment only in the most extreme cases. But this position has serious problems of its own. Even if it would be possible, in principle, for reasonable people to confine the current alleged basis for impeachment, it is extremely doubtful that the line could be held in highly partisan practice. Thus, the House's judgment that the current grounds are constitutionally appropriate has set an exceedingly dangerous precedent for the future, a precedent that could threaten to turn impeachment into a political weapon, in a way that would produce considerable instability in the constitutional order. 
Consider, for example, the fact that reasonable people can and do find tax evasion far more serious than false statements about a consensual sexual activity, and that reasonable people can and do find an unlawful arms deal more serious, from a constitutional standpoint, than either. The question is not whether those people are correct; they may or may not be. The problem is deeper than that. Whenever serious charges are made, participants in politics may well be pushed in particular directions by predictable partisan pressures. The serious risk is therefore that contrary to the constitutional plan, impeachment will become a partisan tool to be used by reference to legitimate arguments by people who have a great deal to gain. As we will soon see, a special risk of a ready resort to the impeachment instrument is that it would interact, in destructive ways, with existing trends in American democracy. From the standpoint of the constitutional structure, it is far better to draw a line in the sand, one that has been characteristic of our constitutional practice for all of our history: a practice of invoking impeachment only for the most extreme cases of abuse of distinctly presidential authority. 
There is an important question about how those who approve (as I do not) of the impeachment of President Clinton will, and should, regard the general principle for which that impeachment stands. I suggest that in order to remain as true as possible to our history, they should urge that President Clinton committed serious felonies in direct connection with the judicial system, and that it is appropriate to impeach the President for such serious UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYL VANIA LAW REVIEW and unique acts, even if presidential power was not involved. On this view, the impeachment of President Clinton does not signal any departure from our practices, nor does it mean that impeachment can be used more readily than it has in the past.10 6 
B. ImpeachmentNow 
But should the Nation adopt a lower standard for impeachment of the President? Should we, for example, conclude that impeachment is legitimate for criminality not involving misuse of office, or for misuse of office that is perhaps not as "high" as has traditionally been thought? We might consider, for example, the following propositions: 
or criminal) involving the performance of his official responsibilities at any time in public life. 
or criminal) involving the performance of his official responsibilities while in office. 
official powers. 
In the abstract, it is not clear whether a nation should subscribe to one, two, or all of these propositions if it were creating a constitution from first principles. Undoubtedly, a movement in the direction of propositions 1, 2, or 3 would push a nation more toward a parliamentary system in which the head of the executive branch can be removed from office upon a vote of"no confidence." In the abstract, it is hardly obvious that an intermediate system-a presidential system in which the President can be removed not for mere lack of confidence, but because he has committed some identifiable offense-would be inferior to the alternatives. Perhaps such an intermediate system would create more in the way of separation of powers than a parliamentary system, but not the degree of dependence that a parliamentary system creates. Perhaps the degree of separation produced by our hypothetical intermediate system would be optimal. Surely it is possible to imagine assumptions under which this would be true. Institutional questions of this kind do not have acontextual answers. 
106 The legacy of the impeachment of President Clinton is discussed in more detail in Cass R. Sunstein, Lessonsfrom Impeachment to Reform, 51 FLA. L. REV. (forthcoming 1999). 
For the United States, it is doubtful that we could create such a system, short of a constitutional amendment. But suppose that we could move in that direction, via interpretation or amendment. Should we seek to do so? I think that the clear answer is that we should not. The reason has a great deal to do with the nature of both the contemporary presidency and modem American democracy, where political disagreements are frequently turned into allegations of scandalous behavior, asserting, all too often, an abuse of public trust, a violation of law, or even criminality. This is not a claim that the allegations are usually offered in bad faith or are always without merit, or that what emerges in practice does not sometimes amount to an abuse, a violation, or a crime. Political opponents can, on occasion, uncover something quite bad. My claim is instead that the focus on this kind of material has a series of unfortunate effects for American self-government, and that the possible benefits (discouraging and discovering bad conduct) do not justify those unfortunate effects. 
Let us briefly consider the Independent Counsel Act ("the Act") 10 7 and then move to the topic of impeachment. 10 8 The Act was a well-intentioned effort to promote trust in government by ensuring that independent officials would be entrusted with the authority to investigate allegations of improper behavior by high-level people in the executive branch. In practice, however, the Act has created a variety of harmful incentives for Congress, the media, and the independent counsel himself. Members of an opposing party have every incentive to ask for the appointment of an independent counsel, and to take any apparent wrongdoing extremely seriously, in such a way as to divert attention from the actual task of making lives better for citizens. Reporters who are concerned with audience share (which is to say almost all reporters) are under considerable pressure to give great attention to the appointment of an independent counsel, or the work of the counsel, in such a way as to crowd out news about more substantive matters. And armed with an unlimited budget and a narrow focus, the Independent Counsel has a natural incentive toward zealotry in a way that contrasts sharply with the ordinary criminal prosecutor, who would spend little or no time on many of the cases that have been the focus of independent counsel investigations. (None of this is a comment about the Independent Counsels themselves; all of them have been honorable people). The result of all this has been a disaster for the American public-a diversion from serious issues, a fear that all politicians are crooks, and a deepened distrust of politicians. 107 28 U.S.C. §§ 591-99 (1994). 
103 For a more detailed discussion of the Act, see Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Incentives and BadInstitutions, 86 GEO. W.2267 (1998). 
Now consider impeachment in this light. Under current conditions, what is likely to happen if the grounds for impeachment are expanded? The serious risk is that impeachment will become a political weapon, one to be used as a kind of substitute for the tasks of running the country and making people's lives better. Of course, one way to attempt to be elected, or reelected, is to say that a certain policy initiative is actually desirable and will do a great deal of good. But another way to get elected, or reelected, is to claim that members of the opposing party have actually committed crimes and are in fact criminals to be eliminated from office. A risk of a ready resort to the impeachment instrument is that it would interact, in destructive ways, with existing trends in American democracy. 
We may go further. In light of the incentives faced by the media and the opposition party, and in the context of the Act, it was close to inevitable that the impeachment instrument would eventually be invoked as a mechanism to oust the President from office. With the unlimited budget and narrow focus of the Independent Counsel, some such Counsel would, sooner or later, generate evidence that an American president has been involved in some kind of crime. An impeachment proceeding would follow. None of this eliminates President Clinton's own responsibility. The impeachment of President Clinton reflected an odd constellation of events: the President's own inexcusable misconduct; the incentives of the press and the opposing party; the natural incentive effects of the Act for Independent Counsels themselves; and the "referral" mechanism which essentially allows the independent counsel to initiate an impeachment inquiry. 
There is one final point. The office of the President has assumed more rather than less importance since the Founding, and in at least some respects, its importance has continued to grow in every twenty-year period in the twentieth century. This is true both domestically, where the President is entrusted with ensuring execution of an extraordinary range of legislation, and internationally, where the President is the only real spokesman for the Nation. In these circumstances, the great risk of the impeachment mechanism is that it is destabilizing in a way that threatens to punish the Nation as much as, or perhaps far more than, the President himself. Since the purpose of impeachment is not to punish officials but to protect the Nation, 109 this is a cruel irony. 
None of these points amounts to a demonstrationthat it would be undesirable to move in the direction of a "lower bar" for impeachment. The 109 See BERGER, supra note 19, at 1, 5-6, 297-98 (distinguishing impeachment from criminal prosecutions and suggesting that the Framers "were steeped in history" in intending for impeachment to be used as a means of preserving the effectiveness of the government rather than as an instrument to punish officials for their conduct). 
IMPEACHINGTHE PRESIDENT question is what would be gained and what would be lost. If the basic purpose of government is to make for better lives for citizens, it is highly likely that nothing would be gained and a considerable amount would be lost. It would be far better for the House of Representatives to conform to our history and to adopt a kind of "mutual arms control" agreement by which members of opposing parties would agree not to use the impeachment weapon, with its potentially destructive effect on national stability, except in the most egregious cases. 
C. ImaginableCases 
By way of summary and review, let us now explore a set of possible cases for impeaching the President. 
substantial campaign contributions in return for a promise to help that country, even though the help endangers the national security of the United States. This is an easy case for impeachment. Even if it does not involve treason, it does involve a "high" crime and is, therefore, an impeachable offense. 
incriminating evidence about, and to punish, political adversaries. This conduct may not involve a violation of the criminal law but it nonetheless involves an impeachable offense-an egregious abuse of the power of the office. 
basic tasks of office, not because he has made choices with which many people disagree, but because he has essentially defaulted. The default may be a result of drunkenness, mental illness, physical problems, or sheer laziness. Here, too, there is no crime, but there is a misdemeanor sufficient to remove the President from office. 
not a legitimate basis for impeachment. There is no misuse of distinctly governmental authority. 
there is no basis for impeachment because there is no misuse of distinctly governmental authority. 
impeachment. It falls within the same category as case two above-an egregious abuse of the President's power. 
him. There is no political motivation; the dispute is entirely personal. This is a hard case under the analysis thus far. There is no clear view from history. On one view, there is no abuse of distinctly presidential powers, and hence no impeachable offense. On another view, the best conclusion is that the President can be impeached for this level of private misconduct on the theory that this is undoubtedly an exceptionally serious crime, and the President is not likely to be able to govern after committing such a crime. Perhaps the Constitution would make little sense if it did not permit the Nation to remove murderers from the highest office in the land. It would probably be intolerable not to allow the President to be removable in such apnroedxutcreemaedicfafesere;nthtejukdegyempoeinntt iasbtohuattctahsiessjufdougrmaenndt fsihvoeualdbonvoet.'b1e0 allowed to 
D. A Note on Partisanship 
From their discussion in Philadelphia, it is clear that the Framers feared that impeachment could be used as a political tool, and sought to ensure a standard that would insulate the President from impeachments that were driven by factions, passions, or parochial interests. And while the Framers did not anticipate the rise of political parties, it is reasonable to ask whether and how the interest in "bipartisanship" should bear on the topic of impeachment. The impeachment of Andrew Johnson seems deplorable in large part because of its partisan character."' And it is fair to say that the founding debates show a general intention of allowing the impeachment devices to be invoked only where there was a kind of national consensus, cutting across partisan disagreements, to the effect that the President had grossly abused his official powers. It makes sense to endorse the general principle, on which history has also generally converged, to the effect that the President (or for that matter judges) should not be subject to serious impeachment inquiry unless there is at least some consensus, across political lines, that the inquiry is justified. It follows that future impeachments should be avoided unless and until people who disagree on political questions can be brought to agree that the President has committed deeds that justify his removal from office. 
110 This conclusion does not contradict my suggestion that presidential abuse of power is ordinarily required; I am speaking here of an extremely unusual case, an exception to the general proposition. 
See, e.g., JOHN F. KENNEDY, PROFILES IN COURAGE 126 (1961) (describing the impeachment as "the sensational climax to the bitter struggle" between President Johnson and the Radical Republicans); REHNQUIST, supranote 67, at 208-09, 214-18 (describing the role ofthe Radical Republicans in passing the impeachment resolution in the House of Representatives). 
CONCLUSION 
Text, history, and long-standing practice suggest that the notion of "high Crimes and Misdemeanors" should generally be understood to refer to large-scale abuses that involve the authority that comes from occupying a particular public office. A President who accepted a bribe from a foreign nation, or who failed to attend to the public business during a war, would be legitimately subject to impeachment. Perjury or false statements under oath could certainly qualify as impeachable offenses if they involved, for example, lies about using the Internal Revenue Service to punish one's political opponents or about giving arms, unlawfully, to another nation. The most ordinary predicate for impeachment is an act, by the President, that amounts to a large-scale abuse of distinctly presidential authority. 
If there is ever to be impeachment outside of that category of cases-if the experience with President Clinton is to be repeated-it should be on exceedingly rare occasions. This principle is consistent with the basic view of the Nation during the founding era. In the current period, the argument for adhering to this view has been strengthened rather than weakened. It has been strengthened partly because of a long historical tradition of forbearance and restraint, one that has created a strong norm against the commencement of impeachment proceedings, even when the President's misconduct has been quite serious. And it has also been strengthened by current trends in the modem political system, which has seen decreasing attention to issues of substance and increasing attention to allegations of misconduct, criminal or otherwise. In such circumstances, the impeachment device stands not as a political tool, but as a remedy of last resort, designed to make possible the removal from office of those presidents whose egregious official misconduct has produced a social consensus that continuation in office is no longer acceptable. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 209.175.73.10 on Sun, 07 Feb 2016 11:43:38 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
regulatetobaccoproducts.He considersthe textof the FederalFood, Drug, and CosmeticAct, whichsupportsthe FDA assertion,and the contextof its enactment,whicharguesagainstthe FDA. He resolves the tensionbetweentextand contextin favor of FDA jurisdictionby turningto the emergingrole of administrativeagencies.In modern government, he contends, administrativeagencies have become America'scommonlaw courts,withthepower to adaptstatutoryregimes to newfacts and new valueswhenthe underlyingstatuteis ambiguous. 
was writtenafterthe UnitedStatesDistrictCourtfor the MiddleDistrictof North CarolinadecidedCoyne Beahm v. FDA,' but beforea threejudgepanel of the UnitedStatesCourtof Appealsfor theFourth Circuitreversedthatdecisionin Brown& WilliamsonTobaccoCorp. v. FDA.2 In Coyne Beahm, the DistrictCourtheld that the Federal Food, Drug, and CosmeticAct authorizedthe FDA to regulatetobacco products,but not tobacco advertising.The Fourth Circuitrejected the District Court'sjurisdictionalruling and invalidatedthe FDA's regulationsin theirentirety.The ClintonAdministrationhas since requestedan en bancrehearingbeforetheFourthCircuit.3 t KarlN. LlewellynDistinguishedServiceProfessorof Law,Universityof Chicago.I am gratefulto ElizabethGarrett,Jack Goldsmith,Dan Kahan,MarthaNussbaum,Eric Posner, RichardPosner,DavidStrauss,andPeterStraussforvaluablecomments.Inhis Article,Professor Sunsteinpresentsthe argumentshe firstofferedon March6, 1998,at the Duke LawJournal's1998AdministrativeLawConference. 
1013 
INTRODUCTION 
Does the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have the authorityto regulatetobacco and tobacco products?For a long time the FDA said that it did not. In 1996, the FDA changed its mind.4 The principalissue raisedby this assertionof authorityis whethertobacco qualifiesas a "drug." 
The issue is exceptionallyimportantfor both policy and law. It is importantfor policy becauseFDA authorityover tobaccoproductsis significantin itself, and also because a resolutionof the case will provide the backdropfor statutorydevelopmentsand for any continuing settlement negotiations between the tobacco industry and government.5Obviouslynew initiativeswill be much affectedby the existing power of the FDA. The question is important for law because it raises large issues not only about the Food, Drug, and CosmeticAct (FDCA)6but also about the natureof statutoryinterpretationin the administrativestate. Above all, these questionsinvolve the respective roles of courtsand administrativeagenciesin settlingthe meaningof federallaw. 
Theterm'drugm'eans(A) articlesrecognize din theofficialUnited States Pharmacopoeia,official HomeopathicPharmacopoeiaof the United States,or officialNationalFormulary,or any supplementto any of them;and (B) articlesintendedfor use in the diagnosis,cure, mitigation,treatment,or preventionof disease in man or other animals;and (C) articles(otherthanfood) intendedto affectthe structure or any functionof the body of man or other animals;and (D) CigarettesandSmokelessTobaccoto ProtectChildrenand Adolescents,61 Fed. Reg. 44,396,44,396(1996) (codifiedat 21 C.F.R.pts. 801, 803, 804, 807, 820, 897 (1997)) [hereinafterFDA Regulations](announcing regulationof the sale andpromotionof cigarettesand smokelesstobaccoto individualsunder the age of eighteen). 
Excerpts From Agreement Between States and Tobacco Industry, N.Y. TIMES,June 25, 1997, at B8 [hereinafter Tobacco Settlement Excerpts]; see also Barry Meier, Talks Stall in Effort to Reach TobaccoAccord,N.Y. TIMESA,ug. 5, 1998,at A14 (reportingthat recentsettlementnegotiationshavebeen abandoned). 
(1994& Supp.II 1997)).The FDCA replacedthe PureFood andDrug Act of June30, 1906, Pub.L. No. 59-384,34 Stat.768 (codifiedas amendedat 21 U.S.C.?? 1-15(1934)).SeeFDCA, ?902(a), 52 Stat. at 1059 (codified at 21 U.S.C. ? 301 (1994)). articlesintendedfor use as a componentof anyarticlespecifiedin For purposesof the FDA's assertionof jurisdictionover tobacco, the key provision is clause (C), defining a drug as an "article[] ... intended to affect the structureor any functionof the body."Is tobacco such an article? I will be urging here that the FDA has the legal authorityto answerthis question either no or yes, and that its yes in 1996is thereforelawful.8 
The dispute over the authorityof the FDA9 to regulate tobacco raises a numberof questions-indeed, a remarkablyhigh percentage supplement... is not a drugsolelybecausethe labelor the labelingcontainssucha claim."Id. 
involvingdrugsand devices. See FDA Regulations,supranote 4, at 44,403.I deal principally here with the issue of whethertobaccoproductsqualifyas "drugs."An affirmativeansweris the basicpredicatefor FDA authorityunderthe FDA's conclusionthatcigarettesare "devices" because"theprimarypurposeof partsof the cigarette... is to effectuatethe deliveryof a carefullycontrolledamountof the nicotineto a site in the humanbodywhereit can be absorbed." Analysis Regarding the Food and Drug Administration'sJurisdiction Over NicotineContainingCigarettesand SmokelessTobaccoProducts,60 Fed. Reg. 41,453,41,522(Aug. 11, 1995)[hereinafterFDA JurisdictionaAlnalysis].The statutorydefinitionof "device"includes: [A]n instrument,apparatus,implement,machine,contrivance,implant,in vitroreagent, or othersimilaror relatedarticle,includingany component,part,or accessory, which is ( animals,and whichdoesnot achieveits primaryintendedpurposesthroughchemicalactionwithin or on the body or man or other animalsandwhichis not dependentupon being metabolizedfor the achievementof its primaryintendedpurposes. dressed,andI makea few supplementalpoints. note 1, at 44,402(explainingFDA jurisdictionover combinationproducts). 21 U.S.C. ? 321(h) (1994).I do not discussthis provision,except to suggestthat if the FDA is authorizedto define tobaccoproductsas a drug,it is almostcertainlyauthorizedto treatsuch productsas "combinationproducts"subjectto its deviceauthority.SeeFDA Regulations,supra appealsinvalidatedthe FDA regulationon variousgrounds.See Brown& WilliamsonTobacco Corp.v. FDA, Nos. 97-1604,97-1581,97-1606,97-1614,97-1605,1998WL 473320,at *1 (4th Cir. Aug. 14, 1998). The points made by the court are discussedat separateplaces below; I identify the elements of the court's analysishere, and also the places where these are ad 
The moststrikingfeatureof the court'sapproachis its failureto dealwiththe language of the key provisionof the statute,an especiallystrikingomissionin lightof the court'sadmission that the "literal"languageof the statute stronglysupportsthe FDA. See Brown & Williamson,1998WL 473320,at *4. An especiallydisturbingfeatureof the court'sopinionis the of the set of questions raised in a whole semester of administrative law. Examplesof these questionsinclude the following:the power of an administrativeagency to change its mind; the role of unenacted legislation;the extent to which subsequentlegislative action can divest an agencyof authoritythatit mightotherwisehave;the authority of an agency to define its own jurisdiction;and the law-interpreting power of agencies.The dispute over the FDA's authoritycould ultimately be resolved on these or any numberof other grounds,and I will take up these and other questionsin the courseof the discussion. sheer numberof argumentsinvoked on behalf of its conclusion;the courtgives no sense of whichof those argumentsare necessary,or sufficient,for the outcome.In anycase the following arethe principalpoints. 
First,the courtsuggestedthatthe FDA's view was entitledto less thanthe usuallevel of deferencebecauseit involveda determinationof its ownjurisdictionS.ee Brown& Williamson, 1998WL473320,at *3.Even if thissuggestionis correct,the FDA shouldprobablyprevail underthe narrowrationaleurgedbelow,in PartV.C.1. 
virtue of the factthatthe FDA didnot bantobaccoproductsafterfindingthey qualifiedas combinationproducts.See Brown& Williamson1,998WL473320,at *4-9.Thiswas a structuralargument.The courtsuggestedthat drugsand devicesmustbe provedsafe and effectivebefore they can be sold,see 21 U.S.C. ? 360c(a)( dangerous and unsafe,but were not banned,showsthat the agencyhad acted unlawfully.The court invokedvariousprovisionsrequiringcertainrestrictionson drugsanddevices,suchas a banon misbrandeddrugsanddevices,see 21 U.S.C.? 331(a)(1998),anda requirementthatdrugscontainadequatedirectionsfor use,see 21 U.S.C. ? 352(f)( (1998) (requiringadequatewarningsagainstuse by children);21 U.S.C. ? 360c(b)( (requiringclassificationsof devices intendedfor humanuse); 21 U.S.C. ? 360h(e)( (requiring"ceasedistribution"ordersfor productsfound to cause seriousadversehealthconsequences).In the court'sview, the FDA's failureto impose variousdisabilitieson tobacco, includinga ban,suggestedthatthe FDA hadviolatedthe statute. 
This is, however,an extremelypuzzlingargument.If the FDA concludedthat some substanceX is a drug,but did not ban X, it wouldnot follow that the FDA lacked authority over X. It mightfollow thatthe FDA had actedunlawfullyin failingto ban X; withrespectto tobacco,it mightalsofollow,fromthe court'sargumentst,hatthe FDA wasrequiredto engage in variousotherregulatoryrestrictionsB.utthe FDA offeredreasonableargumentsfor refusing to bantobaccoproducts,see infranotes 75-77andaccompanyingtext,or to requireinstructions on how to use cigarettes,see FDA Regulations,supranote 4, at 44,520-21,andin any case any inadequacyin these argumentswould not justify a conclusionthat the FDA lacked legal authorityover tobacco products.It would merelyjustify a conclusionthat the FDA was requiredto go furtherthanit did. 
Third,the court found "extrinsicevidence"againstthe regulationin the failure to mentiontobaccoin the text or historyof the Act; in the FDA's historicalpractice;in congressional inaction;and in Congress'stobacco-specificlegislation.See Brown & Williamson,1998 WL 473320,at *9-19.Each of these argumentsis addressedbelow. See infranotes 53-61 and accompanyingtext (discussingthe FDA's historicalpractice);infranotes 179-187(discussing congressionalinactionor the lack thereof);infranotes 188-190(discussingCongress'stobaccospecificlegislation). 
My principalemphasis, however, will be on a conflict between two differentstyles of statutoryinterpretation.'0The first is a form of literalism:it stresses the need to interpret statutory terms in accordance with their ordinary,plain meaningto speakersof English."Because of the breadth of the language of the FDCA, this approach strongly supports the FDA. The second style of interpretation is more contextual: it emphasizes the need to understand statutory terms taken in their original context, in accordance with thencontemporaryunderstandingsof their meaning. This argumentcreates serious problemsfor the FDA because the context of the statute suggests a narrowerreading than the text alone. These two styles produce conflicts in many different areas of statutory law. To take just two examples, the dispute between them accounts for internal disputes on the Supreme Court about the legality of affirmativeaction undera law forbidding"discrimination"'a2nd also about whether someone "uses"a gun when he sells it for cash.'3 
There is no simple or easy choice between the two approaches. The literalist approach has many advantages. It enables diverse judges to coordinate about both method and outcomes, prevents guessing games about the nature of past contexts, and may well impose good incentives on the enacting legislature.'4Its disadvantageis the two stylesmaybe foundbelow,in PartIV.C. 

Of course,thisidea producesmanypuzzlesof its own.In the contexthere, it is intelligible becausethe definitionof "drug"does have suchan ordinarymeaningthat,as we will see, becomesunsettledonly by an investigationof context.For a discussionof the possibilityof literal interpretation, see FREDERICKSCHAUER,PLAYINGBY THE RULES:A PHILOSOPHICAL EXAMINATIONOF RULE-BASED DECISION-MAKINGIN LAW AND IN LIFE 215-18 (1991) (arguingthat interpretationis difficultonly in the rarecase). A recent case stronglyaffirming the "plainmeaning"approachto statutoryinterpretationis Broganv. UnitedStates,118 S. Ct. 805, 808 (1998) (statingthatthe Courtshouldnot inferunwrittenlimitationsin an act when its languagehas a clearmeaning).For a more detaileddiscussionof Brogan,see infranotes 161168andaccompanyingtext. 
ban on racial discriminationdoes not encompassall private sector affirmativeaction programs).For a more detailed discussionof Weber,see infranotes 151-153and accompanying text. that, by wrenchingstatutoryterms out of their context, it may well lead to understandingsof statutory terms that are quite different from those of the enactingCongressand may, in that sense, produce significantmistakes."The chief advantageof the contextualapproach is that it builds on a sensible understandingof how the governing words were understood by ordinarypeople, including members of Congress, at the time of enactment.16Its disadvantageis that it increases the burdensof judicialjudgmentsand may involve unreliable speculationabout the natureof the relevantcontext. 
In the abstract,the choice between the two approachesis very difficult."A key question is whether Congresswould respondto the literalistapproachin the desiredway, by legislatingmore clearlybefore the fact and by respondingto any errors.To the extent that this kind of legislative response is likely and to the extent that agencies ought not be permittedto bringcoercivepower to bear in an area on which Congresshas not focussed,a court-if forced to decide the tobacco question on its own-might do well to hold that despite the statute'sliterallanguage,tobacco is not a drugwithinthe meaningof the FDCA because the term "drug"has a particular,highly contextual meaning.'8But a courtpresentedwith this questionis not making such a choice on its own. 
Formalism, 107 YALE L.J. 529, 557 (1997) [hereinafter Sunstein, Democratic Formalism] (explainingJusticeScalia'sapproachto statutoryinterpretationas,in part,"aseriesof information-elicitingdefault rules"which ideally "encourageCongressto state its will clearly").It mightalso be justifiedas a low-costmethodof allowinga widerangeof people to convergeon a particularoutcome.See FrederickSchauer,AshwanderRevisited,1995SUP.CT.REV.71, 74 (arguingthatthe costsof strainedreadingsof statutesso as to avoidconstitutionailnvalidation outweighsthe benefits). 
1994 Sup. Ct. Rev. 429, 527 (criticizingthe SupremeCourt'stextualismfor yieldingdecisions unresponsiveto the organicdevelopmentof statutes);RichardJ. Pierce, TheSupremeCourt's New Hypertextualism: An Invitation to Cacophony and Incoherence in the Administrative State, 95 Colum.L. Rev. 749,752 (1995) (claimingthatthe recententhusiasmof the SupremeCourt for textualismsometimesleadsto "findinglinguisticprecisionwhereit does not exist"). 
The FDA has a large law-interpretingrole and it has made some distinctive findings in the case of tobacco that support its regulations.19In light of those findingsandthat role, courtsare not in a position to make independent judgments but only to say whether the FDA's interpretationis reasonable.20In the end, I will argue that reviewing courts should uphold the regulation,principallyby reference to the appropriaterole of contemporaryadministrativeagencies. 
A generalclaim underliesthis conclusion:without much fanfare, agencies have become modern America's common law courts, and properly so. The basic task of common law courts is to specify abstract standards(often involving reasonableness)and to adapt legal rules to particularcontexts as facts, social understandingsof facts, and underlyingvalues change over time. Operatingas common law courts, agencies have, as they should, considerable power to adapt statutory language to changing understandingsand circumstances. This is a conventionalrole, for example, of the National Labor Relations Board, the FederalTrade Commission,the EnvironmentalProtection Agency, the Federal CommunicationsCommission,the Department of Health and Human Services, the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the Internal Revenue Service.21The FDA's conclusion that tobacco is a "drug"is merely an unusually dramaticand visible illustrationof this proposition. 
This general claim is connected to a more particularone: under the best readingof the FDCA, tobacco may or maynot be a drug,but the FDA has the legal authority to treat tobacco as a drug if it Regulations,supranote 1, at 44,403.The FDA then adoptedregulationsafter findingthat advertisementsfortobaccoproductswerespecificallyharmingyoungpeople. Seeid. at 44,466-95. 
Inc.,467 U.S. 837(1984). 
source"wasa permissibleconstruction)R;ustv. Sullivan,500U.S. 173,184-189(1991)(holding thatregulationsissuedby the Secretaryof HealthandHumanServiceswere a permissibleconstructionof Title X of the PublicHealth ServicesAct); Good SamaritanHosp.v. Shalala,508 U.S. 402, 414 (1993) (holdingthatwhen "[c]onfrontedwith an ambiguousstatutoryprovision, we will generallydefer to a permissibleinterpretationespousedby the agencyentrustedwith its implementation")T;orringtonExtend-A-CareEmployeeAss'n v. NLRB, 17 F.3d 580, 589 (2d Cir.1994) (approvingthe NLRB'sinterpretationof a statutory"inabilityto pay"requirement); Detroit/Wayne County Port Auth. v. ICC, 59 F.3d 1314, 1317 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (sustainingthe decisionof the ICCbecauseit adopteda reasonableinterpretationof the statute in question). chooses to do so. One of my principalgoals here is to show why this is no contradiction.In the process I shall have occasion to discuss a number of importantinterpretivequestions:the relevance of subsequent legislative events; the uses and limits of literalism;"t2he power of an agencyto changeits mind after Congressand others have been explicitly informed of the previous interpretation;2t3he nature of statutorydefault rules, operating as "information-eliciting"rules or as "intention-eliciting"rules;24and the exercise of dynamicstatutory interpretationby administrativeagenciesratherthancourts.25 
I. PRELIMINARIES 
The problems posed by cigarette smoking might, of course, fill many volumes. I offer here a brief discussionas a way of providing some context. It was estimated in 1995 that about 529,000deaths in the United States were attributableto smoking, about twenty-four percent of total mortalitythat year.26"Second-hand"smoke is said to be responsiblefor 3,000 deaths from lung cancer and 37,000 deaths from heart disease annually,2though these numbers are controversial.28In any case, there is general agreementthat smokingis by far the largest of the preventablecauses of death,29and "passive"smoking is sometimes described as the third leading preventable cause of deaths.30 
A word about the prevalenceof smokingis also in order.3'As of about 1993,25% of all Americanssmoked;27.7% of men and 22.5% of women.32This representsa decline from 44.1% of men and 31.5% of women in 1970.33 Smoking among adult blacks is 26%, very close to that of adult whites at 25.4%,34but there was an intriguinglysubstantial decline among blacks between eighteen and twenty-four years old from 1965to 1992.In that group,the rate fell from 37.1%in 1965, to 31.8% in 1979, to 20.4% in 1987, to 4.4% in 1993, while the rate among whites in the same age group fell from 38.4% in 1965 to 27.8% in 1987, but has remained more or less constant since that time.35Almost 80% of smokersbegan to smoke regularlyat or before the age of sixteen.36In 1995, 21.6% of high school seniors smoked, a significantincreaseover the 17.2%rate in 1992.37 
The causes of reductionsin smokingare disputed.It appearsthat education, advertisingrestrictions, reduction of peer pressure, and taxes may all contributeto changes in smoking levels.38Social norms may, for example, operate as subsidiesor taxes to smoking behavior, encouragingpeople to smoke when norms are a subsidyand encouraging them to cease smoking when norms are a tax.39Public perceptions of greaterhazard,in response to governmentaction and other public health warnings,also contributeto drops in smoking rates.40 Advertisingbans appear to have had a significanteffect in Canada, Finland,New Zealand, and Norway.41Antismokingadvertisingcampaigns appearto have substantialeffects as well. In particular,campaigns intended to delegitimizesmokingby emphasizingthe dangers of second-handsmoke and the industry'smanipulationof smokers seem to have been especially effective.42Tobacco taxes also have been foundto have substantialconsequences.43 
Currentlya complexnetworkof laws controlscigarettesmoking. Every state now bans the sale and distributionof tobacco to those underthe age of eighteen.44Congresshas also enactedlegislationcontrollingboth cigarettelabeling and advertising.4C5 urrenttaxes range from 20% to 44% of the retail price of cigarettes,a sharpcontrastto other industrializednations,where taxes range from 50% to 86% of the retailprice.46A varietyof federaland state laws regulatesmoking in publicplaces.47As of this writing,there are continuingdiscussions sion betweenprivatejudgmentsand publicbehaviorby conferringbenefits(subsidies)on appropriatebehaviorandimposingcosts (taxes)on inappropriatebehavior);see also Hersch,supra note 31, at 1158 (arguingthat social norms-as reflectedin state minimumage restrictions-are inverselycorrelatedto teen smoking). 
House andmilitaryareas(by the federalgovernment)to restaurantsandworkplaces(by state about a tobacco "settlement" that would involve a resolution of pending civil cases against the tobacco industry, an increase in tobacco taxes, and the provisionof funds for education and prevention of smokingby young people.48 
There is a substantialdebate about the appropriaterole of government in regulatingthe sale and use of tobacco products.On one view, people are now adequatelyinformed about the risks of smoking, and the basic task of governmentshould be to promote the operation of the market for safer cigarettes.49Others believe that this argumentunderstatesthe role of addictionand the motivationaland cognitive issues raised by risk-takingby young people.'o Still others focus on the possible existence of unrealisticoptimismin risk-taking behavior and also on the problems presented by cumulativerisks."5 There is a furtherquestion about the government'sappropriaterole when choices are a function of social norms over which people have little control,and which they wish to change;this phenomenonmakes it unclearwhat it means to say that governmentshould respect people's preferencesor choices.52 
For a numberof decades, the FDA disclaimedthe general legal authorityto regulate tobacco, and Congressand others operated under the assumptionthat tobacco would not generally be subject to FDA authority. Until 1963, there was no serious discussion of whether tobacco products might generally qualify as a "drug."Inandlocalgovernments)). 

Regulation4,7 DUKEL.J.1095(1998)(arguingforsafetythroughmarketcompetition). 
bothnicotine addictionandlong-termhealthconsequencesof smokingraisesquestionsaboutwhetheror not people "voluntarily"acceptthe risksof cigarettesmoking). 
(1998) (discussingthe effects of optimismbiasesandthe tendencyto perceivecumulativerisks as less threateningthannoncumulativerisks). 
103942 (1995)(discussinghow,afterthe rejectionof an anti-beggingpenallaw on FirstAmendment grounds in Loper v. New York City Police Department, 999 F.2d 699 (2d Cir. 1993), the New York TransitAuthoritywas able to curbthe incidenceof beggingby promotinga social norm that made it acceptableto say no to panhandlers);Sunstein,Social Norms,supranote 39, at 939-41, 953-59 (discussing the connection between personal choices and prevailing social norms andpositingthatthe governmentshouldengagein harmmanagementto solve collectiveaction problems). deed, the only real assertionof FDA authorityover tobaccoproducts prior to that time occurredin 1959,when the since-renamedFederal Drug Administrationclaimed authority only because certain cigarette companies had advertised that their cigarettes would reduce body weight."5Between 1963 and 1988, FDA officials said explicitly that tobacco products did not otherwise qualify as drugs, devices, foods, or cosmetics.5T4hus, the FDA Commissionertestified in 1972 that cigaretteswould be counted as drugsif, and only if, claimsabout beneficialphysicaleffects were made on their behalf;"t5hat is to say that cigaretteswould qualifyas drugsonly if tobacco companiesmarketed them by reference to their beneficial effects on the human body. This view was consistentlymaintainedthrough1988.56 
rejectedpetitions by an anti-smokinggroup-Action on Smokingand Healthto regulate cigarettesas drugs.57The FDA concluded that there was insufficient evidence that cigarettes were "intended"to affect the structureor functionof the body.58By this, the FDA meant that those who sold cigarettes did not "intend,"by express representationor 847, 851 (D.N.J. 1959) (stating that, in light of the manufacturer's appetite suppression claims, the cigarettes seized were drugs within the meaning of the FDCA, 21 U.S.C. ? 321(g)( also United States v. 46 Cartons ... Fairfax Cigarettes, 113 F. Supp. 336, 339 (D.N.J. 1953) (finding that Fairfax Cigarettes fell within the statutory meaning of "drug" as leaflets seized with cigarettes described a "miracle vapor" that could reduce the frequency of respiratory dis 
See id. at 239 (noting that "[s]uch an understanding has now been accepted as a matter of statutory interpretation" and citing National Nutritional Foods Association v. Mathews, 557 F.2d 325, 333 (2d Cir. 1977) ("The vendors' intent in selling the product to the public is the key element in this statutory definition.")). otherwise, to affect people's bodies. Such an intention could, of course,be found when cigaretteswere marketedand sold as a means of reducing weight, but not in the ordinary course of sale.59The FDA's decision was upheld on appeal.60The court said that the FDCA authorizedthe FDA to regulatetobacco only if tobacco companies were marketingcigarettesby reference to variousphysiological benefits of smoking,and if most smokersused a particularbrand of cigarettespartlybecause of those supposedbenefits.61 
In 1988,the AmericanHeartAssociation and other publichealth organizationspetitioned the FDA to regulate low-tar cigarettes as drugs.The FDA respondedby announcingits intentionto reconsider whetherit had jurisdictionover cigarettesand smokeless tobacco. In 1996, the FDA concluded that it did indeed have jurisdictionin a dense reportof some seven hundredpages.62 
The scientificand politicalbackgroundleadingto this decisionis undoubtedlyworth an article, or perhaps a book, of its own.63 For present purposes,two points seem both clear and highly relevant to the legal issue. First,this was an extremelyvisible politicalissue, one in which the President himself was heavily involved and one that played a seriouspartin the presidentialelection of 1996."Second,the FDA's decisionwould not have been possible without a great deal of relatively new evidence about the effects of nicotine and the intentions of the tobaccoindustry.The evidence suggestedthat smokingis responsiblefor more than400,000prematuredeathsper year.65It also suggested that tobacco companies were well aware of the adverse physical effects of smoking.66The FDA stressed its conviction by statingthat smokingwas a far more importantpublichealthproblem than those to which it ordinarilydevoted its attention. Thus, in its own statement,the FDA said that smokingcausesmore deathsannually in the United StatesthanAIDS, car accidents,murders,suicides, fires, alcohol, and illegal drugscombined.67Nonetheless, about fifty million Americans continue to smoke cigarettes, and 3,000 minors beginto smoke everyday." 
With respect to the jurisdictionalissue, the FDA supportedits view with two central conclusions.First, it said that tobacco affects the structureor function of the body because (a) it causes and sustains addiction,(b) it has mood-alteringaffects, such as stimulation and tranquilization,and (c) it controlsweight.69Second,and most importantfor purposesof its changein view, the FDA stressedthat tobacco productsare intended to have these effects.70This conclusion resulted from new evidence of the foreseeability of these various physicaleffects, new evidence of consumeruse, and new evidence of manufacturerintent, stemmingfrom three decades of industrystatementsandresearch.71 
The FDA emphasizedthat the situation had changed dramaticallyfrom 1980,72when no majorhealth organizationhad determined that nicotinewas addictive,to 1995,by whichtime most majorpublic health organizations-including the American PsychiatricAssociation, the U.S. SurgeonGeneral,and the AmericanPsychologicalAssociation-had concluded that tobacco was addictive.73There was also a great deal of emerging evidence, since 1980, to support this conclusion-and the conclusionthat smokinghad variousstimulating andsedatingeffects, effects intendedby tobaccocompanies.74 Reynolds Tobacco Co. which made reference to the "undesirable" physical effects of smoking). 
otherwise lead to premature deaths, such as obesity; the figure of 400,000 lives lost does not take account of losses that would be produced in any case, as a result of substitute or offsetting behavior. 

F.2d 236 (D.C. Cir. 1980). 

The FDA did not, however, ban nicotine.75It concluded that a ban would be ineffective, because it would produce black markets and smuggling,and that it would be undesirable,because it would create adverse health consequences for the millions now dependent on nicotine.76It decided that the best response would be to prevent childrenand adolescentsfrom beginningto use cigarettesat all.77To this end, the FDA invoked its "restricteddevice" authority78and adopted a regulatorystrategywith two principalcomponents.79First, the FDA attemptedto limit the access of young people to cigarettes in the following ways:by prohibitingthe sale of cigarettesto people under eighteen years of age; by requiringretailers to check photographicidentification;by banningfree samples;by requiringretailers to remove self-servicedisplays;and by prohibitingthe use of vending machinesfor selling cigarettes."S8econd, the FDA attemptedto limit the desire of young people to smoke by restrictingcigarette advertising and promotion. The restrictionsincluded a requirementthat advertisinguse a black and white, text-only format;81a ban on outdoor advertisingnear schools and playgrounds;8a2prohibitionon the sale or distributionof non-tobaccoproducts,such as hats or T-shirts, with a tobacco product brand name or logo;83and a prohibitionon tobacco brand name sponsorship of athletic, cultural, or similar events.84 
II. TEXTUALISMAND HISTORY 
Now let us turn to the legal issues. The criticallanguage of the FDCA defines "drugs"as "articles... intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.""'Is tobacco an article that is inhabit-forming, with the power to sedate or tranquilize its users. See id. at 41,591. 
hence I do not discuss, except in passing, the more specific questions raised by the particular way in which the FDA chose to regulate such products. 

and Health v. Harris, 655 F.2d 236, 237 n.4 (D.C. Cir. 1980). 
tended to affect the structureor any functionof the body? Let us begin by generatingan argumenton behalf of the FDA, emphasizing the apparentlyliteralmeaningof the statutorytext and attemptingto accountfor the changein the FDA's positionover time. 
At first glance, the text of the definition of "drug"plainly includes tobacco, or so a reasonableFDA, actingon the basis of plausible factualassumptions,couldfind. 
effect on the structureor any functionof the body and ( intention to producethat effect. Tobaccohas a series of effects on the human body, at least on one readingof the evidence.Nicotine may reasonablybe found to work as both a stimulantand a sedativeand also to have addictiveproperties.On the question of intent, things are a bit more complicated.What is the precise meaning of "intended"? Does this termrequireknowledge,motivation,or somethingelse? By itself, the text does not make this clear. In the context of tobacco, however, there is evidence that tobacco companies not only knew aboutbut also desiredthe variouseffects of nicotine.86 
Thus, the naturalreadingof the text appearsto be stronglysupportive of the FDA. It suggestsnot ambiguitybut a relativelyclear understandinglike that of the currentFDA. An ordinaryEnglish readerwould probablyfind that tobacco is a drugin light of the two statutoryrequirements. 
B. TheOriginalUnderstandingof FDA AuthorityOver Tobacco 
The text of the statutemaynot be decisiveif the traditionaltools of statutoryconstructionlead to a contraryresult. In Part II, I will discussthis point in connectionwith the strongestargumentagainst the FDA. But it makes sense to begin with a simpler,more straightforward,and, in a way, more obvious set of questions:What of the original understandingabout whether tobacco fell within the term "drug?"Does Congress'soriginalunderstandingof the place of tohere with the issue of whether cigarettes are "devices" as that term is defined under 21 U.S.C. ? 321(h) (1994). 
Nicotine Delivery Devices Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act: Jurisdictional Determination, 61 Fed. Reg. 44,619, 44,690-806, 44,847-45,097, 45,098-150 (1996) [hereinafter Jurisdictional Determination]; FDA Jurisdictional Analysis, supra note 8, at 41,582-603. bacco argue against a literal interpretationof the text? What is the importanceof the (exceedinglylikely) fact that the enactingCongress did not intendto give the FDA power over tobacco? 
When the definition of "drug"was originallyenacted in 1938, it seems clear at first glance that the term was not understood to include tobacco products.87There was no discussion of the FDA's authority over tobacco products in Congress that year, and the silence is highly relevant:in view of the importanceand high visibility of the tobacco industry,it defies belief to suggest that Congresswas conferringthat authoritywithout debate or by inadvertence.It is entirely reasonable to think that the battle over the 1938 bill would have been far more intense if the bill was meant to give the FDA this kind of regulatorycontrol;it is even reasonableto thinkthat a statute givingthe FDA such authoritycould not possiblyhave been enacted. Moreover, the FDA's predecessor agency said in 1914 that it could not regulatetobacco productsunderthe 1906 Act,mand Congressdid not enact an explicit proposal in 1929 that would have amended the 1906Act to cover tobaccoproducts.89 
Thus,it could be arguedthat the statutoryterm shouldbe understood by reference to its originalmeaning,which did not include tobacco. By itself, however, this argumentis quite weak. The basic reason is simple: Congress enacted general words, not its beliefs about particularapplicationsof those general words, and Congress'sunenacted beliefs about those applicationsneed not control. When Congress enacts such general words, it is usually their present meaning that governs,90at least if the question is whether the agency charged time Congresswould have been taken to have referredto existing understandingsof what countedas drugsand devices, or to have set out a generalconceptwhose particularcontent would and shouldvaryover time, with new understandingsof facts and values. If the second view,whichenvisionsan evolvingdefinitionof whatconstitutesa "drug"underthe Act, is correct, then CoyneBeahm,Inc. v. FDA is rightlydecidedeven underJusticeScalia'sview of interpretation,rooted, as it is, in textualism.966 F. Supp.1374 (M.D.N.C.1997). The courtin Beahmadoptedan expansiveview of the term"drug"as usedwithinthe FDCA andconcluded thatCongress'sfailureto addresstobaccowithinthe Act when enacteddid not withholdFDA authorityto regulatetobaccoproductstoday. See id. at 1380-81.In reality,it is unlikelythat there was a generalunderstandingon Congress'spart aboutwhetherthe statutorydefinition wasstaticor meantto changeovertime. 

thatworkplaceharassmentcan violate Title VII's prohibitionagainstdiscrimination"because of sex"whenthe harasserandthe harassedemployeeareof the samesex);. with their interpretation may so conclude.9'History may help in sorting out ambiguities, but when they are unambiguous,general words are frequentlyappliedin ways that enactinglegislaturescould not have anticipatedand would not, on their particular,time-bound understandingof facts and even values, have approved.9T2he validity of such applicationsis especiallyclear where, as here, factual understandingshave changeddramaticallysince the statutewas written. 
We mightmake severaldistinctionshere. Sometimesagenciesalter their interpretationof law because the facts have changedor have been understoodin a new way.93Sometimesagencies changetheir interpretations of law because of new values.94Sometimes agencies change their interpretationsnot because of new facts or new values but becauseof a somewhatdifferentevaluationof the evidence.95 
Considerthat it is generallyagreed that the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)96authorizes the EPA to regulateDDT as a productraising"a substantialquestion"of human safety," but that this authoritydoes not rest on a judgmentthat the decisionnot to granttax exemptstatusto a universitywhichdidnot permitpartnersin interracialmarriagesto enrollbecausethe university'spracticewas "contraryto publicpolicy");EnvironmentalDefense Fund,Inc.v. Ruckelshaus4,39F.2d584, 593 (D.C. Cir.1971)(holdingthat the Secretaryof Agriculture'sinterpretationof the FederalInsecticide,Fungicide,and RodenticideAct governsexceptin casesof abuseof discretion).Butsee Boutilierv. INS,387 U.S. 118, 118 (1967)(holdingthatan "alienwho wasa homosexualover a continuousanduninterrupted periodpriorto andat timeof entrywas'afflicted'withpsychopathicpersonalitywithintermsof [the INS's interpretationof the]statuteexcludingsuch persons from admissioninto United States") 
marriageswithineducationalinstitutionsis contraryto publicpolicydespitethe fact that such discriminationwas thoughtconsistentwithpublicpolicyin the firsthalf of this century);EnvironmentalDefenseFund,439 F.2d at 593-95(notingthatdespitean administrativerecognition of "asubstantiaqluestionconcerningthe safetyof DDT"thatwasnot presentat the timeof the enactionof the FederalInsecticide,Fungicide,andRodenticideAct, thepesticide'sregistration was not suspended);Oncale,118 S. Ct. at 1001-02(holdingthatalthoughTitle VII wasnot enactedwithsucha claimin mind,"nothingin Title VIInecessarilybarsa claimof discrimination 'because... of sex'merelybecausetheplaintiffandthe defendant... areof the samesex"). 
interpretationof factorsdeterminedto be relevantin implementingstatutorypurpose). Congressthat enacted FIFRA believed that the EPA could regulate DDT. On the contrary,when introduced,DDT was thought to be unproblematicand entirely safe,98and hence the enacting Congress did not contemplatethat FIFRA would authorizeEPA regulationof DDT. The EPA nevertheless possesses just such authority.Statutes regulatinghealth and safety quite routinely contain broad language authorizingagenciesto regulatearticlesor substancesif the statutory criteriaare met. Whether Congressbelieved that the statutorycriteria were met when it enacted the relevant legislation is beside the point unless Congressembodied that belief in law. Consider,as well, the prominentexample of Bob Jones Universityv. UnitedStates,9in whichthe Courtheld that a publicpolicy exception to the categoryof charitabledeductions disallowed deductionsfor gifts to schools prohibiting interracial marriages-notwithstanding the fact that when the charitabledeductionwas first enacted in 1918,segregatedschools were thought entirely consistent with public policy.'00As the Court wrote in 1998, "statutoryprohibitionsoften go beyond the principal evil to cover reasonably comparable evils, and it is ultimately the provisionsof our laws ratherthan the principalconcerns of our legislators by which we are governed."'0T'hen the Court held that the 1964 Civil Rights Act bans same-sex harassment,even though the 1964 Congressdid not in the least have that problem in mind, or intend to cover it.102 
We can make the point more plain by supposingthat in floor debates in 1938,membersof Congressexpresslystated the view that the Act did not authorize the FDA to regulate tobacco, on the ground (for example) that tobacco did not create a serious health threat or did not "affectthe structureor functionof the body."'03A scenarioof this sort would be at least as strong and perhaps even stronger for those attackingthe FDA regulationthan the actual case, for, in the hypothesized situation, there would be explicit legislative history against the FDA's view. Even if, however, there were an express statement to this effect in the legislativehistory,it would not be conityunderFIFRA). 

"sexdiscriminationconsistingof same-sexsexualharassmentis actionableunderTitleVII"). effects of some kind.'7T7he FDA's currentassertionof authorityover tobacco is basedlargelyon a claimthattobaccocompaniesmade,and intended to make, that kind of representation.178No doubtthis was a change in the FDA's position, but there was some ambiguityin the formerdisclaimerof authority,and there is somethingless than complete discontinuitybetween the FDA's past andcurrentpositions. 
Second,the idea of ratificationor acquiescenceis strongestwhen legitimatereliance interestshave been built up aroundthe previous view. If, for example, private actors have ordered their affairson a certainunderstandingof the law, then a changein that understanding could defeat legitimate expectations.And while tobacco companies have assumedthat the FDA would not be regulatingthem, the landscape of regulationof the world of cigarettesmokinghas been shifting rapidly(to say the least), and it would be extravagantto suggest that the assertionof FDA authoritywoulddefeat reasonableexpectations. 
Third,agenciesare, with respectto staredecisis,in a very different position from courts. Agencies are permitted to change their minds,especiallyunderthe SupremeCourt'sdecisionin the Chevron case," on whichmore is said below. It is one thingto say thatjudicial interpretationscan be "frozen"by legislativeinaction that might be taken to representacquiescencein the judicialjudgments;this idea is part of a strong principleof stare decisis for statutorymeaning, designed to limitjudicialdiscretion.'8sBut agenciesare in a differentposition, andwhen the changein view is associatedwithchangedunderstandings of legally relevant facts, there is no problem with that change.Indeed,such changesin view, even when they alterthe interpretation of a statute, are perfectly acceptablewhen motivated by judgements about values, as Chevronitself makes entirely clear.18 There, too, the agencychangedits interpretation,and there, too, the interpretationwas made public,and Congresscould easily have been made awareof it.182Here the FDA's change was self-consciouslymotivated by new understandingsof the effects of tobacco and of tobacco companies'intentionswith respectto those effects. 
These points would not be controllingif Congresshad endorsed or ratifiedthe FDA's priorposition. How might any such ratification have come about?There are two separatepossibilities:Congressmay have ratifiedthe FDA's view by failing to enact proposed legislation that would overturnit,183or Congress may have ratified the FDA's view by enacting legislation that was preemptive or comprehensive, in the sense that it reflected a settlement of the question of tobacco regulation,a settlementof whichthe absenceof FDA authoritywas a part.Let us examinethese points in order. 
To say the least, there are many complexities in drawinginferences from the mere fact that Congressdebated whether to regulate tobacco in certain ways, with the apparent understandingthat the FDA would not be involved. Some cases have found a kind of "acquiescence"in longstandinginterpretations;they suggest that a settled patternof agency interpretations,which Congressconsidered overruling but did not overrule, is relevant to judicial interpretation.184This approachis especially reasonable where there has been detrimentalreliance on the previous interpretation.But other cases point in the opposite direction.'"C'ertainlyCongressdoes not legislate by failingto legislate.'8T6he failureto enact certainbills involving tobacco, by itself, does not divest the FDA of authoritythat it would otherwise have. There is little authority, and properly so, for the proposition that congressionalacquiescence in administrativeinterpretations,in the form of inaction,works to bind an agency to those interpretations.Nor is this a case in which the FDCA has been reenacted against the backgroundset by the FDA's interpretation.18A7 claimof acquiescenceis especiallyweak in a case in whichthere have 
(discussing this theory and listing cases in which this argument was made). 
(1994));MotorVehicleMfrs.Ass'nv. StateFarmMut.Auto Ins.Co.,463U.S. 29,45 (1983)). 
dangerous ground on which to rest an interpretation of a prior statute."). 
Supreme Court decisions applying the reenactment rule finding ratification). But see id. at 312 (discussing Supreme Court decisions applying the reenactment rule finding no ratification). 
been new understandingsof statutorilyrelevant facts;the FDA did not disclaimall authorityover tobaccofor all time, andhence it is not even clear that a reenactment would have frozen the preexisting 
Subsequentlegislationon the general topic is the strongestbasis for holding againstthe FDA. If the legislationcould be treated as a comprehensivesettlement,and if an absenceof FDA authoritywas a partof that settlement,then the new regulationwould be invalid.But this would be an extravagantinferencefrom what Congresshas actually done. The preemptionprovisionin the Federal CigaretteLabeling and AdvertisingAct of 1986, for example,is quite narrow,'8a8nd the ComprehensiveSmokeless Tobacco Health EducationAct reads in similarterms."8H9ence, the relevantlegislationshouldnot by itself eliminate FDA authority,even if that legislation was enacted with the understandingthat the FDA would not regulate tobacco. The strongestargumentfrom subsequentlegislationwould rest on an actual conflictbetween the legislationand FDA regulations;to the extent that there is such a conflict, the regulationsare preempted.At the very least, though, most of what the FDA has done can coexist comfortablywith the relevant statutes, and hence the most that can be said is that some of the FDA regulationsmightbe subjectto challenge as applied. Repeals by implication are disfavored,"90and the stateU.S.C.? 1334(a)(1994). ment requiredby section 1333 of this title, shall be requiredon any cigarettepackage."15 the statementsrequiredby section4402of thistitle,shallbe requiredby anyFederalagencyto appearon anypackageor in anyadvertisemen.t. . ." 15 U.S.C.? 4406(a)(1994).Note alsothat a recentact,whichrequiresthat a statemustprohibitthe sale of tobaccoproductsto individuals undereighteenin orderto receive federalfundingunderthe act, includesfederalfunding anddoesnot preemptFDA regulatoryauthority.SeeAlcohol,DrugAbuse,andMentalHealth ReorganizationAct, Pub. L. No. 102-321,? 202, 106 Stat. 323, 394-95(1992) (codifiedat 42 U.S.C. ? 300x-26 (1994)). This point is fortifiedby a 1997 enactmentsuggestingthat FDA authorityis unsettled.The Food andDrugAdministrationAct of 1997,Pub.L. No. 105-115,? 422, 111Stat.2296,2380(codifiedat21 U.S.C.A.? 321note (WestSupp.1998)),providesthat: Nothingin thisAct or the amendmentsmadeby thisAct shallbe construedto affect the question of whether the Secretaryof Health and Human Services has any authorityto regulateany tobaccoproduct,tobaccoingredient,or tobaccoadditive. Suchauthority,if any, shall be exercisedunderthe FederalFood, Drug, and CosmeticAct, ch. 675,52 Stat.1040(1938)as in effect on the daybeforethe date of the enactmentthisAct [Nov.21, 1997]. implicationare disfavoredand are only permissiblewhen earlierand later statutescannotbe reconciled). claim that the FDA has been divested of authority by subsequent legislationlooks very similarto a claimfor impliedrepeal. 
I conclude that the subsequentlegislation makes for a plausible argumentagainstthe FDA. But outside of the context of a directconflict, that plausibleargumentis not convincing. 
C. PragmaticConsiderationsL:egislativeResponsivenessandJudicial Capacity 
A naturalway to resolve the dispute between a more literal and more contextualunderstandingis to ask some questions about institutionalcapacity.First,which approachwould lead to more mistakes and more serious mistakes? This is a question about "errorcosts." Second,which approachwould lead to more costly and more difficult decisions?This is a questionabout "decisioncosts." 
To approachthese questions,it is necessaryto refine the distinction between the two approaches;they representa continuumrather than a sharpdichotomy.Some literal interpretationswould be ruled out by context, regardlessof one's general approach.This is true not only for scrivener'serrors,'9'but also for terms whose meaning becomes plain only by context.192 Context is alwayspresent and always helps informthe understandingof meaning.In some cases the literal meaningwould make no sense; even the most enthusiastictextualists accept this point.193By the same token, contextualinterpretationbecomes quite contentiousif it is understoodto entail a rejectionof the plain meaning of the text on the basis of the legislative history.The form of contextualismthat arguesagainstthe FDA is more modest:it is merely a suggestionthat an apparentlybroadtext shouldbe understood by reference to its purpose and backgroundand that the context, including the history, supports a narrowerunderstandingthan the languagealone suggests.The debate here is not between rigidlit191. These are to be fixed via contextual interpretation. See SCALIA,INTERPRETATION, supranote 107,at20-21. 
154-156andaccompanyingtext. 
criticaltool to be used in interpretingthe meaningof a word.See Smithv. United States,508 U.S. 223, 241-47(1993) (Scalia,J., dissenting)(arguingthat the majority'sliteraldefinitionof the word "use"is inaccurategiven its ordinarycontextualmeaning);see also SCALIAI,NTERPRETATIO Nsu, pra note 102, at 23-24 (criticizing the majority's strict construction in Smith andstatingthat a text shouldbe interpreted"reasonablyt,o containall thatit fairlymeans,"a goalwhichneitherstrictnorlenientconstructionachieves). eralistsand text-rejectingcontextualists-two pretty absurdcampsbut between two emphatically reasonable opponents: those who would stress the ordinarymeaning of the statutoryterms and those who would stress contextualfactorssuggestinga narrowerview than the wordsalone support. 
In ordinarycommunication,of course,literalinterpretationis infrequent,andlikely unsuccessful:"don'tleave the house"(butwhatif there is a fire?); "let'splay a game, any game you like" (but what if Russian roulette is proposed?). In ordinarycommunication,people understandwords very much in context, with reference to presumed intentions.Genuine "literalism"is a provinceof androidsand robots in science fiction,who do not reallyunderstandhow languageworks, and of eight-year-oldchildren,who derive considerablehumor and mischieffrom literal interpretation.'9T4he point suggestsa pervasive problemwith literalism:it may generate mistakes,in the form of inaccurateunderstandingsof Congress'sinstructions.We can talk all we like of the difficulty of discovering the "intention"of a multimemberdecisionmakingbody;the point stillholds. 
Thus, the defense of a contextualunderstandingdepends on the view that it is likely to producemore accurateinterpretations,where accuracyis assessedby referenceto Congress'sjudgmentsaboutwhat it is seeking to accomplish.'95On this view, an emphasison context is part of any approach to interpretationthat seeks to elicit actual judgments and understandings.Contextual interpretation is thus analogous to "market-mimicking"or "intention-eliciting"default rules in the law of contract.'9I6n contractlaw, as in statutoryinterpretation, default rules and interpretivestrategiesmight be intended to figure out what the parties are likely to have wanted to have done. Indeed, it would be possible to conclude that all understandingis contextualandthatliteralism,in the tobaccocase or anywhereelse, is obtuse, somethingto be used only when there is reason to thinkthat the literalinterpretationhas a good claimto being the contextualone too. 
SCALIA,INTERPRETATIOsNu,pra note 107, at 37 ("In textual interpretation, context is everything,andthe contextof the Constitutiontells us not to expectnit-pickingdetail,and to give wordsandphrasesan expansiveratherthannarrowinterpretation-thoughnot an interpretationthatthe languagewillnot bear."). 
in thelawof contracts). 
But this view is far too simple.'9Suppose, for example, that the more contextual interpretationdepends on resort to the legislative history, and that the statute's text alone, as enacted in 1938, cannot supportthat interpretation.It is entirelyreasonableto think that the text should prevail.A refusalto give the words their ordinarymeaning may create bad incentives for Congress;perhaps a more literal reading would encourage Congress to speak more clearly. A literal reading may also greatly simplify the process of judicial judgment. Freed from reliance on the ordinarymeaningof the text, contextualist courtsmightproducemistakes,partlythroughsimple error,partly through willfulness, even if some contextualist courts might also make some better decisionsthan literalistones. In other words,literalists cannot be perfect;but perhapsthey will be better, on balance, than their adversaries.Here as elsewhere, the perfect can be the enemy of the good. On this view, (reasonable,rather than science fictional) literalism can be justified as analogous to an informationeliciting rule in the law of contract,designed to force the parties (or in this case, the Congress)to speak with greaterclarity.198It can be so justified with the additionalclaim that if intention-elicitingis important,literalismis no worse than the alternative,andperhapsbetter, at least as a generalrule.199 
It is hardto resolve this disputein the abstract.An obvious question is whetherCongresswill in fact respondto literalinterpretations by legislatingwith greatercare andclarity;there is little evidence that it will. Another questionis whether Congresswill respond to judicial mistakes,and here there is no systematicevidence. These points suggest that the contextual approachis more reasonable, at least where the courtis confidentthat the resultinginterpretationis really a fairly accurateconception of Congress'sinstructionsand where the notion of contextual interpretationis not a guise for unreliable inferences based on legislativehistory. 
This conclusion suggests that if the courts were deciding the issue in the first instance, tobacco products could not be regulated without a convincingshowing that they were being sold with some 
ruleswhich"promoteinformationrevelation"). 
Untold Story of Holy Trinity Church, 50 STAN.L. REV. 1833 (1998) (criticizing intentionalist courts'use of legislativehistoryin statutoryinterpretationcases based upon their inabilityto cope withthe volumeandheterogeneityof priorstatutes). kind of representationabout their beneficial medical or therapeutic effects, makingthem analogousto slenderizers.200But courts are not deciding this issue in the first instance-an importantfact of life in the administrativestate,201as we shallsoon see. 
Is it possible to accept the contextual interpretationoffered in Part III while, at the same time, upholdingthe FDA's treatmentof cigarettesas drugs?Might the FDA endorse a narrowerunderstanding of the statute and still prevail?This would be the most promising route;it would make the basic conflict about styles of interpretation irrelevant,or nearlyso. 
To the extent that the FDA is emphasizingthe addictiveproperties of tobacco, this question is hard to answer affirmatively.If tobacco companies urged that smoking helps to prevent colds, cigarettes would fit withinthe contextualmeaningof the term "use."But addictionis altogetherdifferent,since no one contends that tobacco companies successfullyencouragedpeople to smoke on the ground that smokerswould become addicts.Thingsare, however,a bit more complicatedfor those challengingthe FDA regulation.In its ruling, the FDA referrednot only to addictionbut also to two other undisputed changesthat tobaccoproducesin the functionof the body:the effects of smokingin producingboth tranquillityand stimulationand the effects of smokingin producingweightcontrol.202Therecan be no question that the FDA would have the power to treat tobacco products as drugsif they were sold with the representation,expressor implied, that they help people to controlweight.Nor can there be much doubt that the FDA would be authorizedto treattobaccoas a drugif it were sold as a method for producingstimulationor tranquillity. Could the FDA find that these effects were intendedby manufacturers and understoodby consumers,so that cigaretteswould be akin to slenderizersafter all? A reading of the rationale in support of the regulationssuggeststhat the FDA did make this finding. 
Thisis farfroma frivolousargument.Manypeople use cigarettes because of their effects on the functions of the body-usually for producingeither stimulationor tranquillity,sometimesfor helpingto prevent weight gain. A reasonable person could find that manufacturers intend these effects and that many consumers smoke with these effects in mind. Indeed, common advertisementsfor cigarettes can be seen to be emphasizing,explicitly or implicitly,the tranquilizing and stimulatingeffects of smoking,203and there is evidence that tobacco companieshave been entirelyawareof these effects.204Thus, for example, the FDA reported survey evidence that over seventy percentof youngpeople who are dailysmokerssaid that they smoked for relaxation.20T5he narrowest decision upholding FDA authority would emphasizethese points, which provide a much strongerfoundationfor the FDA's assertionof jurisdictionthandoes addiction.26 
V. AGENCIES As COMMONLAW COURTS 
Thus far the discussionhas proceeded as if this were a case of statutoryinterpretation,but it is also one of administrativelaw, and the FDA's positionis muchfortifiedif we expandthe lens in this way. In the modern era, most of the key work of statutoryinterpretation is, of course,not done by courts,but ratherby federal agencies.Most of these interpretiveacts never face judicial review, and those who challengesuch acts face a high burden.20R7ealisticallyspeaking,general and ambiguousterms are given their meaningby agencyofficials who adapt those terms to changingfacts and values. Thus, the business of a wide range of agencies-the NLRB, the FCC, the FTC, the SEC, the IRS, the EPA, the CPSC, and many more-involves the specificationof generalstatutoryterms,the resolutionof ambiguities, Man is capable of both 'action' and 'repose,' suggesting both stimulation and tranquillity); Irene Scharf, Breathe Deeply: The Tort of Smokers' Battery, 32 HOUS. L. REV. 615, 631-60 (1995) (discussing advertising thoroughly, and noting specific campaigns based on the weight control properties of cigarettes). 

tobacco, because reliance on those properties stretches the contextual meaning of the statute further than does an interpretation that relies on tobacco's sedating and stimulating properties. 
842-45 (1984) (requiring "deference to administrative interpretations"). cumstancesand new social understandings.208 and the adaptationof legal texts (their enablingstatutes) to new cir 
The point is, of course, recognized in Chevron U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., which, it is becoming increasinglyclear, stands as the most importantcase about legal interpretationin the last thirtyyears.2"Chevronholds that where statutes are ambiguous,courtsshould acceptany reasonableinterpretationby the agencychargedwith their implementation.210Agencies are to prevail wheneverstatutes are subjectto diverse,plausiblereadings.This idea is of course strongly supportiveof the FDA's position that tobacco can be treatedas a drug. 
The central idea behind Chevronis that where underlyingstatutes are ambiguous,Congressshould be taken to have decided that agencies are in a better position to make judgments about their meaning than are courts.211Agencies are in that better position because, Chevronemphasizes,the President is generally in charge of their policyjudgments,and hence agencieshave a kind of democratic pedigree, certainly a better one than the courts.21A2dministrative 
There is, of course, much debate about the precise meaning and consequences of the decision. See, e.g., Thomas W. Merrill, Textualism and the Future of the Chevron Doctrine, 72 WASH.U. L.Q. 351 (1994) (discussing implications for textualism); Thomas W. Merrill, Judicial Deference to Executive Precedent, 101 YALE L.J. 969 (1992) (arguing that the Supreme Court has not rigorously followed Chevron); Peter H. Schuck & E. Donald Elliott, To the Chevron Station: An Empirical Study of Federal Administrative Law, 1990 DUKE L.J. 984 (presenting empirical evidence about the impact of Chevron on administrative law). 
See Chevron, 467 U.S. at 842-45. This statement simplifies some complex issues. For more comprehensive discussions, see 1 RICHARDJ. PIERCE & 
KENNETHCULP DAVIS, ADMINISTRATIVLEAWTREATISE?? 3.1-3.7 (1994 & Supp. 1997); Cass R. Sunstein, Law and Administration after Chevron, 90 COLUM.L. REV. 2071 (1990) [hereinafter Sunstein, Law and Administration]. 

See Chevron, 467 U.S. at 843-44 (discussing "implicit" delegation of power to tions of law. See Scalia, Judicial Deference, supra note 180, at 516. "elucidate" statutes). Although not on the Chevron Court, Justice Scalia argues that Chevron is best taken to hold that the question of deference will be resolved by reference to Congress's instructions. Of course, when Congress passes an ambiguous statute, it fails to give clear instructions. Thus, both in light of the value of providing a clear background rule and because Chevron is a reasonable understanding of Congress's views about relevant institutional capacities, statutes will generally be read to require courts to defer to reasonable agency interpreta212. In the Court's words: 
While agencies are not directly accountable to the people, the Chief Executive is, and it is entirely appropriate for this political branch of the Government to make such policy choices-resolving the competing interests which Congress itself either inadvertently did not resolve, or intentionally left to be resolved by the agency charged with the administration of the statute in light of everyday realities. 
Chevron, 467 U.S. at 865-66. In some ways, perhaps, agencies have a stronger democratic pediagencies are, of course, influencedby shiftingpublicjudgments,and their approachesare likely to reflect the President'sbasic commitments.21T3his was, no doubt, true in Chevronitself, where the costsaving innovation there at issue responded to President Reagan's concern with expensive regulations. In the context of the tobacco controversy,the point is highlyrelevant,for there can be little doubt that the FDA's position is highlyresponsiveto the views of President Clinton,who has made regulationof tobacco a centralissue, not least in the context of the presidentialcampaignof 1996.214Chevronappears in this way to accept the suggestion that deciding how to read ambiguitiesin a law involves no brooding omnipresencein the sky but an emphaticallyhumanjudgmentaboutpolicy or principle.21T5his suggestionwas of course centralto the legal realistmovement, but it is now supportedby a wide range of people216and it obviously bears on the question of whetherand how the FDA can interpretthe word "drug." 
Chevronalso has a technocratic(as opposed to democratic)justification:judgments about the best meaning of statutory terms may well turn on an understandingof underlyingfacts. A decision about which articlesaffect the structureor function of the body will inevitably turn on judgments about facts, not only about the particular consequences of using the relevant articles, but also on the consequences, for regulatorypolicy, of a judgment one way or the other. This point is closely connected to the question of whether the FDA has authorityover tobacco,since the FDA's decisionturnedpartlyon judgmentsaboutthe facts.217 gree than Congress itself, though the Chevron Court does not so argue. For an argument to this effect, see JERRYL. MASHAW,GREED,CHAOS,ANDGOVERNANCE131-157 (1997). 
POST,Aug. 24, 1996, at Al (discussing President Clinton's support for the FDA's assertion of regulatory authority over tobacco and its relationship to the presidential campaign). 
(1938). Both cases involve a rejection of the view that federal courts could neutrally declare "the law," and both cases, following that rejection, reallocate legal authority from federal courts to other institutions. For a provocative general discussion of the "Erie effect," see Lawrence Lessig, Erie-Effects of Volume 110: An Essay on Context in Interpretive Theory, 110 HARV.L. REV. 1785, 1795-1801 (1997). 
Dworkin and Chevron: both acknowledge the constructive aspects of interpretation, but Chevron sees this as a reason for administrative rather than judicial judgment. 

In this and other disputes,the importanceof the Chevrondecision cannot be overstated:in its relativelyshort period on the scene, Chevron,a kind of counter-Marbury2f1or the administrativestate, has been cited more frequentlythan Marburyv. Madison,Brown v. Board of Education,2 or Roe v. Wade,220and, if present trends continue, it may ultimatelybe cited more frequentlythan all those cases put together.221Of course,there are limitsto whatcitationrates show, but, at the very least, Chevronhas become the frameworkthrough whichagencyinterpretationsof law arereviewed. 
For present purposes,the basic point is that in establishingthe power of administrativeagencies to resolve statutory ambiguities, Chevron has recognized that the resolution of such ambiguitiesis largely a judgmentof policy, to be made by institutionswith democraticaccountabilityand technicalexpertise.In this way, Chevronhas granted agencies two important common law functions, those of specifyingstatutoryterms and of adaptingthose terms to new facts and values.The questionfor post-Chevronlaw has involvedthe identificationof limitson those commonlaw functions. 
We are thus left with the questionof whetherthe FDA is bound by what may appearto be the most reasonableinterpretationof the statutoryterms, taken in their context and understoodby reference to the traditionaltools of statutoryconstruction,or whetherthe FDA may adoptan interpretationthat,whetheror not the very best, seems consistentwith the languageof the statute and that does not violate any unambiguouslyexpressedwill of Congress.So phrased,Chevron seems to supplythe answer:the FDA shouldprevail. 
The narrowestunderstandingof the FDA's interpretationis that when an article has a range of physical effects, includingbeneficial effects, when the manufacturerintendsthose effects, and when a substantial number of consumerspurchasethe article because of those effects, the articlesatisfiesthe definitionof "drug."It does not matter that manyconsumersare unawareof or uninterestedin those effects; 
following results: Chevron, 6252 references; Marbury, 3818 references; Brown, 3455 references; and Roe, 4885 references. the fact that many consumersare aware of them and smoke because of them is sufficientif the manufacturerintends those effects. To uphold the FDA regulation,this narrowunderstandingis sufficient. 
A large advantage of this route is that it does not threaten to give rise to implausiblehypotheticals.Indeed, it is hardto specify implausible outcomes that would follow from this understandingof FDA authority or even from a somewhat more expansive understanding.22E2ven a definition of exercise machines as drugs would, under certain factual assumptions,fit well not merely with the statutory text but also with context, history,and longstandingpractice. 
It is possible to drawfrom this discussiona more general lesson, whichI can describeonly brieflyhere. In the modern era, administrative agencies have become America's common law courts. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, common law courts, of course, had a kind of updatingand particularizingfunction.In a common law era, it was the job of common law judges to applyincompletelyspecified legal doctrines to new contexts and to supply new understandings of those doctrines,which were typicallyphrased as abstractions. These new understandingssometimes amounted to reversals of preexisting doctrines, both general and particular. Often, judges schooled in the common law traditionundertook a similar approach to statutory terms, as in the great cases of Riggs v. Palmer223 and Churchof the Holy Trinityv. UnitedStates.22T4o some degree, courts have exercised this common law function in the twentieth centuryas well,22b5ut in a way that has been highly controversial.Some people (1994) ("[A] food or dietary supplement... is not a drug... solely because the label or labeling contains ... a statement [calling the food or dietary supplement a drug]."). Moreover, exercise machines and other "articles" that are marketed as having beneficial effects qualify as drugs even under the narrower, more contextual understanding; hence, these do not count as implausible hypotheticals. It should be noted that there simply are not many cases of articles that are ingested, that do not count as foods, that have various effects on bodies, and that it seems unreasonable to think that the FDA may treat as drugs. Note that a recent statute has expressly exempted various dietary supplements. See Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994, Pub. L. No. 103-147, ? 3, 108 Stat. 4325, 4327 (codified at 21 U.S.C. ? 321(ff) (1994)). 
would allow a person's murderer to receive an inheritance from that person). 
that Congress did not intend the statute to be interpreted literally). 
824 F.2d 1177 (D.C. Cir. 1987). Congress had not clearly dealt with the problem of how to handle materials held for recycling, and the relevant EPA regulation defined certain materials involved in recycling as "solid waste." Id. at 1179. In particular, it said that spent materials, have urged that it is entirely illegitimatefor judges to continue their common law role,226while others have argued for a form of "dynamic"statutoryinterpretation,227and still othershave gone so far as to urge a judicialpower to nullifystatuteson the groundthat they are out of accordwith the existinglegal landscape.228 
In the modern period, however, dynamic interpretation issimply as a matter of actual practice-an administrativetask, not a judicial one. This is least controversiallythe case when agencies are deciding how to apply general terms to new problems or old problems that appearin new lights.In the late twentiethcentury,administrative agencies have undertakenmost of the functions of common law courts, adaptinggeneral principlesto various contexts, often in ways that produce substantialreversals.This is an omnipresentfeature of the modern legal landscape. Considerjust a few examples. The publicinterest standardfor regulationof the broadcastingindussludges, scrap metal, and the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry's ongoing production process. See id. at 1180. The EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were associated with the same kinds of environmental harms as materials that were abandoned or disposed of in some final way. The court of appeals struck down the EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid waste as "garbage, refuse, sludge ... and other discarded material," id. at 1179. For the court, material held for recycling was not "discarded." Id. at 1193. Citing the dictionary, the court thought that the "ordinary, plain-English meaning" was decisive. Id. at 1184. If the question was an internal dispute on a court of appeals about the best interpretation of a statutory term, perhaps the majority would be right. But the question involved the validity of an EPA regulation, produced after a complex process involving a number of political interests, an extended process of intergovernmental deliberation, and an elaborate inquiry into the underlying issues of substance. Even if a court would be reluctant to adapt the meaning of a term like "discarded" to fit with context, is it not hubristic for judges, not elected and knowing little about the enormously complex subject at hand, to invoke dictionaries (compiled, after all, by human beings) to invalidate executive branch decisions that cannot reasonably be said to run afoul of any judgment made by Congress? The EPA's decision followed a sustained period of public comment, and undoubtedly the government would be held accountable for any decision about the reach of the enabling statute. If the EPA's definitions runs afoul of dictionary decisions but of no actual decision by Congress, should it really be struck down? See also, e.g., Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 659-62 (1980) (rejecting a literal interpretation of the OSH Act). 
"whether the attitude of the common law judge-the mindset that asks 'what is the most desirable resolution of this case and how can any impediment to [its] achievement ... be evaded?'is appropriate for the work that [he does] and much of the work that state judges do." Id. at 13. "All of this [judges interpreting the law in order to accomplish a goal] would be an unqualified good, were it not for a trend in government in recent centuries, called democracy." Id. at 9. 
See ESKRIDGEs,upra note 25, at 11 (defining "dynamic statutory interpretation" as the divergence of the perspectives of the interpreter from that of the statute when written, often because text takes on a new meaning due to subsequent social and ideological changes). try has been subjectto a common-law-likeprocessof specificationon the part of the FCC, embodyingrecognitionof new values and facts. Thus, the FCC originally created and then eliminated the fairness doctrine, and new public interest obligations have grown up in the wake of the elimination.229The EPA's regulationsfor protectingthe public health through national ambient air quality standards are hardlystatic;even if the governingstatutorytermis taken to be clear and firm,the agency'spracticehas been otherwise.230The NLRB operates, in practice,as a common law court, adaptingstatutoryterms to new facts and values.231The principaljudgmentsabout what qualifies as a "drug"have come from the FDA, not from courts, which have played a supplementalrole. The FDA's assertionof jurisdiction over tobacco is merely an unusuallyvisible and dramaticinstance of this phenomenon. 
Is this shift undesirableor illegitimate?It might be argued that the process of common law judgment by administrativeagencies is unacceptablebecause agencies are subjectto the influence of powerful privateinterests,or factions,while independentcourtsare far less vulnerableto such influence. On one view, both the vulnerabilityof agencies to factions and the interest of agencies in increasingtheir own power and authorityargue againstthe common law analogy;at least common law judges had, and have, the virtues of comparative independence.The susceptibilityof agencies to "faction"is a persistent theme in administrativelaw,232and those who emphasize that theme would be likely to favorthe more contextualinterpretationoffered in Part I, to seek express legislative authorizationfor the new FDA interpretation,and to be unconvincedby the pro-deferenceargumentI am urginghere. 
The basic claim on behalf of the transformationI am describing is rooted directly in Chevron;it emphasizes both democratic and technocraticvalues. When comparedwith common law courts,agencies have a greater understandingof relevant facts, and they also have a degree of politicalresponsiveness,whichis a virtueas well as a DUKEL.J. 899, 926-930 (1998). 
857-58 (1984). 
COLLECTIVBEARGAINING13 (1976). 
L. REV. 1667, 1684-85 (1975); JAMESO. FREEDMANC,RISISANDLEGITIMACY158 (1978). potential vice. The common law role of agencies is a function of specificationsof statutoryterms that result either from new factual knowledge or from changesin values, or from some combinationof the two. The reversal in Chevronitself-from a smokestackdefinition of "source"to a plant-widedefinitionof "source"-was partlya product of technocraticvalues suggesting that this strategy would workbest;233it was also undoubtedlya productof politicalvalues and interestscallingfor less costlymeans of achievingenvironmentalprotection. To the suggestionthat this position means that some statutes (more accurately,their terms in some applications)might be lost or misdirectedas a result of new agency rulings,a response might be given in Justice Scalia's words: "[L]ots of once-heraldedprograms ought to get lost or misdirected,in vast hallwaysor elsewhere.Yesterday'sherald is today's bore-although we judges,in the seclusion of our chambers,maynot be au courantenoughto realizeit."234 
The FDCA was of course writtenmany years ago, and it defies belief to suggest that there is, in the backgroundof that Act, any clear or simple legislative intent23a5bout whether tobacco might be counted as a drugin light of modernunderstandingsof the effects of tobacco andof the understandingsanddesiresof cigarettecompanies about those effects. The FDA is in an unusuallygood position to obtain informationabout those effects, understandingsa,nd desires.Its assertionof regulatorypowerhas alreadyreceivedandwill inevitably continue to receive an enormouslyhigh degree of political attention, from Congressas well as from the President,not to mentionthe relevant groupsthat appearbefore the FDA itself. The ordinaryunderstanding of the statutory text supports the FDA's position, and nothing in subsequent developments in Congress has divested the FDA of the authoritythat it would otherwisehave. In applyingthe FDCA to tobacco, the FDA performeda lawful common law function, one that also has a high degree of democraticlegitimacy.Where Congresshas not spoken clearly,the role of the reviewingcourtis to of "source"). 
Separation of Powers, 17 SUFFOLKU. L. REV. 881, 897 (1983). 
word "intent." Some people doubt that legislatures, as collective bodies, have intentions. See Max Radin, StatutoryInterpretation, 43 HARV.L. REV. 863, 881 (1930). Others doubt the relevance of intention even if there is such a thing. See Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Theory of Legal Interpretation, 12 HARV.L. REV.417, 419 (1899). obtain assurance of the reasonableness of the agency's decision in terms of facts, policy, and law, and there can be no doubt that the FDA's judgmentwas reasonablehere. 
There are several possible responses to the argumentrooted in Chevron. 
lights, made a jurisdictionaldetermination,and perhaps an agency does not have, under Chevron,the power to determineits own jurisdiction. As a matter of first principles,it is unclearwhether Chevron deference should be due to an agency involved in a jurisdictionaldetermination. 
This continues to be a disputed question.236On the one hand, it might be thought that courts should not presume that Congress intended to give agencies the power to decide the extent of their own jurisdiction.23T7he likelihood of bias and self-dealing might well be taken to argue againstdeference to jurisdictionaljudgments.On the other hand, two points arguein favor of grantingdeference to agency interpretationseven when jurisdictionis at issue.238First, a prime argumentfor Chevronis its relative simplicity,and if courtswere to attempt to distinguishbetween jurisdictionaland nonjurisdictionaldeterminations,that advantage might well be lost. This is a thin and shifting line; most assertions of agency power can be deemed 
(Brennan,J., dissenting)(arguingthat Federal Power Act did not confer such power on the FederalEnergyRegulatoryCommission);BusinessRoundtablev. SEC, 905 F.2d 406, 413-14 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (refusingto permitthe SEC to "advanceinto an area not contemplatedby Congress");cf. NationalWildlifeFound.v. ICC,850 F2d 694, 699 n.6 (D.C. Cir.1988) (noting that Chevronmay requiredeferenceto jurisdictionaldeterminations,but statingthat it need not decidethe pointbecausethe agencyis disclaimingauthority(citingSchwabackerv. United States,334 U.S. 182,204 (1948)(FrankfurterJ,., dissenting));New YorkShippingAss'nv. Federal MaritimeComm'n,854 F.2d 1338,1363-65(D.C. Cir.1988) (giving"no specialdeference to an agency'sinterpretationof laborlawswhenthose lawswere not committedto that agency for enforcement"); see also Clark Byse, Judicial Review of Administrative Interpretation of Statutes: An Analysis of Chevron's Step Two, 2 ADMIN.L.J. 255, 260-61 (1988) (criticizing judicial acceptanceof all agencies'reasonableinterpretationsof ambiguouslanguageas too simpleand indiscriminate). 
(listingnumerouscases whichgrantthis deference);MississippiPower & Light,487 U.S. 354, 377-83(Scalia,J., concurring)(statingit is "bothnecessaryand appropriate"to defer to agencies' interpretationof theirstatutoryjurisdiction). "jurisdictional."Second, Chevronis in part a recognitionof the comparative advantages of agencies over courts, stemming from the agencies' greater factfinding power and electoral legitimacy, and those comparativeadvantagesseem to apply to jurisdictionaldeterminationsas well. An extension of jurisdictionis likely to reflect politicaljudgments,assessmentsof underlyingfacts, or both;the assertion of jurisdictionover tobacco productsis certainlya case in point. In any event, the cases appearto have settled, at least implicitly,on the view that jurisdictionaldeterminationsare not entitled to less deference. 
It is also possible to question whether the determinationin the FDA case is truly"jurisdictional"in the sense relevantto the dispute over Chevron'sscope. To be sure,the FDA has labeledits determination "jurisdictional."At the same time, is everyFDA decisionto considersome articlea drug"jurisdictional"in the sense that it callsinto question the applicabilityof Chevron?Perhapsthis determinationis more in the natureof an applicationof a statutoryterm to a disputed case than a judgmentthat the FDA has authorityover a whole class of cases that may or may not fit within a statutoryterm. When the FDA assertsauthorityover anyparticulararticleof commerce,its assertion might be describedas "jurisdictional"b;ut if FDA assertions of this kind are jurisdictional,then deference will not be due to the FDA in a wide range of cases that call for distinctlyadministrative competence. 
interpretationswere entitled to little or no deference if they were inconsistent or if the agency's currentinterpretationdepartedfrom longstandingagencyunderstandings.239After Chevron,however,the cases are ambiguous,some suggestingthatinconsistencydoes not eliminate deference and others suggestingthat the case for deferenceis significantlyreducedif the agencyhas changedits mind.24H0ere, it mightbe urged that the fact that the FDA has departedfrom a longstanding interpretationis sufficient to reduce the level of deference under Chevron. 

Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 445 (1987) (rejecting a new agency interpretation that was not in line with congressional intent); Gossett, supra note 180, at 698 (examining cases in which the agency interpretation was rejected for reasons other than the interpretation's revision). 
It probablymakes sense to say that a steady course of administrative interpretationis entitled to an unusuallyhigh level of deference. If the agency's course has been steady, then reliance interests may have built up aroundit; there may be special reason to thinkthe old interpretationmakes sense; and Congressand relevant interests have not, by hypothesis, showed dissatisfactionwith it, even though they have had some time in which to do so. It does not, however, make sense to say that a new interpretationis entitled to no deference at all. Chevronitself was a case in which the agency changedits mind, partlybecause of politicaljudgments,partlybecause of technical ones; consider, as well, Rust v. Sullivan,upholdingthe so-called "abortion gag rule," a new administrative interpretation driven largely by political judgments. The case for deference is of course heightenedwhen the area involves a high degree of politicalvisibility or technicalcomplexity,and the FDA rule involves both. I conclude that the fact that the FDA changedits mind is relevant and justifies less deferencethan an unbrokenpatternof interpretation,but it provides insufficientreason to disallow the FDA from adopting a reasonable understandingof the statutoryterms. 
construction.There are many others, and sometimes they trump Chevron.For example,the idea that statuteswill be construedto avoid serious constitutionaldoubts seems to defeat agency interpretations,241 in part on the theory that Congress,ratherthan agencies, should deliberate explicitly on questions that are close to the constitutional line. This notion operates as a more targetedandnarrowerversion of the nondelegation doctrine,requiringlegislative focus on certain issues. The notion that statutes will not ordinarilybe taken to apply outside the territorialboundariesof the United States-a notion that is also intendedto ensure legislativefocus on the relevantquestionalso seems to prevailover agencyinterpretations.242 
If there were an applicable canon of construction that would trumpthe FDA's interpretation,then the FDA shouldnot prevail.It is difficult,however, to find any such canon in this case. To be sure, the FDA's assertion of authorityover tobacco places some federal 485 U.S. 568, 574-75 (1988). 
Bd. of Optometry v. FTC, 910 F.2d 976, 981-82 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (holding that a federal agency may not displace state power through its rulemaking authority unless specifically granted the power to do so by Congress). authority in an area that has also been regulated by the states. It would be implausible,however, to say that the FDA's decision triggers a relevantcanon of construction,as in the idea that ambiguous statutesshouldnot lightlybe taken to preemptstate law. No countervailingcanonof constructiondefeats the applicationof Chevron. 
Compare,in this regard,the question of whether the FDA has the authorityto restrict the promotion and advertisingof tobacco productsthrougha ban on the sale to people underthe age of eighteen, detailed verificationrequirements,bans on sales throughvending machines,requirementsof black-and-whitetext-only advertising, and prohibitionsof use of brand names to sponsor entries, teams, sporting,and other events.24T3he relevantstatute allows the FDA to "requirethat a device be restrictedto sale, distributionor use... upon such... conditionsas the"FDA may prescribeby regulation.244 The FDA arguedthat restrictionson promotionand advertisingare restrictionson the conditionsof sale, designedto ensurethe safety of tobacco productsby preventingchildrenand adolescentsfrom using them and becoming addicted to them.245The districtcourt rejected this argument on the ground that "sale" does not include "advertising"and with the suggestionthat "conditions"could not be construedto allowrestrictionson advertisingandpromotion.246 
The analysishere suggests that that court was probablywrong under Chevron:the statutehas considerableambiguityhere, and the term "conditions"on "sale, distribution,or use" can reasonablybe understoodto includerestrictionson advertisingandpromotion.The court's decision would, however, be strengthenedif it were thought that some or all of these restrictionsraised serious questions under the FirstAmendment.A claim to this effect raisesmanyissues by itself, and I do not believe that the First Amendmentobstacles are in fact serious.24T7his is, however, a controversial view of the First 
that a Puerto Rican law prohibiting local advertisements inviting residents of Puerto Rico to visit casinos did not violate the First Amendment). Thus the case is, on this dimension, akin to Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991), where the Court found the constitutional issue insufficiently serious to justify a rejection of the agency's interpretation. See id. at 203. Amendment,24a8nd the best argumentagainstthe FDA's position on this countwould invoke the constitutionalbackground. 
There have been many strandsin the foregoing argument,and by way of summary,it may be useful to outline the most plausible opinions and surroundingrationalesagainstand for the FDA (in ascendingorderof persuasiveness). 
The FDA's regulation might be invalidated on the following grounds: 
enactingCongress,tobacco did not count as a "drug"and that this originalunderstanding is decisive. This is the weakest argumentagainst the FDA because the general terms are what matter, and because the original understandingabout the applicationsof those terms were not enacted into law. 
and Congress'sfailure to enact legislation againstthe backgroundof that interpretation,foreclose a definition of "drug"that includes tobacco.This argumentis not entirelywithoutforce, but in the end, it is unconvincing,because agencies are allowed to change their mind, and Congressdoes not legislateby failingto legislate. 
and Congress'sactual enactment of tobacco regulationwork to prevent the FDA from regulatingtobacco. This argumentis convincing insofar as there is a direct conflict between the FDA regulationand congressionalenactments. It also has some force as applied to the regulation as a whole. In the end, however, it is also unconvincing, because it is too close to an argumentfor an implied repeal and because agencies should be entitled to change their minds about the meaning of an ambiguousstatute in the face of response to new understandingsof underlyingfacts (and new values as well). 
definition of "drug"suggeststhat to qualifyas such, articlesmust be sold with some kind of representationof actual beneficial effects on the humanbody and that tobacco is not, realisticallyspeaking,being sold with any such representation.If a court were interpretingthe statute reasoning in Posadas). in the first instance, this argumentwould have considerableweight, especially when combined with argument( however, of the FDA's factualfindingsand the appropriatejudicialposture in reviewingan agencyinterpretationof generalstatutoryterms after Chevron,that argumentis not persuasive. 
On behalfof the FDA, the followingargumentsare available: tobacco must be treated as a drug,as Action for Smokingand Health urged long ago. This argumentis not entirelywithout force, but the terms contain ambiguity,and the FDA should be authorizedto decide otherwise,as it did until 1996. 
find both an actualeffect on the functionof the body, because of tobacco'saddictiveproperties,and an intentionto affectthe functionof the body, becauseof the knowledgeof those propertieson the partof tobacco companies. This argumentis unnecessarilybroad, and the contextualunderstandingof the term "drug"makesit at least unclear whetherthe FDA could adoptthis interpretation. 
includetobacco within the category "drug"if and to the extent that the FDA can point to tobacco companies'knowledge of the tranquilizingand stimulatingproperties of nicotine and advertisingthat suggests, explicitlyor implicitly,that smokinghas those properties.Thiswouldbe the best approach,because it is the narrowestbasis for upholding FDA authority. 
CONCLUSION 
As a matterof simple practice,administrativeagencieshave become America'scommonlaw courts.The task of adaptingthe law to new circumstanceso,f both value and of fact,is largelyan administrative responsibility.Agencies specify general statutoryterms and are engaged in continuingprocesses of both "updating"and particularization. 
In view of agencyself-interestand the exercise of power by selfinterested privategroups,this development is not without risks. On balance, however, it is highly salutary. In an era that prizes both democratic accountabilityand the technical knowledge that comes from specialization, it is only natural that the process of updating the law and adapting it to the particulars of individual cases will fall to administrative agencies. Administrative agencies have, however, become our commonlaw courtsin a distinctivesense. On the one hand, it is legitimate for them to undertake relatively rapid changes over time, accountableas they are to the currentadministration-more legitimate than it is for common law courtsto do the same thing.249On the other hand,the updatingandparticularizingfunctionsof administrative agencies must be disciplined by statutory boundaries, by "clearstatement"principles,and by requirementsof reasoned decisionmaking, requirements with both substantive and procedural components. 
These points very muchbear on the multiplegovernmentefforts to regulatetobacco. The regulationof tobacco is best treated as a political ratherthan a judicialtask (however active common law courts have become in the context of tort actions). Statutory language is best understoodcontextually,and,as a generalrule, ambiguousterms should not be taken to cover cases far beyond the contemplationof the enactinglegislature.As a matter of administrativelaw, however, the assertionof jurisdictionby the FDA is a largelyordinaryadaptation of general statutorytext to a particulararticle, understood as a "drug"both because of new understandingsof facts and because of a wide range of democratic pressures and influences. The FDA is authorized to adapt the statutory terms in this way in light of the general characterof those terms and in light of its findingswith respect to the tranquilizingand stimulatingeffects of nicotine. This argument,largelyinstitutionalin character,is the narrowestand, in the end, the most convincingone on the FDA's behalf. 
On an independentreadingof the FDCA, there is an argument that tobacco is not a "drug"within the meaning of the Act, understood in its historicalcontext. But the best readingof the FDCA, understood in the context of the modern regulatorystate, is that the FDA has the authorityto concludeotherwise,andto treat tobacco as a drugif it chooses to do so. 
(1984); Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass'n. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 59 (1983) (Rehnquist, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). 
Articles, discussions, and research about risk assessment and resource allocation often refer to observed differences between laypersons and "experts."' Experts are said to assess risk and to allocate resources with the goal of maximizing the expected number of lives saved; laypersons are said to depart from this goal, partly because they make frequent errors, and also because they give weight to qualitative variables that make for distinctions among quantitatively identical risks. Ordinary people, it is said, care about whether risks are equitably distributed, voluntarily incurred, controllable, or faced by future generations; they depart from the expert's focus on lives saved.2 
No one knows whether lawyers demonstrate "expert" patterns of risk assessment and resource allocation; it might seem intuitive to think that they do, especially, perhaps, if they have been trained with an emphasis on the economic analysis of law. Whether expert or not, the patterns of assessment and allocation that lawyers exhibit likely have great influence in the modern state, for lawyers tend to dominate arenas of governmental decision-making. There is an ample literature on risk assessment, well worth consulting in connection with an Administrative Law course;3 but that literature says little about how lawyers and public officials respond to risk. 
We attempted to study these patterns partly to learn something about how law students and hence lawyers are likely to think. But there is a pedagogical issue as well. In Administrative Law, students must learn a good deal about regulatory policy, and in order to do that, they should have some sense of the need to allocate resources among different risks. Why do some risks receive so Christopher E. Houston is an associate with Ropes & Gray in Boston. Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Law at the University of Chicago. &Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U. Ci. L. Rev. 1 (1995). 
Disagree on Environmental Issues (Chicago, 1996). much attention, and why are other risks so often neglected?4 This is a pressing question in both administrative and environmental law. It is therefore useful to think of ways to direct students to consider regulatory priority-setting, preferably in such a way as to encourage their active discussion of these issues from early on in the course. 
To understand the risk assessment and resource allocation patterns of lawyers (and also to evaluate whether those patterns are "expert" or otherwise), we administered two surveys at the University of Chicago Law SchoolY The University of Chicago is a particularly apt school at which to determine whether lawyers--or, more accurately, future lawyers-are more like laypersons or like experts in their risk assessment and resource allocation, because the school has a well-known and long-standing reputation in the economic analysis of law. This paper discusses these surveys and results obtained from them. 
We administered the first survey in January 1997 to 118 second- and thirdyear law students taking Administrative Law. The second survey was given in January 1998 to 94 second- and third-year law students taking Administrative Law. We administered both surveys on the first day of class, so that the results would not be tainted by information conveyed and discussed in class, especially about risk assessment and resource allocation. We analyze the surveys, and we present the results below, in three sections: the first section discusses resource allocation, the second discusses risk assessment, and the third discusses fairness. Our principal findings are as follows. 
" Law students act like ordinary people rather than experts in the particular sense that they care about variables other thf.n number of lives saved. When they are given information beyond the number of lives saved, equity becomes more important to them; and to achieve equitable resource allocation, they are willing to sacrifice the total number of lives saved. But the total number of lives saved is the predominant factor in resource allocation, and there is a ceiling on the extent to which other considerations will prompt them to allocate resources more equitably, like ordinary people, and less like experts. " Law students seem to behave more like experts when assessing risk levels themselves; that is, their assessments are not substantially incongruentwith expert assessments, or at least not as incongruent as the assessments of laypersons. When asked to establish funding priorities, however, law students do go far beyond expert assessments of risk alone. Specifically, they incorporate considerations such as voluntariness, alternative possibilities for addressing the risk apart from government funding, breadth of effect, and effects on children and other innocent parties; they are responsive to the 
Mass., 1993). concerns of ordinary people, even when those concerns are not matched orjustified by expert assessments. 
Law students, at least at the University of Chicago, are very different from ordinary people in their judgments about the relation between markets and fairness. Ordinary people think that certain market-driven behavior is unfair, but law students disagree sharply. Law students also offer interesting and highly distinctive judgments about price increases with risk to important products, and with respect to both subsidies and price regulation. (It would be extremely interesting to find out whether this is a consequence of being the sort of person who chooses law school, or of law school itself, or of the University of Chicago Law School.) 
We designed the 1997 preliminary survey to test the extent to which number of lives saved, or perhaps some other goals, would play a role in law students' resource allocation decisions. The most straightforward finding was that the number of lives saved is far from the sole consideration for purposes of allocating money. On the contrary, law students are willing to save fewer lives in return for the achievement of other social goals. The most relevant question posited that the respondent was "entrusted with the task ofallocating $100 million among a number of possible regulatory activities." Then the survey listed the following six programs. 
A. Spend all $100 million on AIDS education, prevention, and treatment, with estimated annual savings of 120 lives. 
B. Spend $50 million on enforcement activity relating to toxic air pollutants, with estimated annual savings of 10 lives. 
C. Spend $50 million on safety inspections of nuclear power plants, which would carry an estimated annual savings of no lives but would satisfy many members of the public who are concerned about nuclear power plant safety and are demanding greater attention to these safety risks. D. Spend $25 million on heightened security measures at airports, which would carry an estimated annual savings of only 0.5 lives but would respond to greater public demand for airport security following recent highly publicized accidents. 
E. Spend $100 million on a vigorous antismoking campaign involving education, restrictions on sales to minors, and higher tobacco taxes, with estimated annual savings of 200 lives. 
F. Spend $50 million on preventing lead ingestion by children in the inner city, with estimated annual savings of 50 lives. 
The survey item then posited that the respondent's advisers had narrowed the policy options for allocating the $100 million to the following. 
(smoking), for a total savings of 160 lives annually. (smoking), $25 million on program B (toxic air pollutants), $20 million on program D (airport security), and $10 million on program C (nuclear power plants), for a total savings of 79.5 lives annually. program E (smoking), for a total savings of 150 lives annually. program A (AIDS), for a total savings of 110 lives annually. 
For all but the first two allocations (for which calculation of lives saved was obvious from the program description), the number of lives saved annually was provided. The dependent measure for this survey item was threefold: respondents were asked to indicate, of those six allocations, which was their most-preferred allocation, which their second-most-preferred allocation, and which their least-preferred. Table 1 displays the frequencies with which each allocation was chosen in these dependent measures. 
Had the respondents attended only to the number of lives saved by a particular allocation, they would have overwhelmingly favored allocation 2, spending all of the money on antismoking measures and saving 200 lives annually. While this allocation did receive 25 first-place votes, there were even more first-place votes for allocation 5, splitting the money between smoking and lead ingestion but saving 50 fewer lives annually. In addition, allocation 2 was second-to-last in number of combined first-place and second-place votes; the allocation receiving most combined first-place and second-place votes was allocation 3, splitting the money between two programs and saving 160 lives annually. Allocation 4, which split the money among five different programs was near average in receiving first-place and second-place votes, but more interesting was its receiving far and away the most last-place votes. Finally, while spending money on AIDS was chosen often when it was joined with other programs, spending money on AIDS alone received the least number of first-place and second-place votes and the second-highest number of lastplace votes. 
These initial results, as well as other rough exploratory analyses of the data, led to the following hypotheses. 
* The number of lives saved might be a substantial factor in the respondent's choice of allocation, but it was not the exclusive factor and might not have been even a dominant factor. (For example, one very rough exploratory analysis indicated that as little as 2.5 percent of the variance in response to these measures might have been explicable by the number of lives saved under each allocation.) " Addressing only one problem might be less preferable in itself than addressing two problems; but addressing five problems and possibly spreading the money too diffusely might be least preferable. " AIDS seemed somewhat important but only in conjunction with some other program; spending money on AIDS alone was least popular as a first or second choice. 
These hypotheses, if true, are quite interesting. They suggest that law students (and perhaps lawyers) differ greatly from experts insofar as they do not focus on the numbers alone. They also suggest that law students like to spread money among a variety of programs-but that there are limits on the extent to which they like to spread. (One reason for this limit might be cognitive difficulty in assessing more complex allocations; another reason might be a sense that, if resources are spread too diffusely among programs, no program will achieve any material benefit.) Finally, they suggest a reluctance to devote resources to AIDS alone. This possible reluctance might stem from distributional concerns; it might also stem from a belief that AIDS is in some sense a product of voluntary activity that could be negligent or worse. (One might think that smoking would similarly be considered a voluntary activity. But many people might perceive smoking as less voluntary and at least partially caused by manipulative efforts of the tobacco industry. Recent research on the effectiveness ofantismoking campaigns points to the strength of such perceptions: the most effective campaigns seem to be those urging their targets not to be manipulated by the tobacco industry.6 ) 
The 1998 survey sought to test and refine the hypotheses generated by the preliminary 1997 survey, as well as several additional hypotheses about resource allocation among risks and regulatory programs. In the relevant portion of the 1998 survey, respondents were again asked to allocate $100 million among nine programs or regions, as described below. In this survey, however, they were free to allocate the $100 million among the programs or regions in any proportions they wished, rather than being limited to fixed allocations provided for them. Moreover, there was no minimum or maximum allocation for any one program nor any requirement to fund a minimum or maximum number of programs. The resource allocation portion of the 1998 survey required the most complex analysis and interpretation, in part because there were five variant conditions for this portion of the survey. The underlying rationale for these varying conditions (and for this portion of the survey 
Risk Assessment, ResourceAllocation, andFairness generally) was that we wanted to assess the extent to which various types of information would affect the respondents' allocations. 
Our basic findings were that the law students behaved like experts to this extent: the number of lives saved was the predominant factor in their allocations. But even with no information other than the number of lives saved, respondents sacrificed some lives saved in the interest of breadth or equity. And when information of any sort was added to the number of lives saved, breadth and equity became even more prominent, although the effect of additional information was limited and the number of lives saved seemed always to remain the predominant factor. Finally, the 1998 survey also yielded insight about the effects of special interest groups, regarding allocation for AIDS, and regarding the intriguing possibility that people make their allocations by establishing the highest and lowest priorities and then leaving what is left to the middle (rather than, for instance, making allocations in serial order of priority). 
In one condition (the program-basic condition), we briefly described the nine programs and, for each program, projected the number of lives to be saved annually, as follows. 
12.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). save 12.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). 5.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). (projected to save 6.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). annually per $10 million spent). 0.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). per $10 million spent). restrictions on sales to minors, and higher taxes on tobacco products (projected to save 16.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). education, and various wellness programs and incentive programs (projected to save 16.0 lives annually per $10 million spent). 
A second condition (the program-enhanced condition) sought to determine the extent to which certain specific factors other than the number of lives saved and the nature of the risk would affect allocation patterns. These additional factors included political accountability, distributional effects, and public opinion. In this condition, respondents received the same information described above, but for some of the programs, there was additional information, as follows. 
* The description of program 1 (AIDS) added that "AIDS-related spending was a visible part of your party's most recent campaign." * Program 4 was described as preventing lead ingestion by children in inner-city schools and buildings. " Program 5 was described as the removal of asbestos from allschool buildings. * The description of program 6 (nuclear power plant inspections) added that "some members of the public are increasingly concerned with nuclear power plant safety and are assertively demanding greater attention to these potentially catastrophic risks." * The description of program 7 (airline inspections) added that .recent highly publicized incidents have focused public attention on airline safety." * The descrilItion of program 8 added that the program was strongly opposed by the tobacco industry and farmers. " The descriptions of programs 2, 3, and 9 (cancer/toxic air pollutants/fitness and nutrition) were left unchanged. 
A third condition (the program-minimal condition) identified the programs simply as Program 1, Program 2, etc., and offered no information other than the number of lives saved annually per $10 million spent. The purpose of this was twofold: first, to establish a baseline allocation absent any information but lives saved, to which we could compare the allocations generated where additional information was given; and second, to verify that the respondents were willing and able to allocate like experts, at least when lives saved was the only information provided. 
Although these three conditions were presumed to elucidate the effects of various types of information, we wanted to isolate further the effects of the supplemental information in the program-enhanced condition, independently of the particular program to which such information was attached. For example, perhaps being a visible part of one's party's campaign might have some effect on allocations for AIDS but not for other programs. But there were too many permutations to test each piece of supplemental information with each program, and besides, it could be that our programs were not broad enough. Accordingly, we sought to assess whether the supplemental information would have any effects completely apart from the nature of a program, and we did this by creating two additional conditions, in which the fund recipients were not "programs" but "regions." In these fourth and fifth conditions, the survey posited: 
A new government program is to be implemented. For purposes of analyzing the program's effects and distributing funds for the program, the country has been divided into nine regions of approximately equal populition. With regard to the number of lives saved, the program has different effects in different regions. The other effects of the program do not differ substantially among regions. Assume that you are responsible for allocating $100 million among the different regions. 
One of these two "region" conditions (the region-minimal condition) merely provided the number of lives that the program was projected to save annually (per $10 million spent) in that particular region. This condition was analogous (and nearly identical) to the program-minimal condition, which offered only such information for "programs," and the numbers of lives saved for the regions matched those for the programs. 
In addition to this same information about numbers of lives saved, the other "region" condition (the region-enhanced) added supplemental information as similar as possible to that which was added in the programenhanced condition, as follows. 
" For region 1, the description of the number of lives saved added that "this region was a key supporter of your party's most recent campaign." * For region 4, the lives saved were noted to be "mostly lives of innercity children." " For region 5, the lives saved were noted to be "mostly lives of schoolchildren." " For region 6, the description of the number of lives saved added that "some members of the public are increasingly concerned that this region might suffer catastrophic loss of lives without the program. " For region 7, the description of the number of lives saved added that "recent highly publicized incidents have focused public attention on this region's problems." " For region 8, the description of the number of lives saved added that "implementing the program in this region is strongly opposed by two powerful special-interest groups." " For regions 2, 3, and 9, the descriptions of the number of lives saved were left unchanged and not enhanced by supplemental information. 
General Patterns: Efficiency Versus Equity in Resource Allocation Respondents adhering to expert judgments would generally allocate their .$100 million so as to maximize the number of lives saved annually; in that sense, they should strive for maximum efficiency.' Efficiency in this sense would entail allocating all of the money to program 8, to program 9, or to both in any proportion, yielding a total of 160 lives saved annually. But far from a majority of the respondents allocated their funds in the maximally efficient manner; on the contrary, only 23 respondents (24.5%) did so. Clearly, then, factors other than maximizing number of lives saved affected the vast majority of the a criterion that would generate something other than maximizing lives saved. See Valuing Health for Policy- An Economic Approach, eds. George Tolley et al. (Chicago, 1994). allocationschosen-and the purpose of this survey was indeed to discern what some of those factors might be.8 
One potential factor was apparent in the preliminary 1997 survey (and discussed briefly above): namely, people might prefer not to put all of their allocation in one basket, as it were, but instead to spread the wealth among recipients. A possible explanation for this preference is that people are hedging against the risk that any one program might fail to meet its projections for lives saved; as one allocates funds to other programs, one is better assured that at least one of those programs will meet expectations. This explanation is analogous to the explanation for asset allocation and diversification in investment portfolios. But this explanation seems less than compelling- the survey simply asserted projections of lives saved, without delving into probabilities of saving more or fewer lives than projected. We are not inclined to believe that so many respondents considered such matters and hedged accordingly. 
Instead, fairnessor equity is probably a better explanation for the tendency to spread the wealth among more programs than just the one or two that would maximize efficiency. If only one or two programs receive the $100 million, then all who would benefit from the other programs are effectively shut out; those whose lives might be saved by the less-than-maximally-efficient programs enjoy no heightened prospect at all. By contrast, if the money is allocated among more programs, the total benefit may not be as high, but perhaps respondents believe that more people--or more diverse people-will enjoy some incremental benefit of an increased probability that their lives will be saved.' 
We operationalized these two factors, efficiency and equity, via summary statistics derived from each respondent's allocation among programs. The simple proxy for efficiency was the total number of lives saved annually under the respondent's allocation of the whole $100 million; we will refer to this variable as total lives. For each program, we calculated the actual lives saved as follows: 
(millions allocated) x (lives saved per $10 million) / $10 million. 
We then summed the actual lives saved for each program to get the total lives. Under maximum efficiency, where the entire $100 million was allocated. 
Specifically, for eight of the respondents, allocatiorLs to the various programs did not add to $100 million. For at least five and possibly more of these respondents, this was likely due to mere miscalculation. It is possible, though, that some respondents allocated less than $100 million deliberately, as a sort of statement about the propriety of government spending and supporting limits thereon. Although we would be interested in whether attitudes toward government spending might affect allocations to some programs or regions vis-A-vis others, the propriety of government spending in general did not concern us here. We were concerned with what people would "buy" with every $100 million spent, not with whether they thought $100 million was too much to spend or whether they preferred to save some of that $100 million. Accordingly, where a respondent's allocations did not sum to $100 million, we either increased or decreased all of the allocations proportionately to make them do so. programs and regions, although where a distinction between programs and regions is required, it will be made clear, and the word "program" in the name of a survey condition will remain significantly distinct. to program 8, program 9, or both, total lives would equal 160. Lower figures would indicate decreased efficiency. 
We operationalized equity via two statistics. The first equity statistic, designed to test breadth (a very possible proxy for equity), was simply the number of programs to which a respondent allocated any money at all; this variable we call total programs. Respondents concerned solely with efficiency (at least as we consider it here, as lives saved) would allocate money to only one or two programs (namely, program 8 and/or program 9). As the respondent allocated money to more programs, breadth (or, here, equity) would increase, and efficiency would decrease. 
The second statistical proxy for equity, equity variance,is subtler and more precise but also more complex than the total programs variable described above. Under what might seem to be a perfectly equitable allocation of equal amounts to all nine programs, each'program would receive $11.1 million, which is exactly equal to the mean allocation (i.e., $100 million divided by 9, insofar as all respondents allocated $100 million among nine programs). As allocation patterns deviate from this perfectly equitable pattern, the actual allocations for specific programs will, on average, also deviate from the mean allocation of $11.1 million. On this basis, equity varianceequaled the total summed variances of each program's allocation from the mean allocation of $11.1 million per program. That is, for each program, we subtracted the actual allocation from the mean allocation of $11.1 million and squared that difference. Then, for each respondent, we added all nine squared differences and, finally, computed the square root of that sum total; equity variancerefers to the resulting figure. 
That equity variance offers some measure of a respondent's breadth in allocation can again be seen as follows. If a respondent allocated the $100 million among all nine programs equally, the allocation for each program would equal the mean allocation, and equity variancewould equal zero; from this baseline, as the respondent increases allocations to some programs and decreases allocations to other programs (perhaps even to zero), allocations for programs will deviate more and more from the mean allocation (of $11.1 million per program), and equity variancewill increase accordingly. 
Table 2 presents by condition the means for total lives, equity variance,and total programs. Efficiency (as measured by total lives) was highest in the program-minimal and region-minimal conditions (with 140.42 and 145.89 total lives saved, respectively), and there was no significant difference between these two conditions (which we will refer tojointly as the minimal conditions). This result is not surprising, because in these conditions respondents had no information except the number of lives saved, and that factor should have been predominant in their allocations. 
The more interesting finding is that the means for total livesin the programbasic (116.54), program-enhanced (115.28), and region-enhanced (118.73) conditions were significantly lower than the means for the two minimal conditions (using a Student-Newman-Keuls test, or SNK, at p < .05)-but they were not significantly different from one another. In other words, when information about the number of lives saved by a program was accompanied by any additional information, total lives (representing efficiency) decreased significantly, but it did not matter whether that additional information was basic program description alone (as in the program-basic condition), supplemental information alone (as in the region-enhanced condition), or both (as in the program-enhanced condition): total lives was essentially the same regardless. 
Equityvariance Total programs 
We obtained complementary results for total programsand equity variance, the two measures of equity, or breadth, of allocation. The total programs to which respondents allocated any funds at all was lowest (which meant that breadth was lowest) in the two minimal conditions (averaging 3.96 programs in the program-minimal condition and 4.00 programs in the region-minimal condition); and total programswas highest (which meant that breadth was highest) in the three nonminimal conditions (averaging 6.37 programs in the program-basic condition, 7.18 in the program-enhanced, and 7.00 in the region-enhanced). The two minimal conditions were significantly lower in totalprogramsthan the three nonminimal conditions (using SNK at p < .05). But the two minimal conditions were not significantly different from each other, nor were the nonminimal conditions significantly different from one another. 
Similarly, equity variancewas highest (which meant that the allocations were furthest from perfect breadth or equality among all nine programs) in the two minimal conditions; and equity variance was lowest (which meant that the allocations were closest to perfect breadth or equality) in the three nonminimal conditions. Of the three nonminimal conditions, however, only the programenhanced condition was significantly lower than the two minimal conditions (using SNKatp< .05). As with totalprograms,the two minimal conditions were not significantly different from each other in equity variance,nor were the three nonminimal conditions significantly different from one another on this variable. 
Because the program-basic and program-enhanced conditions showed no significant differences in totallives, equity variance,or totalprograms (as assessed via planned contrasts), we combined these two conditions in order to conduct additional analyses using a two-factor model in which one factor was program versus region (i.e., whether allocations were to programs or to regions) and the other factor was minimal versus nonminimal (i.e., whether or not respondents received any information beyond number of lives saved). For total lives, equity variance, and total programs alike, whether respondents received minimal-versus-nonminimal information was a significant factor (p < .001 for each variable). But whether respondents allocated funds to programs versus regions was not a significant factor, nor was there a significant interaction between the two factors. 
Finally, one additional finding about these three variables was that they correlated rather consistently with our construction of the efficiency-versusequity tradeoff. Total lives (or efficiency) was positively correlated (r = .822) with equity variance (for which zero indicated perfect equity and higher numbers indicated less equity) and negatively correlated (r = -.804) with total programs (for which lower numbers indicated less equity and higher numbers indicated more equity); both correlations were significant at p < .001. There was also a significant negative correlation between equity variance and total programs (r = -.897, p < .001); this we also expected because higher equity varianceand lower totalprograms both indicate less equity, while lower equity varianceand higher totalprogramsboth indicate more equity. 
In sum, the resource allocation portion of the 1998 survey indicated the following. 
" Respondents were capable of appreciating lives saved and generally acted more like experts when no other information was offered. " But even when they had no information beyond lives saved and so should have acted most like experts, they allocated money on average to four of the nine programs, sacrificing some fifteen to twenty lives vis-i-vis the most efficient allocation. This indicated that there is at least a baseline reluctance to concentrate resources too much and/or a baseline interest in equity (i.e., in breadth, fairness, or sharing the wealth). " Moreover, when any information, regardless of its nature, was offered in addition to lives saved, respondents acted even less like experts and shifted more towards breadth and equity in their allocations, sacrificing on average about twenty-five more lives. 
Table 3 presents the mean allocations (overall and broken down by condition) for each program. It lists the programs in order oftheir mean allocations for all conditions combined. With each mean allocation we include in parentheses the program's ranking for that particular column. Each listing briefly references the program description and supplemental information, although each piece of such information would be applicable to only some of the various conditions. 
For all programs except program 5 (lead-inner-city children), specific allocations were significantly different among conditions. As with the broader measures discussed above, no specific program showed a significant difference (in a planned contrast) between the program-basic and programenhanced conditions. Accordingly, as with those broader measures, we collapsed these conditions to conduct a two-factor analysis with minimal-versusnonminimal as one factor and program-versus-region as the other. Because the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor was significant for all but one program (where the factor was still marginally significant), Table 3 also presents separate mean allocations for the combined minimal conditions (i.e., programminimal and region-minimal) versus the combined nonminimal conditions (i.e., program-basic, program-enhanced, and region-enhanced). 
Ceiling effects and the dominance of lives saved. As we have noted, for no program was there any significant difference between the program-basic, program-enhanced, and region-enhanced conditions. This finding suggests that the potential effects of information beyond the number of lives saved have limits and that, accordingly, the effects of different types of information are not additive once those limits are reached. If we were not surprised that some limit precludes additive effects of information other than number of lives saved, we were surprised that this ceiling was so low. For example, we would have expected the supplemental information presented alone (i.e., in the region-enhanced condition) to produce a significant difference from program description presented alone (i.e., in the program-basic condition) for at least one of the nine programs, but we never got this result. (To be sure, there were some potential trends in this direction, but none that was significant or even marginally so.) 
This ceiling on the effects of information beyond number of lives saved points to the relative dominance of lives saved in respondents' allocation. The relative rankings, both overall and across specific conditions and combinations, make it even clearer that the number of lives saved was the dominant factor in the allocations. That dominance is most pronounced in the minimal conditions, of course, where (as predicted) efficiency was highest in the absence of mitigating alternative information. But even though additional information (whether program description, supplemental information, or both) caused a decrease in efficiency and broader allocation, the relative rankings of the various programs remained relatively consistent with the number of lives saved under the programs. 
Fitness, smoking, and special-interest groups. The program receiving the highest allocation overall was program 9 (fitness-no supplemental information), projected to save 16.0 lives per $10 million spent; program 8 (antismoking-interest-group opposition), also projected to save 16.0 lives per $10 million, received the second-highest allocation overall. In the minimal conditions, these programs received virtually identical allocations, but when information was added to the number of lives saved, program 8 allocations decreased more than twice as much as the program 9 allocations (as we discuss in more detail below). Indeed, a within-subjects analysis of the relative allocations between programs 8 and 9 showed a significant difference between those allocations in general, and the magnitude of the difference varied significantly both by condition and on the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor. 
The relative allocation between programs 8 and 9 was not affected by any interaction between the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor and the programversus-region factor. As we have said, this points to a ceiling on the effects of any information added to the number of lives saved. But one set of trends is worth mentioning: namely, from the baseline established in the programminimal condition, allocations for program 8 in the program-basic condition (i.e., for an antismoking program) decreased an average of $5 million more than did the allocations for program 8 in the program-enhanced condition (i.e., where the antismoking program description was supplemented by the note that the program was strongly opposed by the tobacco industry and farmers). At the same time, comparing the region-minimal and regionenhanced conditions, both program 8 and program 9 were exactly equal in the region-minimal condition, but program 8 dropped much more than program 9 in the region-enhanced condition, where the only difference between the two programs was program 8's being strongly opposed by powerful special-interest groups. 
Although the difference for program 8 between the program-basic and program-enhanced conditions was not significant, it was not far from significance and might become so ifwe used more powerful measures (and/or more respondents). If valid, what the trend indicates is that the tobacco industry might hurt itself with its public opposition to antismoking programs: the antismoking program received higher allocations when the industry's opposition was mentioned. In other words, it might sometimes be strategic and prudent for the tobacco industry to stifle its public opposition to (or support for) programs with which it is concerned. Conversely, as we have said, supporters of antismoking programs likely help their cause by highlighting the tobacco industry's opposition to them. 
Notwithstanding this specific observation, special-interest groups in general do not seem to hurt their own causes, even when their support or opposition is salient; in the region-enhanced condition, the mere fact of special-interest opposition to program 8 reduced allocations to levels far below those in otherwise-identical program 9 Oust as the special-interest opposition would like). Even when the special-interest group is the tobacco industry (i.e., in the program-enhanced condition), allocations were substantially lower for program 8 than for program 9; theyjust were not as low as they were when the interest group was not identified as being the tobacco industry. 
AIDS, cancer, and political campaigns. Program 1 (AIDS-campaign issue/support), projected to save 12.0 lives per $10 million spent, received the third-highest mean allocation overall, while program 2 (cancer-no supplemental information), with an identical projection of lives saved, received an almost identical fourth-highest allocation. Indeed, within-subjects analyses of the relative allocations between program 1 and program 2 showed no significant differences between those allocations in general. The relative allocations between the two programs did vary significantly both by condition and on the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor; generally, allocations for both programs increased about equally when information was added to the number of lives saved. But there was also a marginally significant interaction effect between the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor and the program-versus-region factor. From the baseline in region-minimal, allocations for program 1 in the regionenhanced condition increased more than allocations for program 2. This makes sense because only program 1 added supplemental information in the region-enhanced condition; any increase in program 2's allocation in that condition would have been due to its interdependence with the other programs, since its description was no different. By contrast, from the baseline in program-minimal, allocations for program 1 in the program-basic and program-enhanced conditions increased less than the allocations for program (albeit not significantly) than in the region-enhanced condition. 
These findings yield a few possible explanations. The slight difference in program 1 allocations between the program-enhanced and the regionenhanced conditions might simply suggest that the slight difference in the supplemental information was relevant. In the program-enhanced condition, AIDS was described as "a visible part of your party's campaign," whereas in the region-enhanced condition, the region was described as "a key supporter of your party's most recent campaign"; and perhaps the latter, denoting explicit support rather than mere visibility (which was unclear as to effect or valence), commanded greater attention and influence on the allocation. But from the baseline in the program-minimal condition, AIDS-program allocations went up less than cancer-program allocations in the program-basic condition, and AIDS allocations went down a little when the campaign-visibility information was added, while cancer allocations went even higher in the programenhanced condition (albeit likely due to interdependence, as no supplemental information was added for program 2). Since the number of lives saved was equal between the two programs, it might be that respondents preferred cancer in the nonminimal program conditions because it affects more people; this interpretation would cohere with the preference for breadth and equity. Another explanation might be that these patterns reflect some sort of backlash against AIDS programs. But if the alleged backlash is purportedly due to AIDS' not affecting so many people, then the explanation is simply the complement of the breadth- or equity-based explanation for the relatively higher allocations for cancer programs. And while the decrease in AIDS allocation in the program-enhanced condition (where its campaign visibility is salient) might further support a backlash theory, that decrease was rather small and not significant, and it might simply have reflected the interdependence of the AIDS program and other programs with supplemental information. 
Nuclear power plants and airline safety. Program 6 (nuclear power plantscatastrophe concerns), projected to save zero lives per $10 million spent, received the lowest mean allocation overall; program 7 (airline inspectionspublicized incidents), projected to save only 0.5 lives per $10 million spent, received the second-lowest allocation. As with other programs, the minimalversus-nonminimal factor was significant: allocations for both programs increased when program descriptions and/or supplemental information was added to the number of lives saved. Notwithstanding that significance, however, even when additional information was given, programs 6 and 7 still received the lowest and second-lowest allocations, respectively; this consistency further highlights the dominance of lives saved in determining allocations. 
Lead, air pollution, and asbestos. Program 4 (lead ingestion-inner-city children), projected to save 6.0 lives per $10 million spent, received the fifthhighest mean allocation overall; program 3 (air pollution-no supplemental information), projected to save 5.0 lives per $10 million spent, received the sixth-highest overall allocation; and program 5 (asbestos removal-all schoolchildren), projected to save 3.0 lives per $10 million spent, received the seventh-highest overall allocation. Within-subjects analyses yielded a significant pattern of differences in the allocations among programs 3, 4, and 5. In addition, allocations for these programs as a group varied significantly by condition and on the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor. (By themselves, program 3 and program 5 varied significantly by condition and on the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor; program 4 did not vary significantly by condition and reached only marginal significance on the minimal-versusnonminimal factor.) But the relative pattern of allocations among the three programs did not vary significantly by condition or on the minimal-versusnonminimal factor; generally, allocations for both programs increased about equally when information was added to the number of lives saved. 
Unlike any of the interprogram patterns discussed above, the relative pattern ofallocations among these three programs varied significantly on the program-versus-region factor. Essentially, program 3 received higher allocations than program 5 in the program conditions but not in the region conditions (where program 3 received allocations that were very slightly but not significantly lower). The superiority of program 3 in the program conditions is consistent with the dominance of lives saved and might also reflect persisting concern about air pollution, while concern about asbestos seems to have waned in the past few years (especially as we have recognized the exorbitant expense but limited benefit of asbestos removal). By contrast, the relative equality of these two programs in the region condition might derive from the salience of program 5's benefiting all schoolchildren (and thus appealing to breadth or equity concerns), especially since program 3 has no supplemental information added. 
Notwithstanding the results above, the most interesting observation about programs 3, 4, and 5 might be that their results are rather uninteresting. Program 4 is one salient example; it was the only program for which allocations did not vary significantly across the five conditions, and it was the only program for which the minimal-versus-nonminimal factor was only marginally significant. Program 3 (which added no supplemental information in the enhanced conditions) offers another example. The allocation for this program in the program-basic condition approximates the midpoint of allocations for that program in the two region conditions. This might indicate that there are perceived variations in the program's allocations; with no supplemental information, the two region conditions should have approximated the program-basic condition for allocations to this program, so the variance in the region conditions is more likely due to the program's interdependence with other programs than anything else. 
These "uninteresting" results suggest that the allocation process might be one of deciding on the extremes and thinking much less about the middle. Here, that would mean the respondents might typically have decided which programs should clearly get the highest and lowest allocations and then how much those programs should receive; the remaining programs in the middle then split up the pot, in rough proportion to the number of lives saved. If this observation is valid generally, it suggests that the most fertile opportunities for influencing allocations lie where the program is very high or very low on the priority list. By contrast, allocation for programs ofmoderate priority might be destined to take the relatively constant amount left over after the higher and lower priorities have been addressed. But this hypothesis is tentative and requires further inquiry. 
Summary and concluding remarks. In sum, the most basic trend observed in this portion of the survey was that, given minimal information, respondents come closest to maximal efficiency in the sense that lives saved dominates everything else. But when given any sort of additional information (whether program descriptions, supplemental information, or both), respondents sacrifice efficiency in favor of greater breadth or equity. In making this tradeoff, though, respondents generally achieve the breadth without disturbing the relative priority of the various programs; there may be less difference in allocation from first to second and so on to last, but first and second and so on to last retain their relative levels of priority. And there seems to be a ceiling on the effects of additional information, so that additional information affects allocations only to a certain point; beyond this point, further information seems to have no effect on allocations. 
The question is, where efficiency suffers, which programs bear those losses in efficiency? Because the programs with highest allocations under more efficiency-oriented conditions have more to give, it should be expected that they would bear such losses and that portions of their allocations would be redirected to programs lower in efficiency. Indeed, this is exactly what happened here. When information of any sort was added to the number of lives saved, the two programs with highest allocations in the minimal conditions suffered losses, while all other programs received higher allocations. Even the programs ranked third and fourth in the minimal conditions approximately doubled their allocations in the nonminimal conditions. This result seems to mitigate the predominance of lives saved in determining allocation, suggesting that such efficiency is something of a spartan luxury that must be abandoned when additional information and complexity detract from spartan simplicity. 
Also relevant to this issue of what programs bear the losses in efficiency is the marked disparity between how much program 8's allocations decreased in the nonminimal conditions and how relatively little program 9's allocations decreased. That finding points to two conclusions, either or both of which may be valid (even if subject to the ceiling on effects of information added to lives saved) and worthy of further research. One is that government's launching an antismoking campaign raises issues of autonomy, paternalism, and propriety that the government's launching ofa pro-fitness campaign does not. The second, consistent with public choice theory, is that, for all the criticism of special-interest groups that one often encounters (even from those whom they seek to influence), their support or opposition can substantially affect resource allocation and hinder efficiency. 
There is considerable debate not only about differences between experts and ordinary people on the importance of maximizing lives saved, but also about the particular kinds of risks that experts and ordinary people deem important. Consider, for example, the following table:"0 Hazardous waste sites Exposure to worksite chen nicals Industrial pollution ofwaterways Nuclear accident radiatior Radioactive waste Chemical leaks from underground storage tanks Pesticides Pollution from industrial accidents Water pollution from farm runoff Tap water contamination Industrial air pollution Ozone layer destruction Coastal water contamination Sewage-plant water pollution Vehicle exhaust Oil spills Acid rain Water pollution from urban runoff Damaged wetlands Genetic alteration Nonhazardous waste sites Greenhouse effect Indoor air pollution X-ray radiation Indoor radon Microwave oven radiation 
In the risk assessment portion of the 1997 preliminary survey, respondents were given the following instruction: 
The federal, state, and local governments of the United States expend resources on a wide range of issues that present environmental health and safety risks. As a guide to setting government priorities, how important do you consider each of the following risks? Listed below are 24 risks. Please assign each risk to one of three categories (high, medium, or low importance), indicating its seriousness compared with the other risks listed there. Please be sure to assign exactly eight (8) risks (one-third of the total) to each of the three categories. 
Surveys were scored by assigning to each risk 3 points if in the "high" category, 2 if in the "medium," and 1 if in the "low." The last two columns of Table 5 display the mean scores and ordinal rankings of our twenty-four risk factors (which were somewhat different from the twenty-six risks of Table 4). More than they answered the question whether law students are more like experts or like laypersons, these results pointed out certain ambiguities and other issues in risk assessment that would need to be addressed and refined with the followup survey. 
For example, on the basis of certain variance patterns and comments from some respondents, we believed that answers to the question "How important is each risk, as a guide to setting government priorities?" were somewhat ambiguous. Specifically, we could not be'sure how much the answers were determined by the respondent's assessment of the risk itself, independent from government expenditure, versus how much the answers were determined by the respondent's opinion as to the propriety and/or utility of government expenditure on the risk, independent of the risk itself. For example, the risk of cigarette smoking (to smokers themselves) showed the highest variance, and its distribution was U-shaped. Presuming that the respondents did not include adherents to the then-current Bob Dole claim that smoking was notso harmful or addictive, we assumed that the risk itself should have been ranked uniformly high, but instead we found that it was often ranked medium or even low, because some respondents believed it improper or ineffective for government to spend resources against cigarette smoking. 
Another source of potential ambiguity in these results was that respondents might have interpreted or defined the term "risk" in various ways. Some might have interpreted it in technical terms, as the magnitude of harm multiplied by the probability of harm, but others might have given greater weight to one or the other of those factors. Moreover, some respondents might have factored in other characteristics of the risk, such as its being particularly grisly, unforeseeable, inequitable, and so forth (as described, for example, by Slovic and his colleagues1 1). Again, these variations in definition of "risk" might have affected the results, and certain comments by respondents indicated that this was a real possibility. Accordingly, the 1998 survey was designed with an eye toward reducing these ambiguities and focusing the results and their interpretation. 
The 1998 survey improved upon the preliminary survey by dividing respondents into two conditions for the risk assessment portion, using a different response format, and offering a guideline definition of risk. For both conditions, the question began with the guideline definition: 
The level of risk associated with an event or condition is a product of both the magnitude of harm resulting from the event or condition and the probability that the event or condition will occur. The federal, state, and local governments of the United States expend resources against a wide range of environmental, health, and safety risks. 
Then, in one condition (the risk level condition), respondents were given the following instruction: 
Listed below are 24 risks. You have been asked to evaluate the level ofrisk that each presents. Accordingly, please rank all of the risks from 1 to 24, indicating the level of each risk compared to all the others (1 = highest level of risk on the list, 2 = second-highest level of risk on the list, and so on, to 24 = lowest Psychological Perspective, inRegulatory Policy and the Social Sciences, ed. Roger G. Noll, 241 (Berkeley, 1985). level of risk on the list). IMPORTANT: You must use each rank from 1 to 24, and there can be no ties between risks. 
In the second condition (the funding priority condition), respondents were instead given this instruction: 
Listed below are 24 risks. Assume that the government has allotted limited funds thatwill be used to combat eight of the risks listed below. Because these funds are limited, you have been asked to evaluate where they would be best spent. Accordingly, please rank all of the risks from 1 to 24, indicating the spending priority that each risk should receive compared to all the others (1 = highest spending priority on the list, 2 = second-highest spending priority on the list, and so on, to 24 = lowest spending priority on the list). IMPORTANT: You must use each rank from I to 24, and there can be no ties between risks. 
The 1998 Survey Results Table 5 presents the ordinal ranking and mean score for each risk both overall and by condition. (In addition, as noted above, this table includes the ordinal ranking and mean score for each risk as assessed by the 1997 preliminary survey, which used a different response format and scale.) 
We conducted Mann-Whitney U-tests on each risk to determine whether the assessment of that risk differed between the risk level condition and the funding priority condition. (The Mann-Whitney U-test is a test ofsignificance that is analogous to a t-test but more appropriate for ordinal data such as the rankings generated by this portion of the survey.) Table 5 highlights significant differences as follows: where the mean scores for a risk were significantly different between conditions (p < .05), the risk has two asterisks; where the difference between conditions was marginally significant (p< .10), the risk has one asterisk. 
A total of ten risks showed significant or marginally significant differences between the two conditions. Of these ten, the following five risks received higher mean rankings in the funding priority condition than in the risk level condition: hazardous waste, nuclear power, stratospheric ozone depletion, pesticide residue on foods, and terrorism. This difference indicates that the law students might have beenjust like experts in recognizing that the risk level for these is actually rather low; but they might have beenjust like laypersons in believing that these risks warrant higher funding priority nonetheless. This difference might be explained in two ways. First, in adopting the role of policy makers in the funding priority condition, respondents might simply have recognized the importance that others place on these risks and responded accordingly, notwithstanding their own predilections. Second, the students might have wanted higher funding for the same reasons that laypersons want higher funding for these risks, such as the reasons discussed by Slovic and his colleagues (the widespread devastation that could result from the risks, the particular danger to children and other innocent parties, etc.) .12 
By contrast, five risks showed significant or marginally significant differences in which the mean ranking was higher in the risk level condition than in the funding priority condition: automobile accidents, cigarette smoking (risk to smokers), poor diet/nutrition, indoor air pollution, and occupational injury and illness. What is notable about these five risks is that, unlike the five risks discussed above, these risks can be seen as matters of voluntary behavior and/or contractual relations, and they can be addressed fairly well via insurance arrangements and the tort system. For example, while respondents might see cigarette smoking and poor diet as substantial risks, they might see these risks as being better addressed by behavioral change and/or selfinsurance than by government funding. Similarly, while the respondents might see indoor air pollution and occupational injury or illness as substantial risks, they might see these risks as being better addressed by insurance (including workers' compensation) or even by the tort system than by government funding. On the contrary, the five risks discussed above, with their potential widespread devastation, might be seen as less amenable to solution via behavioral modification, insurance, or the tort system. 
Variance for each risk was generally similar between conditions, but Levene's test for equality of variances indicated that there were significant or marginally significant differences in variance for five of the risks. For loss of wildlife habitats, indoor air pollution, and pollution of surface waters, variance was higher in the risk level condition than in the funding priority condition. (For pollution of surface waters, this difference was just marginally significant.) Apparently, for these risks, respondents were less consistent in assessing the risk level than they were in assessing the proper funding priority. By contrast, poor diet/nutrition and infectious diseases (excluding AIDS) showed higher variance in the funding priority condition than in the risk level condition (although both of these differences were just marginally significant). For these risks, respondents were less consistent in assessing the proper funding priority than they were in assessing the risk level. Finally, one other interesting observation about variance was that two risks showed overall standard deviations that were significantly different from the average standard deviation (which was 5.55): those risks were cigarette smoking (risk to smokers), with a standard deviation of 7.75, and poor diet/nutrition, with a standard deviation of 7.43. 
Finally, some of the risks in this portion of the survey matched programs included in the resource allocation portion of the survey. Accordingly, we derived Spearman correlation coefficients for certain pairings of risks in this portion of the survey and programs in the resource allocation portion. (Spearman coefficients were more appropriate than Pearson coefficients because of the ordinal nature ofthe risk assessment rankings.) We limited this computation to respondents in the program-basic and program-enhanced conditions of the resource allocation portion, because these were the only respondents who knew the nature of the programs when making their allocations. We expected correlations to be negative because, under the 1-to-24 ranking system of the risk assessment portion, greater risks received lower rank scores. 
Of the pairings we tested, three were significantly correlated. First, rhisk rankings for AIDS were negatively correlated with allocations to the AIDSrelated program (r = -.438). Second, risk rankings for poor diet/nutrition were negatively correlated with allocations to the fitness and nutrition program (r=-.400). Third, risk rankings for secondhand smoke were negatively correlated with allocations to the antismoking program (r =-.331). By contrast, risk rankings for cigarette smoking (risk to smokers) showed virtually zero correlation with allocations to the antismoking program, which is consistent with cigarette smoking's having the highest variance among all risks. (In fact, the Spearman correlation between risk rankings for cigarette smoking and risk rankings for secondhand smoke was only .182 and definitely not significant, which is also consistent with cigarette smoking's having such high variance.) Other pairings that did not show significant correlations were between risk rankings for nuclear power and allocations for nuclear power plant inspections, between risk rankings for airline accidents and allocations for airline safety inspections, and between risk rankings for particulate air pollution and allocations for programs related to toxic air pollutants. 
Law students seem to behave more like experts when assessing risk levels themselves. Their assessments are not particularly discordant with those of experts; at the very least, they are more congruent with expert assessments than are the assessments of laypersons. But when asked to establish funding priorities, law students do go beyond assessments of risk alone. Specifically, they apparently attend to factors such as voluntariness, alternative possibilities for addressing the risk aside from government funding, breadth of effect, and effect on children and other innocent parties; and/or they are responsive in their hypothesized roles as policy makers to the concerns of ordinary people, even when those concerns are not matched orjustified by expert assessments of risk levels. 
The 1997 preliminary survey included an item presenting the following scenario: "A department store in your town sells snow shovels, usually at a price of $10 per shovel. The morning after a substantial snowstorm, the department store decides to raise the price to $15 per shovel." Respondents were then asked to indicate whether they believed the department store's decision was "completely fair," "acceptable," "unfair," or "very unfair." In most surveys, most people (80 percent or so) treat this decision as unfair. 
Of the 116 responses, 29 (25.0%) indicated that the decision was completely fair, 66 (56.9%) said that it was acceptable, 17 (14.7%) said that it was unfair, and only 4 (3.4%) said that it was very unfair. Collapsing the data, then, 95 (81.9%) of the respondents thought the decision was completely fair or acceptable, while only 21 (18.1%) of the subjects thought it was unfair or very unfair. Chi-square tests on these two distributions indicated that each was significantly different from a random distribution. 
These results differ greatly from results observed among other populations.13 We do not know whether this is a law student effect, a law school effect, an elite law school effect, or a University of Chicago Law School effect. In general, the students in our survey were most like economists in their willingness to suffer the laws of supply and demand without protest. Because of certain respondent comments, we wondered if such tolerance was due to the respondents' perceiving snow shovels not as essentials but instead as luxuries, for which fairness could not provide a superior claim to efficiency. And we wondered about the extent to which law students might be prepared to address efficiency's effects on fairness via either prohibition of price increases or subsidies to offset price increases. 
* * 
$10 per shovel. The morning after a substantial snowstorm, the hardware store decides to raise the price to $15 per shovel. 
Due to the same substantial snowstorm, roads to the town are blocked, and the grocery store is unable to receive new inventory. The grocery store decides to double the price of meat and fruit. 
The grocery store also decides to double the price of diapers and baby formula. 
Respondents were asked to indicate whether they believed the decision in each scenario was "completely fair," "somewhat fair," "somewhat unfair," or "completely unfair." For each scenario, respondents were also asked to indicate, using a 1-9 scale, whether the government should prohibit the price increase (1 = yes, 9 = no) and whether the government should subsidize consumers to offset the price increase (1 = yes, 9 = no). Because food and baby needs seem more important or indispensable than snow shovels, we expected the responses for these products to differ from responses for shovels. 
Tables 6 and 7 present results for the fairness portion of the 1998 survey. Analyses of these results yielded several observations. 
First, a chi-square test comparing the fairness results for the snow shovel items on the 1997 preliminary survey and the 1998 survey showed no significant difference in the two distributions, whether we compared the data across all four possible responses or collapsed the responses into one fair category versus one unfair category. 
Diapers &formula 
Second, the particular product mattered in the 1998 survey: people found increases for snow shovels more fair than increases for fruit and meat and for diapers and baby formula. More specifically: looking solely to the 1998 survey, chi-square tests showed that the distribution of responses was significantly dependent on the product for which prices were being increased (p < .01, whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses collapsed into one fair category versus one unfair category). Still more specifically, though, subsequent chi-square tests showed no significant difference between the response pattern for meat and fruit and the response pattern for diapers and baby formula (whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses collapsed into fair versus unfair). But there was a significant difference between the response pattern for snow shovels and the response patterns, collapsed together, for meat and fruit and for diapers and baby formula (p< .01, whether assessed across all four responses or with the responses collapsed). 
This significant difference indicated that respondents found price increases on fruit and meat and on diapers and baby formula less fair than a price increase on snow shovels. Notwithstanding that difference, though, respondents were more likely to find the price increases fair than unfair, regardless of the particular product. 
Fruit &meat Diapers &formula Collapsed means for prohibition and subsidy across all products 
Third, we conducted within-subjects analyses on responses concerning government prohibition of price increases and government subsidies to offset price increases. These analyses revealed no significant difference overall in preference for prohibition versus subsidy. But there was a significant effect of the particular product for which a prohibition or subsidy was in question. Specifically, as with the responses above regarding fairness versus unfairness, subjects were more opposed to either prohibition or subsidy when the product was snow shovels than they were to either prohibition or subsidy when it was fruit and meat or diapers and baby formula. But again, notwithstanding that difference, mean responses leaned toward opposing prohibition or subsidy, regardless of the particular product. 
Finally, there was a marginally significant interaction between the particular product and the relative preference for subsidy versus prohibition. Specifically, with regard to snow shovels (for which respondents were most tolerant of the price increases), respondents were a little more opposed to the subsidies than they were to the prohibition of price increases; with regard to fruit and meat and to diapers and baby formula (for which respondents were less tolerant of the price increases), respondents were a little more opposed to the prohibition of price increases than they were to the subsidies. This interaction, while only marginally significant, might indicate that, when a product is more important or indispensable, respondents such as these prefer to offset the unfairness of the price increase with subsidies rather than prohibiting such price increases. 
One possible rationale for the interaction could be that prohibiting price increases removes incentives for merchants to supply these important or indispensible products, whereas subsidies motivate the merchants to supply the products and receive the extra premium, while they prevent the individual consumer from bearing too much cost. Meanwhile a less important product might notjustify a subsidy; even if prohibition of price increases is a disincentive for merchants to supply the product, consumers are not much harmed by the merchants' unwillingness. 
In this essay we have reported on several studies designed to reveal law students' evaluations of issues of regulatory policy, especially with respect to risk allocation and risk assessment. Part of the purpose was pedagogical-to give students a sense of the range of problems encountered under the general rubric of "administrative law" (with similar such problems occurring in environmental law as well). An understanding of these problems can illuminate both regulatory policy andjudicial review, and can usefully be brought to bear on many cases in the Administrative Law course. Part of our purpose was to see whether and how law students deviate from experts, who tend to focus on the number of lives saved; we wanted to explore whether law students think like ordinary people or like experts, and to understand their deviations, if any, from these two (somewhat stylized) groups. 
Our most important findings are as follows. With regard to resource allocation, law students at the University of Chicago deviate from experts in giving weight to factors others than number of lives saved, when any such information is presented to them. That is, they also care about equitable issues of fairness and breadth. With regard to risk assessment, the law students are able to act like experts in assessing risk levels alone. When establishing funding priorities, however, they are responsive to the concerns of laypersons, even when such concerns are not supported by expert assessments; and they appreciate factors such as voluntariness, the availability ofsolutions aside from government funding, and potential effects of each risk. 
But these law students also differ-and strikingly so-from ordinary people in their judgments about the role of fairness in certain markets. Among ordinary people, about 80 percent find market outcomes unfair and 20 percent find them fair. For law students the proportions are almost precisely reversed: 20 percent find unfairness and 80 percent find fairness. We do not know whether this remarkable difference is a consequence of being the kind of person who chooses law school, of law school training, or of University of Chicago Law School training. 
As we have indicated, this exercise had two purposes. One was pedagogical, and the distribution of the survey (and preliminary discussions of the outcome) did help to focus student attention on some central issues in administrative law. The other purpose was to see how law students and perhaps lawyers approach question of priority-setting and equity in the administrative state. The preliminary results are intriguing and highly suggestive; but there is much to learn, in particular because ofpossible distinctive effects arising from the respondents" being enrolled at the University of Chicago Law School, where the economic analysis of law is ofsubstantial importance and emphasis. Further research could provide a great deal of insight into the particular judgments of lawyers, an important group of citizens who take substantial policy-making roles, about how government might make best use of its limited resources in reducing risks to life and health. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 57 (2D SERIES) 
Second-Order Decisions 
THE LAW SCHOOL THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
In making decisions, people sometimes calculate the costs and benefits of alternative courses of action, and choose the option that maximizes net benefits, however these may be described and understood. Certainly this is a conventional picture of practical reason in both private and public life.1 When deciding what to buy, where to travel, whether to support legislation, or how to vote in a dispute over constitutional rights, people might seem to proceed in this way. A common idea about decision-making is that agents are typically in the business of maximizing or optimizing. At the time of choice, this is their basic method and their basic goal. 
A moment’s introspection shows that this picture is inaccurate or at least too simple. The cost of deliberation is often high. When and because the stakes are extremely low, people may use simplifying strategies; when and because the stakes are extremely high, people may seek approaches that relieve them of the burden of or the responsibility for choice. Sometimes calculation of costs and benefits of alternative courses of action is exceedingly difficult, or in any case tedious and not worthwhile. Every bureaucrat knows that costbenefit analysis may fail cost-benefit analysis, and almost everyone, bureaucrat or not, is sometimes willing to do a great deal in order to reduce or to eliminate the burdens of decision. Often agents very much want not to make (particular) decisions. Often they know that they will want not to make decisions even before they undertake the particular calculations involved in those particular decisions. Part of what it means to optimize is to try to reduce the burdens of judgment, a fact that can lead people not to calculate at all, or to do so in a sharply truncated fashion. Noncalculative or truncated *Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago. **Center for Rationality and Interactive Decision Theory, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. We are grateful to Saul Levmore and Richard Posner for valuable comments on a previous draft. 1 See, e.g,, Gary Becker, Accounting for Tastes (1996). decisions can in turn have substantial individual and social consequences. 
This is true for decisions both large and small, and for decisions both by individuals and by institutions, political and otherwise. When people are deciding what cereal to buy at the grocery store, whether to buckle their seatbelts or lock their car doors, what route to take to the movie theatre, or what to say in response to the question, “how are you,” they may want, almost more than anything else, a simple way of proceed. Reduction of the burdens of decision and choice is valued in less routine settings as well. Consider the decision whether to purchase a house, to get married, to move to another city, to have a child, or, in the political realm, to create a new right, to reduce spending on welfare programs, or to make war or peace; here people often find themselves in a poor position to calculate ultimate consequences, and they seek to produce simpler strategies for choice. 
The point very much bears on ethics, politics, law, and institutional design. To be sure, people often believe that it is important to face the responsibility for decision, even though another strategy would produce a better outcome. Sometimes elected officials—simply because of the democratic legitimacy that comes from their election—refuse to relinquish responsibility to those with superior knowledge; democratic considerations may force them to make decisions on their own. But when officials decide whether to sign a civil rights law, or to support affirmative action, they may not be in a position to calculate net benefits, and hence they may choose some other decision-making strategy for political or strictly cognitive reasons. Public institutions generally operate on the basis of this understanding; some institutions, like the Environmental Protection Agency and the Food and Drug Administration, owe their existence partly to the legislature’s desire to reduce the burdens of judgment. Or consider adjudication. When deciding cases, judges are constantly in a position to decide how much (and to some extent whether) to decide, and different judges, with different assessment of how to weigh the cognitive burdens, often split on just this question. 
Our particular interest here is in second-order decisions. The term requires some clarification. In the case of second-order desires, one deals with desires-about-desires; in the case of second-order beliefs, one deals with beliefs-about-beliefs. In the case of second-order decisions, however, one does not exactly deal with decisions-aboutdecisions. Rather, one deals with the decision about appropriate strategies for avoiding decisions or for reducing their costs. More particularly, our concern is with strategies that people use in order to avoid getting into an ordinary decision-making situation in the first instance. Thus people (and institutions) might be said to make a second-order decision when they choose one from among several possible second-order strategies for minimizing the burdens of, and risk of error in, first-order decisions. Second-order decisions about second-order strategies are thus our basic topic. 
The procedure of choice might, for example, be a delegation to some other person or institution (“I’ll ask what my wise friend John thinks; he’ll know how to handle that question” or “the Environmental Protection Agency will decide how to solve the problem of groundwater pollution”). Or the chosen procedure may involve a judgment, before ultimate decision-making situations arise, in favor of proceeding via some rule settled in advance (“I always buckle up my kids in the back seat, even on short rides,” or “whenever the bill to be paid is less than $50, I shall pay cash,” or “if the opposing party proposes a tax increase, do not support it”). As we understand it here, the term “second-order decisions” refers to strategies chosen before situations of first-order decision in order to eliminate the need for ordinary choice or to reduce the calculative demands of choice. 
Second-order decisions are a pervasive part of ordinary life and a major aspect of ethics, politics, and both private and public law. But they have not been studied systematically. In this essay, we attempt to make some progress on the topic. One of our strategies is to see what might be learned by exploring analogies and disanalogies between the cases of individuals and institutions. Each of us lives according to a wide range of second-order decisions, many of them so reflexive and so thoroughly internalized that they do not seem to be decisions at all. Political and legal institutions often confront or embody second-order decisions. Indeed, one of the most important tasks for a Constitution itself is to make a series of second-order decisions. Even after a Constitution is in place, political actors face a range of further second-order decisions, and well-organized private groups tend to know this, at least where the stakes are especially high. 
Part of our purpose is simply to organize this topic by providing a taxonomy of strategies—the first step toward understanding the adoption, at the individual and social levels, of one or another second-order decision. We also try to provide some guidance on positive and normative issues. Both individual people and collective bodies may face an interesting meta-decision: Which of the possibilities on the menu is the suitable one with regard to a given kind of cases? Should an agent or an institution adopt a rule or a presumption? When is it best to take small steps, or instead to delegate to another party? 
produce mistakes and in the extent to which they impose informational and other burdens on the agent and on others either before the process of ultimate decision or during the process of ultimate decision. Thus a second-order decision might well be based on a judgment about how best to ( decision and ( mistakes. There are three interesting kinds of cases. First, some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burdens either before or during the ultimate decision. This is a great advantage, and a major question is whether the strategy in question (consider a decision to flip a coin) produces too much unfairness or too many mistakes. Second, some second-order strategies greatly reduce decisional burdens at the time of ultimate choice, but they require considerable thinking in advance (consider, for example, the creation of rules to govern emissions from coal-fired power plants, or to govern misconduct by one’s children). Decisions of this kind may be burdensome to make in advance; but the burdens may be worth incurring if they remain far less than the aggregate burdens of onthe-spot decisions. Here too there is a question of how to regulate the number, magnitude, and quality of mistakes. Third, some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burden in advance, but may impose high burdens on others who must make the first-order decision; a delegation of power to some trusted associate, or to an authority, is the most obvious case. 
We attempt to understand these different kinds of cases by drawing on actual practices, individual and institutional. The result is to provide some guidelines for seeing when one or another strategy will be chosen, and also when one or another makes best sense. I n the process we introduce some ethical, political, and legal issues that are raised by various second-order decisions. 
People determined to ease the burdens of decision have a number of available strategies. The following catalogue captures the major alternatives. The taxonomy is intended to be exhaustive of the possibilities, but the various items should not be seen as exclusive of one another; there is some overlap between them, a point to which we shall return. 
People anticipating hard or repetitive decisions may adopt a rule, in the form of an irrebuttable presumption. A key feature of a rule is that it amounts to a full, or nearly full, ex ante specification of results in individual cases. All, or nearly all, of the work of decision is done in advance. 
In order to ease the burdens of decisions, people might say, for example, that they will never cheat on their taxes or fail to meet a deadline, or that they will never borrow money, or that in their capacity as friend, they will always keep secret anything told in confidence. While dieting, you might adopt a rule against eating desert; a former smoker might adopt a flat ban against having a cigarette, even a single one late at night. There are many institutional analogues. A legislature might provide that no one may smoke on airplanes; or that judges can never make exceptions to the speed-limit law or the law banning dogs from restaurants; or that everyone who has been convicted of three felonies must be sentenced to life imprisonment. Irrebuttable presumptions are widespread in law, partly because they greatly reduce the burdens of judgment in the course of individual cases. 
Importantly, rules produce many mistakes (in the sense of bad results) simply because rebuttal is not allowed. Rules are typically overinclusive and underinclusive by reference to the reasons that justify them.2 If taken very seriously, a rule-bound speed limit law 2 See Frederick Schauer, Playing By The Rules (1993). will produce some extremely bad outcomes (imagine an unusually safe driver rushing his friend to the hospital); so too for mandatory imprisonment for three-time felons; so too with a ban on any dogs in restaurants (suppose a police officer needs help from his bombsniffing German Shepherd). Good friends and good doctors tend to have a flexible attitude toward rules.3 
It is because of their generality that rules are often criticized as a pathology of unnecessarily rigid people and (still worse) of modern bureaucratic government4; but they might be defended as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision while producing good results overall. The rigidity of rules can also produce serious interpretive difficulties, as when a rule confronts an unanticipated case and produces, in that case, a transparently absurd outcome; here the question is whether the rule should operate as something like a presumption. A good deal of interpretive dispute in law is focussed on such problems, which is why rules often are nearly full, rather than full, ex ante specifications of outcomes.5 
Often ordinary people and public institutions rely not on a rule but instead on a presumption, which can be rebutted. A presumption is typically rebuttable only on the basis of a showing of a certain kind and weight.6 People might say, for example, that they will presume against disclosing a confidence; or they might say that they will violate the speed-limit only in compelling, unusual circumstances (like saving a life); or that the government may discriminate on the basis of race only if there is an especially strong reason for doing so. In order to obtain greater accuracy, rules may be “softened” in the direction of presumptions. The result, it is hoped, is to make fewer mistakes while at the same time limiting decisional burdens. 
It is important here to distinguish between a presumption and a rule-with-exceptions, though the distinction is subtle. A rule with 3 On doctors and rules, see Kathryn Hunter, Doctor’s Stories (1993). 4 See Eugene Bardach and Robert Kagan, Going By the Book: The Problem of Regulatory Unreasonableness (1982); see also the popular treatment in Philip Howard, The Death of Common Sense (1992). 5 See HLA Hart, The Concept of Law 127-30 (2d ed. 1996). 6 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, On Presumptions, 80 J. Phil. 143 (1983). exceptions tends to have the following structure: “Do X—except in circumstances A, in which case do non-X (or, in which case you may be exempt from doing X).” Thus, for example, “observe the speed limit—except when you're driving a police car or an ambulance in an emergency, in which cases you may exceed it.” By contrast, a typical presumption says something like: “Act on the assumption that P—unless and until circumstances A (are shown to) obtain, in which case, stop (or reconsider or do something else).” The two amount to the same thing when the agent knows whether or not circumstances A obtain. The two are quite different when the agent lacks that information. With a presumption, you can proceed without the information; with a rule-with-exceptions, you cannot proceed, that is, you are justified neither in doing X nor in not doing X. Thus presumptions function as default rules; they free up the agent, who has a set course of action without knowing whether there are rebutting circumstances. 
In law, the distinction between rules-with-exceptions and presumptions is sometimes conceived as a distinction between ex ante specification and ex post specification of rebutting circumstances. Thus a speed limit law may have specified exceptions (police officers and ambulance drivers may violate it); a prohibition on killing does not apply in cases of self-defense. With a presumption, the rebutting circumstances are not identified in advance; it is understood that life may turn up problems that could not have been anticipated. Here the idea of a presumption overlaps with the idea of a “standard,” to be taken up presently. 
Many important presumptions result from the suggestion that in the case of uncertainty or lack of information, an individual, or a government, should “err” on one side rather than another. Consider, for example, the presumption of innocence and the notion of “prevention” as the strategy of choice in environmental law. Folk wisdom is captured in the notion, “better safe than sorry,” an idea that often has an ethical dimension and that has analogues in many areas of law and politics. There are also presumptions in favor of liberty and equality. Daily decisions are permeated and much simplified by presumptions—in favor of particular grocery stores, routes to the downtown area, lunch plans. Often there is also an implicit but widely shared understanding of the kinds of reasons that will rebut the relevant presumptions. Thus Ronald Dworkin’s influential claim that rights are “trumps” can be understood as a description of rights as strong presumptions, rebutted only by a demonstration of a particular kind.7 
Presumptions play an important role in the law of contract and statutory interpretation.8 Described as “default rules,” much of contract law is founded on an understanding of what most parties would do most of the time; the parties can rebut the presumption by speaking clearly. These “market-mimicking” default rules produce continuing debates about the extent to which courts should attempt to ask, not what most parties would do, but what these particular parties would have done if they had made provision on the point; the more specific inquiry increases the burdens of decision but promises to increase accuracy. Sometimes contract rule presumptions are “information-eliciting,” that is, they attempt to impose on the party in the better position to clarify contractual terms the obligation to do precisely that, on pain of losing the case. In the law of statutory interpretation, there is a similar set of presumptions, designed to discern what Congress would have done or instead to impose the duty to obtain a clear statement from Congress on the party in the best position to do so. It is possible to see disputes over liberty and equality as rooted in presumptions, more or less crude, about appropriate social states, presumptions that can be rebutted by special circumstances. 
Rules are often contrasted with standards.9 A ban on “excessive” speeds on the highway is a standard; so is a requirement that pilots of airplanes be “competent,” or that student behavior in the classroom be “reasonable.” These might be compared with rules specifying a 55 mph speed limit, or a ban on pilots who are over the age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in assigned seats. In daily life, you 7 See Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously (1975); this is an effort to read Dworkin through the lens provided by the discussion of exclusionary reasons in Joseph Raz, Practical Reason and Norms 37-45 (2d ed. 1990). 8 See Ian Ayres and Robert Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts, 99 Yale LJ 87 (1989). 9 See, e.g., Kaplow, Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke L.J. 189 (1992); Sullivan, Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards, 105 Harv L. Rev. 22 (1993). might adopt a standard in favor of driving slowly on a snowy day, or of being especially generous to friends in distress. The degree of vagueness is of course highly variable among standards. 
The central difference between a rule and a standard is that a rule settles far more in advance and allows on-the-spot judgments to be quite mechanical. Standards can structure first-order decisions, more or less depending on their content, but without eliminating the need to continue to deliberate. In law, the contrast between rules and standards identifies the fact that with some legal provisions, interpreters have to do a great deal of work in order to give law real content. The meaning of a standard depends on what happens when it is applied. Of course the nature of the provision cannot be read off its text, and everything will depend on interpretive practices. Once we define the term “excessive,” we may well end up with a rule. Perhaps officials will decide that a speed is excessive whenever it is over 60 miles per hour. 
An important illustration here comes from standards of proof and in particular from the notions of “clear and convincing evidence” and “beyond a reasonable doubt.” Judges have refused to assign numbers to these ideas. Thus the legal system has standards rather than rules. Why should the “reasonable doubt” standard not be said to call for, say, 97% certainty of guilt? Part of the answer lies in the fact that this standard must be applied to many different contexts—different crimes, different police behavior, different defendants, and so forth—and across those contexts, a uniform formula may well be senseless. The “reasonable doubt” standard allows a degree of adaptation to individual circumstances, and this is part of its advantage over any single number. This is also its disadvantage, for it imposes substantial burdens on those who must make the ultimate decision. 
Sometimes a reasonable way to deal with a large decisional burden is to adopt or to continue a routine. By this term we mean something similar to habits, but more voluntary, more selfconscious, and without the pejorative connotations of some habits (consider the habit of chewing one’s fingernails). Thus a forgetful person might adopt a routine of locking his door every time he leaves his office, even though sometimes he will return in a few minutes; thus a commuter might adopt a particular route and follow it every day, even though on some days another route would be better. The advantage of a routine is that it reduces the burdens of decision even if it produces occasional error. The adoption of routines is of course a common phenomenon in daily life, as people act “without thinking.” These are the “standard operating procedures” by which people negotiate their daily affairs. 
We have said that routines are related to habits; they are also related to rules. Often they are the concrete specifications of how precisely a rule is to be followed. If, say, the rule is that in a snowstorm, when driving conditions are hazardous, schools are to be called off, then the routines, taken as standard operating procedures, will specify exactly how the responsibilities for carrying this out are to be allocated: what key features in the weather report should trigger the cancellation, who should notify whom (local radio stations, local TV stations, possibly some particular parents), in what order the school buses are to go out, and so forth. Something similar happens when visiting dignitaries come to a nation; the rules of protocol say who will receive special treatment (the “red carpet”) and the routines specify what steps will be taken, who does what and when. In this way routines work like manuals; their point is to minimize the discretion allowed to the accidental people who happen to be there when the event occurs—all the thinking is done in advance. 
Institutional practices entrench routines as well. Any parliament is run in large part by routines, many of them unwritten. To the extent that a legal system relies on precedent, it follows a practice of this general kind. In fact respect for precedent can be seen an especially important kind of routine. Judges follow precedents not because they believe that past decisions are correct—they usually do not even ask whether they are—but because doing so is a routine. If an account is to be offered, it is (roughly) that a legal system will be better if judges follow precedent, because adherence to precedent promotes planning, decreases the burdens of decisions, and accomplishes both of these goals without, on balance, creating more mistakes than would be created without reliance on precedent. Thus following precedent is a kind of “enabling constraint”—a constraint on the power of choice that helps to simplify and to facilitate choice.10 
A possible way of simplifying a difficult situation at the time of choice is to attempt to make a small, incremental decision, and to leave other, larger questions for another day. When a personal decision involves imponderable and apparently incommensurable elements, people often take small, reversible steps first.11 
For example, Jane may decide to live with Robert before she decides whether she wants to marry him; Marilyn may go to night school to see if she is really interested in law; the government might experiment with certain subsidies to independent movie producers before committing itself to a full-scale program. A similar “small steps” approach is the hallmark of Anglo-American common law.12 (If it appears at this point that the common law can run afoul of the rule of law ideal, the appearance captures reality, or at least so many people now urge.13) Judges typically make narrow decisions, resolving little beyond the individual case; at least this is their preferred method of operation when they are not quite confident about the larger issues. It is sometimes suggested that because of the likelihood of unintended bad consequences, government do best, in certain domains, if their steps are small and incremental.14 The notion of “pilot programs” is based on this idea. In the psychological literature, the “small steps” approach has been identified with both steady, reliable success (“small wins”15) and recurrent error.16 10 See Stephen Holmes, Passions and Constraint (1996). 11 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Opting: The Case of “Big” Decisions, in The 1985 Yearbook of the Wissenschaftkeleg Zu Berlin. 12 See Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (1948). 13 The tension between the rule of law and the common law method is the basic theme of Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1997). 14 See James Scott, Seeing Like A State (1998). 15 See Karl Weick, Small Wins, 39 Am. Psych. 40 (1984). Keick urges, “[I]t seems useful to consider the possibility that social problems seldom get solved, because people define these problems in ways that overwhelm their ability to do anything about them. . . . Calling a situation a mere problem that necessities a small win . . . improves diagnosis, preserves gains, and encourages innovation. Calling a situation a serious problem that necessities a larger win may be when the problem starts.” Id. at 48. 
Sometimes the difficulty of decision pushes people to decide on a random basis. They might, for example, flip a coin, or make some apparently irrelevant factor decisive (“it’s a sunny day, so I’ll take that job in Florida”). Or they might “pick” rather than “choose” (taking the latter term to mean basing a decision on reasons).17 Sometimes this happens when the stakes are very low. In the supermarket, busy shoppers often pick; if they were to choose (among, say, toothpastes or pain relievers or cereals) they might find themselves shopping for an intolerably long time. There are many public analogues. A legal system might, for example, use a lottery, and indeed lotteries are used in many domains where the burdens of individualized choice are high, and when there is some particular problem with deliberation about the grounds of choice, usually because of underlying asymmetries among the alternatives. 
While people sometimes pick because the stakes are low, they may pick in the extreme opposite case too: When the differences between the alternatives are enormous, too big and confusing to contemplate, or in some respect incommensurable. They may pick because they do not know where to begin (so to speak). Or the consequences for decision may be so large that people do not want to take responsibility for making the decision; hence they pick (consider Sophie’s Choice). Here delegation might be an alternative to picking as the second-order strategy. 
A familiar way of handling decisional burdens is to delegate the decision to someone else. People might, for example, rely on a spouse or a friend, or choose an institutional arrangement by which certain decisions are made by other authorities established at the time or well in advance. In actual practice, such arrangements can be more or less formal; they involve diverse mechanisms of control, or entirely relinquished control, by the person or people for whose benefit they have been created. 16 See Daniel Kahneman and Don Lovallo, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, 39 Mgmt. Sci. 17 (1993). 17 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Sidney Morgenbesser, Picking and Choosing, 44 Social Research 757 (1977). 
Sometimes the principal grants full authority to the agent to whom power has been delegated; “trustees” often have authority of this sort. Sometimes the principal retains ultimate power of decision. Thus, for example, in a system of separated and divided powers, warmaking decisions are typically delegated to specified officials, subject to various safeguards. In the private sphere, people may rely on the wisdom of those in whom they have great confidence, and here there is a continuum from mere consultation to a delegation of full authority over the outcome. 
People often use heuristic devices, or mental short-cuts, as a way of bypassing the need for individualized choice. For example, it can be overwhelming to figure out for whom to vote in local elections; people may therefore use the heuristic of party affiliation. When meeting someone new, your behavior may be a result of heuristic devices specifying how to behave with a person falling in the general category in which the new person seems to fall. The relevant category may be age, gender, education, race, religion, demeanor, or something else. What is important is that decisions are a product of heuristic devices that simplify a complex situation and that can also lead to error. 
A great deal of attention has been given to heuristic devices said to produce departures from “rationality,” understood as a result of decisions based on full information.18 And sometimes heuristic devices do lead to errors, even systematic ones. But often heuristic devices are fully rational, if understood as a way of produce pretty good outcomes while at the same time reducing cognitive overload or other decisional burdens. 
Under what circumstances will, or should, an agent or institution choose one or another second-order strategy? Begin with a somewhat crude generalization: Rational people attempt to minimize the sum of the costs of making decisions and the costs of error, where the costs of making decisions are the costs of coming to closure on some action or set of actions, and where the costs of error are assessed by examining the number, the magnitude, and the kinds of errors. We understand “errors” as suboptimal outcomes, whatever the criteria for deciding optimality; thus both rules and delegations can produce errors. If the costs of producing optimal decisions were zero, it would be best to make individual calculations in each case, for this approach would produce correct judgments without compromising accuracy or any other important value. This would be true for individual agents and also for institutions. 
Two qualifications are necessary. The first is that people may want to relieve themselves of responsibility for certain decisions, even if those people would make those decisions correctly. This is an important reason for delegation (and hence for institutional arrangements of various kinds, including the separation of powers). A second qualification comes from the fact that special problems are created by multi-party situations: public institutions seek to promote planning by setting down rules and presumptions in advance, and the need for planning can argue strongly against on-the-spot decisions even if they would be both correct and costless to achieve. We will take up these qualifications below. 
The chief motivation for second-order decisions is that most people know two important facts: their own (first-order) decisions may be wrong, and arriving at the right decision can be very difficult, or have high costs. For any agent these costs are of qualitatively diverse kinds: time, money, unpopularity, anxiety, boredom, agitation, anticipated ex post regret or remorse, feelings of responsibility for harm done to self or others, injury to selfconception, guilt, or shame. Things become differently complicated for multimember institutions, where interest-group pressures may be important, and where there is the special problem of reaching a degree of consensus. A legislature, for example, might find it especially difficult to specify the appropriate approach to affirmative action, given the problems posed by disagreement, varying intensity of preference, and aggregation problems; for similar reasons a multimember court may have a hard time agreeing on how to handle an asserted right to physician-assisted suicide. The result may be strategies for delegation or for deferring decision, often via small steps. 
The costs of decision and the costs of error move people to make and to stick to second-order decisions. There are a number of general reasons why one or another second-order strategy might be best. Consider the pervasive tendency to delegate decisions to others. People tend to delegate the power of choice when the cognitive or emotional burdens of decision are especially high and when the costs of error are likely to be much reduced by giving the power of decision to some other person or institution. Thus those who feel unusual stress at certain decisions are likely to find someone who can make those decisions for them. More formally, certain actors are said to have “authority” if giving them the power of decision can promote accuracy while reducing decisional burdens.19 In industrialized nations, the grant of power to administrative agencies stems largely from a judgment to just this effect; the political or informational costs of specific decisions about (for example) the regulation of coalfired power plants or sex discrimination press legislators in the direction of broad and somewhat open-ended standards, to be given particular content by administrative delegates. Thus the Federal Communications Commission and the Environmental Protection Agency are effectively Congress’ delegates. We will return to this point below. 
An institution facing political pressures may have a distinctive reason to adopt a particular kind of second-order decision, one that will deflect responsibility for choice. Jean Bodin defended the creation of an independent judiciary, and thus provided an initial insight into a system of separated and divided powers, on just this ground; a monarch is relieved of responsibility for unpopular but indispensable decisions if he can point to a separate institution that has been charged with the relevant duty. This is an important kind of enabling constraint.20 In modern states, the existence of an independent central bank is often justified on this ground. Consider the Federal Reserve Board in the United States. The President has no authority over the money supply and indeed no authority over the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, partly on the theory that 19 Cf. Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom 23-31 (discussing authority). 20 See Stephen Holmes, supra note. this will prevent the President from being criticized for necessary but unpopular decisions (such as refusing to increase the supply of money when unemployment seems too high); the fact that the Federal Reserve Board is unelected is an advantage here. There are analogues in business, in workplaces, and even in families, where a mother or father may be given the responsibility for making certain choices, partly in order to relieve the other of responsibility. Of course this approach can cause predictable problems. 
These various points are closely related to two important phenomena: wanting not to have options and wanting not to have knowledge. Through restricting options and reducing knowledge, people can simplify decisions, and hence they often adopt a secondorder strategy to accomplish these goals. 
It is sometimes suggested that people would always prefer to have more choices rather than fewer, and on conventional assumptions about how people “maximize,” the suggestion makes a great deal of sense. There is a familiar exception: options consisting of threats disguised as offers. But the exception does not come close to exhausting the field. Even if we put threats to one side, we can readily see that often people would like fewer rather than more options, and they would much like to be in a position to take certain possibilities off the agenda.21 Indeed, they may be willing to do or to pay a lot to reduce the option set. Sometimes this is because the addition of options increases the burdens of decision without increasing, much or at all, the likelihood of a good decision. Thus 1000 television channels, or 500 selections on the menu of your favorite restaurant, might well increase decision costs without improving outcomes, in such a way as to produce a net loss. As a second-order decision, people familiarly truncate the universe of options: I want shoes, I want to shop around for an optimal buy, but I decide in advance to limit my hunting to all the shoe stores in one particular mall. Or I want to go to graduate school, but I might be overloaded with too many choices, so I apply to only five schools 21 A good discussion, highly relevant to second-order decisions, is Gerald Dworkin, Is More Choice Better Than Less, in Gerald Dworkin, Autonomy (1991). (knowing that some of those to which I have not applied may be better than the best of the five to which I am admitted). There are other examples of enabling constraints; consider legislative procedures, or rules of order and relevance, designed to reduce the number of issues that can be considered at any one time. When something is considered “out of order,” by informal or formal rule, it is because this limitation, embodying a second-order decision, simplifies judgment by reducing options. 
Sometimes both people and institutions want not to have options for a quite different reason: they suffer from weakness of will and fear temptation. They know that if cigarettes or chocolates are available, they may “succumb,” and they therefore attempt to close off the universe of possibilities. Legal systems are frequently responsive to this problem. Consider mandatory “cooling off” periods for certain purchases, or mandatory payments to a social security system. In circumstances of temptation, second-order decisions usually take the form of rules embodying precommitment strategies. 
It is reasonable to think that more knowledge is usually better than less, but both individuals and institutions often seek to be or remain ignorant.22 Whether or not ignorance is bliss, no one searches for all available information. Sometimes this is because of the sheer difficulty of obtaining all relevant facts. But people take positive steps—are willing to incur substantial costs—to prevent themselves from finding things out. This may be because knowledge creates strategic problems or biases decisions in the wrong direction. The goddess Justice is blindfolded; the blindfold symbolizes a kind of impartiality. The law of evidence is based largely on a judgment that certain information will prejudice the jury and should not be heard, even if it is material to that decision. 
Similarly, people may have a second-order reason for denying themselves knowledge that will make them choose wrongly, impose on them unwanted feelings of responsibility (as when an acquaintance confides a deep secret), or otherwise produce harm to self or others. The notion of “plausible deniability,” made famous in the Watergate era, can be taken as a metaphor for decisions not to 22 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Not Wanting to Know, in Reasoning Practically (Edna Ullmann-Margalit ed., forthcoming, Oxford University Press 1998). obtain information that may compromise the person who has become informed. Presidents and Supreme Court justices prevent themselves from knowing many relevant facts. Thus many secondorder decisions consist of a failure to secure more information, especially but not only if it is costless to do so. People fail to seek options or information, or take affirmative steps not to get either of these, in order to minimize the burdens of decision and the number and magnitude of errors, or to reduce actual or perceived responsibility. 
Thus far we have offered a taxonomy of second-order strategies and suggested some general grounds on which someone might pursue one or another approach. It will be useful to organize the discussion by observing that several of them require substantial thought before the fact of choice, but little thought during the process of ultimate choice, whereas others require little thought both before and during the process of choice. Thus there is a temporal difference in the imposition of decision costs, which we describe with the terms “High-Low” and “Low-Low.” To fill out the possibilities, we add “Low-High” and “High-High” as well. Note that by the terms decision costs we refer to the overall costs, which may be borne by different people or agencies: the work done before the fact of choice may not be carried out by the same actors who will have to do the thinking during the process of ultimate choice. Consider Table 1: little ex ante thinking substantial ex ante thinking little ex post thinking 
picking; small steps; various heuristics; some standards ( substantial ex post thinking 
delegation ( 
rules; presumptions; some standards; routines ( High-High: Hamlet; characters in Henry James novels; dysfunctional governments ( the ethical issue whether to delegate (consider the question of justice within the family). And there is an uneasy line, raising knotty conceptual and empirical questions, between a delegation (with a delegator and a delegate) and division of labor (consider the allocation of household duties). 
Public institutions, most prominently legislatures, often delegate authority to some other entity. There are many possible factors here. A legislature may believe that it lacks information about, for example, environmental problems or changes in the telecommunications market; the result is an Environmental Protection Agency or a Federal Communications Commission. Alternatively, the legislature may have the information but find itself unable to forge a consensus on underlying values about, for example, the right approach to affirmative action or to age discrimination. The legislature may be aware that its vulnerability to interest-group pressures will lead it in bad directions, and it may hope and believe that the object of the delegation will be relatively immune. Interestgroup pressures may themselves produce a delegation, as where powerful groups are unable to achieve a clear victory in a legislature but are able to obtain a grant of authority to an administrative agency over which they will have power. Or the legislature may not want to assume responsibility for some hard choice, fearing that decisions will produce electoral reprisal. Self-interested representatives may well find it in their electoral self-interest to enact a vague or vacant standard (“the public interest,” “reasonable accommodation” of the disabled, “reasonable regulation” of pesticides), and to delegate the task of specification to someone else, secure in the knowledge that the delegate will be blamed for problems in implementation. 
Obviously a delegation is sometimes a mistake—an abdication of responsibility, an act of unfairness, a recipe for more rather than fewer errors. But when is delegation the right option? Delegation deserves to be considered whenever an appropriate delegate is available and there is a sense in which it is inappropriate for the agent to be making the decision by himself. Before delegating, comparison with other possible approaches may well be in order. As compared with making all first-order decisions on an all-thingsconsidered basis, a delegation promises to lower decision costs, certainly for the delegator and on certain assumptions on balance; this depends on the capacities of the delegate (can he or she make decent decisions quickly?). If the delegate is trustworthy, the delegation may well produce fewer mistakes. 
Compared to a High-Low approach, a delegation will be desirable if the legislature, or the delegator, is unable to generate a workable rule or presumption (and if anything it could come up with would be costly to produce) and if a delegate would therefore do better on the merits. This may be the case on a multimember body that is unable to reach agreement, or when an agent or institution faces a cognitive or motivational problem, such as weakness of will or susceptibility to outside influences. A delegation will also be favored over High-Low if the delegator seeks to avoid responsibility for the decision for political, social, or other reasons, though the effort to avoid responsibility may also create problems of legitimacy, as when a legislator relies on “experts” to make value judgments about environmental protection or disability discrimination. 
As compared with small steps or picking, a delegation may or may not produce higher total decision costs (perhaps the delegate is slow or a procrastinator). Even if the delegation does produce higher total decision costs, it may also lead to a higher level of confidence in the eventual decisions, which, if the delegate is good, will be sound. It follows, unsurprisingly, that the case for delegation will turn in large part on the availability of reliable delegates. In the United States, the Federal Reserve Board has a high degree of public respect and hence there is little pressure to eliminate or reduce the delegation. But a delegate—a friend, a spouse, an Environmental Protection Agency—may prove likely to err, and a rule, a presumption, or small steps may emerge instead. 
There is also the independent concern for fairness. In some circumstances, it is unfair to delegate to, for example, a friend or a spouse the power of decision, especially but not only because the delegate is not a specialist. Issues of gender equality arise when a husband delegates to his wife all decisions involving the household and the children, even if both husband and wife agree on the delegation. Entirely apart from this issue, a delegation by one spouse to another may well seem unfair if (say) it involves a child’s problems with alcohol, because it is an abdication of responsibility, a way of transferring the burdens of decision to someone else who should not be forced to bear them alone. 
In institutional settings, there is an analogous problem if the delegate (usually an administrative agency) lacks political accountability even if it has relevant expertise. The result is the continuing debate over the legitimacy of delegations to administrative agencies.25 Such delegations can be troublesome if they shift the burden of judgment from a democratically elected body to one that is insulated from political control. So too, there is a possibly illegitimate abdication of authority when a judge delegates certain powers to law clerks (as is occasionally alleged about Supreme Court justices) or to special masters who are expert in complex questions of fact and law (as is alleged in connection with a proposed delegation in the Microsoft litigation). Avoidance of responsibility may be a serious problem here. 
Three important complications deserve comment. First, any delegate may itself resort to making second-order decisions, and it is familiar to find delegates undertaking each of the strategies that we have described. Sometimes delegates prefer High-Low and hence generate rules; almost everyone knows that this is the typical strategy of the Internal Revenue Service, a delegate of Congress that likes to proceed via rule. Many spouses, delegated the power of decision by their husbands or wives, operate in similar fashion. Presumptions may be favored over rules for the now-familiar reason that they can reduce ex ante costs and promote greater “flow.” Alternatively, delegates may use standards or proceed by small steps. This is the general approach of the National Labor Relations Board, which (strikingly) avoids rules whenever it can, and much prefers to proceed case-by-case. Or a delegate may undertake a subdelegation. Confronted with a delegation from her husband, a wife may consult a sibling or a parent. Asked by Congress to make hard choices, the President may and frequently does subdelegate to some kind of commission, for some of the same reasons that spurred Congress to delegate in the first instance. Of course a delegate may just pick. She 25 Compare David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (1995) with Jerry Mashaw, Chaos, Greed, and Governance (1997). may, for example, choose to flip a coin, or she may decide without doing much thinking about what decision is best. 
The second complication is that the control of a delegate presents a potentially serious principal-agent problem. How can the person who has made the delegation ensure that the delegate will not make serious and numerous mistakes, or instead fritter away its time trying to decide how to decide? There are multiple possible mechanisms of control. Instead of giving final and irreversible powers of choice to the delegate, a person or institution might turn the delegate into a mere consultant or advice-giver. A wide range of intermediate relationships is possible. In the governmental setting, a legislature can influence the ultimate decision by voicing its concerns publicly if an administrative agency is heading in the wrong direction, and the legislature usually has the power to overturn an administrative agency if it can muster the will to do so. Ultimately the delegator may retain the power to eliminate the delegation, and to ensure against (what the delegator would consider to be) mistakes, it may be sufficient for the delegate to know this fact. In informal relations, involving friends, colleagues, and family members, there are various mechanisms for controlling any delegate. Some “delegates” know that they are only consultants; others know that they have the effective power of decision. All this happens through a range of cues, which may be subtle. 
The third complication stems from the fact that at the outset, the costs of a second-order decision of this kind may not be so low after all, since the person or institution must take the time to decide whether to delegate at all and if so, to whom to delegate. Complex issues may arise about the composition of any institution receiving the delegation; these burdens may be quite high and perhaps decisive against delegation altogether. A multimember institution often divides sharply on whether to delegate and even after that decision is made, it may have trouble deciding on the recipient of the delegated authority. 
Thus far we have been discussing cases in which the delegator exports costs to some other party. What about the intrapersonal case? On the one hand, there is no precise analogy between that problem and the cases under discussion. On the other hand, people confronted with hard choices can often be understood to have chosen to delegate the power of choice to their future selves. Consider, for example, such decisions as whether to buy a house, to have another child, to get married or divorced, to move to a new city; in such cases agents who procrastinate may understand themselves to have delegated the decision to their future selves. 
There are two possible reasons for this kind of intrapersonal delegation, involving timing and content respectively. You may believe you know what the right decision is, but also believe it is not the right time to be making that decision, or at least not the right time to announce it publicly. Alternatively, you may not know what the right decision is and believe that your future self will be in a better position to decide. You may think that your future self will have more information, suffer less or not at all from cognitive difficulties, bias, or motivational problems, or be in a better position to assume the relevant responsibility. Perhaps you are feeling under pressure, suffering from illness, or not sure of your judgment just yet. In such cases, the question of intrapersonal, intertemporal choice is not so far from the problem of delegation to others. It is even possible to see some overlapping principal-agent problems with similar mechanisms of control, as people impose certain constraints on their future selves. 
From the standpoint of the agent, then, the strategy of small steps, like delay, can be seen as a form of delegation. Also, the strategy of delegation itself may turn into that of picking when the delegate is a chance device. When I make my future decision depend on which card I draw from my deck of cards, I've delegated my decision to the random card-drawing mechanism, thereby effectively turning my decision from choosing to picking. 
We have seen that people often make second-order decisions that are themselves costly, simply in order to reduce the burdens of later decisions in particular cases. When this process is working well, there is much to do before the fact of decision, but once the decision is in place, things are greatly simplified. 
We have suggested that rules and presumptions belong in this category, and frequently this is true. But the point must be qualified; some rules and presumptions do not involve high burdens of decision before the fact. For example, a rule might be picked rather than chosen—drive on the right-hand side of the road, or spoons to the right, forks to the left. Especially when what it is important is to allow all actors to coordinate on a single course of conduct, there need be little investment in decisions about the content of the relevant rule. A rule might even be framed narrowly, so as to work as a kind of small step. A court might decide, for example, that a law excluding homosexuals from the armed services is unconstitutional, and this decision might be framed as a rule; but the court’s opinion could be issued in such a way as to leave undecided most other issues involving the constitutional status of homosexuals. Rules often embody small steps. Of course the same points can be made about presumptions, which are sometimes picked rather than chosen and which might be quite narrow. 
institution or an agent is willing to deliberate a good deal to generate a rule or a presumption that, once in place, turns out greatly to simplify (without impairing and perhaps even improving) future decisions. This is a familiar aspiration in law and politics. A legislature might, for example, decide in favor of a speed limit law, partly in order to ensure coordination among drivers, and partly as a result of a process of balancing various considerations about risks and benefits. People are especially willing to expend a great deal of effort to generate rules in two circumstances: ( notice are important and ( be made.26 
In most well-functioning legal systems, for example, it is clear what is and what is not a crime. People need to know when they may be subject to criminal punishment for what they do. The American Constitution is taken to require a degree of clarity in the criminal law, and every would-be tyrant knows that rules may be irritating constraints on his authority. So too, the law of contract 26 See Louis Kaplow, Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke LJ 557 (1992). and property is mostly defined by clear rules, simply because people could not otherwise plan, and in order for economic development to be possible they need to be in a position to do so. 
When large numbers of decisions have to be made, there is a similar tendency to spend a great deal of time to clarify outcomes in advance. In the United States, the need to make a large number of decisions has pushed the legal system into the development of rules governing social security disability, workers’ compensation, and criminal sentencing. The fact that these rules produce a significant degree of error is not decisive; the sheer cost of administering the relevant systems, with so massive a number of decisions, makes a certain number of errors tolerable. 
Compared to rules, standards and “soft” presumptions serve to reduce the burdens of decision ex ante while increasing those burdens at the time of decision. This is both their virtue and their vice. Consider, for example, the familiar strategy of enacting rigid, rule-like environmental regulations while at the same time allowing a “waiver” for special circumstances. The virtue of this approach is that the rigid rules will likely produce serious mistakes—high costs, low environmental benefits—in some cases; the waiver provision allows correction in the form of an individualized assessment of whether the statutory presumption should be rebutted. The potential vice of this approach is that it requires a fair degree of complexity in a number of individual cases. Whether the complexity is worthwhile turns on a comparative inquiry with genuine rules. How much error would be produced by the likely candidates? How expensive is it to correct those errors by turning the rules into presumptions? 
Often institutions are faced with the decision whether to adopt a High-Low strategy or whether instead to delegate. We have seen contexts in which a delegation is better. But in three kinds of circumstances the High-Low approach is to be preferred. First, when planning is important, it is important to set out rules (or presumptions) in advance. The law of property is an example. Second, there is little reason to delegate when the agent or institution has a high degree of confidence that a rule (or presumption) can be generated at reasonable cost, that the rule (or presumption) will be accurate, and that it will actually be followed. Third, and most obviously, High-Low is better when no trustworthy delegate is available, or when it seems unfair to ask another person or institution to make the relevant decision. Hence legislatures tend in the direction of rule-like judgment when they have little confidence in the executive; in America, parts of the Clean Air Act are a prime example of a self-conscious choice of High-Low over delegation. Liberal democracies take these considerations as special reasons to justify rules in the context of criminal law: The law defining crimes is reasonably rule-like, partly because of the importance of citizen knowledge about what counts as a crime, partly because of a judgment that police officers and courts cannot be trusted to define the content of the law. 
When would High-Low be favored over Low-Low (picking, small steps)? The interest in planning is highly relevant here and often pushes in the direction of substantial thinking in advance. If the agent or institution has faith in its ability to generate a good rule or presumption, it does not make much sense to proceed by random choice or incrementally. Hence legislatures have often displaced the common law approach of case-by-case judgment with clear rules set out in advance; in England and America, this has been a great movement of the twentieth century, largely because of the interest in planning and decreased faith in the courts’ ability to generate good outcomes through small steps. 
Of course mixed strategies are possible. An institution may produce a rule to cover certain cases but delegate decision in other cases; or a delegate may be disciplined by presumptions and standards; or an area of law, or practical reason, may be covered by some combination of rule-bound judgment and small steps. 
Thus far we have been stressing public decisions. In their individual capacity, people frequently adopt rules, presumptions, or self-conscious routines in order to guide decisions that they know might, in individual cases, be too costly to make or be made incorrectly because of their own motivational problems. Sarah might decide, for example, that she will turn down all invitations for outof-town travel in the month of September, or John might adopt a presumption against going to any weddings or funerals unless they involve close family members, or Fred might make up his mind that at dinner parties, he will drink whatever the host is drinking. Rules, presumptions, and routines of this kind are an omnipresent feature of practical reason; sometimes they are chosen self-consciously and as an exercise of will, but often they are, or become, so familiar and simple that they appear to the agent not to be choices at all. Problems may arise when a person finds that he cannot stick to his resolution, and thus High-Low may turn into High-High, and things may be as if the second-order decision had not been made at all. 
Some especially important cases involve efforts to solve the kinds of intertemporal, intrapersonal problems that arise when isolated, small-step first-order decisions are individually rational but produce harm to the individual when taken in the aggregate. These cases might be described as involving “intrapersonal collective action problems.”27 Consider, for example, the decision to smoke a cigarette (right now), or to have chocolate cake for desert, or to have an alcoholic drink after dinner, or to gamble on weekends. Small steps, which are rational choices when taken individually and which produce net benefits when taken on their own, can lead to harm or even disaster when they accumulate. There is much room here for second-order decisions. As a self-control strategy, a person might adopt a rule: cigarettes only after dinner; no gambling, ever; chocolate cake only on holidays; alcohol only at parties when everyone else is drinking. A presumption might sometimes work better: a presumption against chocolate cake, with the possibility of rebuttal on special occasions, when celebration is in the air and the cake looks particularly good. 
Well-known private agencies designed to help people with selfcontrol problems (Alcoholics’ Anonymous, Gamblers’ Anonymous) have as their business the development of second-order strategies of this general kind. The most striking cases involve recovering addicts, but people who are not addicts, and who are not recovering from anything, often make similar second-order decisions. When selfcontrol is particularly difficult to achieve, an agent may seek to 27 Cf. Thomas Schelling, Self-Command in Practice, in Policy, and in a Theory of Rational Choice, 74 Am. Econ. Rev. 1 (1984). delegate instead. Whether a delegation (Low-High) is preferable to a rule or presumption (High-Low) will depend in turn on the various considerations discussed above. 
VI. Low-Low (with Special Reference to Picking and Small Steps) 
Why might an institution or agent pick rather than choose? When would small steps be best? At the individual level, it can be obvious that when you are in equipoise, you might as well pick; it simply is not worthwhile to go through the process of choosing with its high cognitive or emotional costs. As we have seen, the result can be picking in both low-stakes (cereal choices) and highstakes (employment opportunities) settings. Picking can even be said to operate as a kind of delegation, where the object of the delegation is “fate,” and the agent loses the sense of responsibility that might accompany an all-things-considered judgment. Thus some people sort out hard questions by resorting to a chance device (like flipping a coin). 
Small steps, unlike a random process, are a form of choosing. High school students tend to date in this spirit, at least most of the time; often adults do too. Newspapers and magazines offer trial subscriptions; the same is true for book clubs. Often advertisers (or for that matter prospective romantic partners) know that people prefer small steps and they take advantage of that preference (“no commitments”). In the first years of university, students need not commit themselves to any particular course of study; they can take small steps in various directions, sampling as they choose. 
On the institutional side, consider lotteries for both jury and military service. The appeal of a lottery for jury service stems from the relatively low costs of operating the system and the belief that any alternative device for allocation would produce more mistakes, because it would depend on a socially contentious judgment about who should be serving on juries, with possibly destructive results for the jury system itself. The key point is that the jury is supposed to be a cross-section of the community, and a random process seems to be the best way of serving that goal (as well as the fairest way of apportioning what many people regard as a social burden). In light of the purposes of the jury system, alternative allocation methods would be worse; consider stated willingness to serve, an individualized inquiry into grounds for excuse, or financial payments (either to serve or not to serve). For military service, related judgments are involved, in the form of a belief that any stated criteria for service might be morally suspect, and hence a belief that random outcomes produce less in the way of error.28 
Lotteries involve random processes; small steps do not. We have said that Anglo-American judges often proceed case-by-case, as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision and the consequences of error. In fact many legal cultures embed a kind of norm in favor of incremental movement. They do this partly because of the distinctive structure of adjudication and the limited information available to the judge: in any particular case, a judge will hear from the parties immediately affected, but little from others whose interests might be at stake. Hence there is a second-order decision in favor of small steps. 
If, for example, a court in a case involving a particular patient seeking a “right to die” is likely to have far too little information, and if it attempted to generate a rule that would cover all imaginable situations in which that right might be exercised, the case would take a very long time to decide. Perhaps the burdens of decision would be prohibitive. This might be so because of a sheer lack of information, or it might be because of the pressures imposed on a multimember court consisting of people who are unsure or in disagreement about a range of subjects. Such a court may have a great deal of difficulty in reaching closure on broad rules. Small steps are a natural result. 
Judges also proceed by small steps precisely because they know that their rulings create precedents; they want to narrow the scope of future applications of their rulings given the various problems described above, most importantly the lack of sufficient information about future problems. A distinctive problem involves the possibility 28 On ethical and political issues associated with lotteries in general, see Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-122 (1993). of too much information. A particular case may have a surplus of apparently relevant details, and perhaps future cases will lack one or more of the relevant features, and this will be the source of the concern with creating wide precedents. The existence of (inter alia) features X or Y in case A, missing in case B, makes it hazardous to generate a rule in case A that would govern case B. The narrow writing and reception of the Supreme Court’s decision in the celebrated Amish case, allowing an exemption of Amish children from mandatory public schooling, is an example. 
Quite apart from the pressures of inadequate information, too much information, and disagreement, small steps might make special sense in view of the pervasive possibility of changed circumstances. Perhaps things will be quite different in the near future; perhaps relevant facts and values will change, and thus a rule that is well suited to present conditions may become anachronistic. Thus it is possible that any decision involving the application of the first amendment to new communications technologies, including the internet, should be narrow, because a broad decision, rendered at this time, would be so likely to go wrong. On this view, a small step is best because of the likelihood that a broad rule would be mistaken when applied to cases not before the court. 
In an argument very much in this spirit, Joseph Raz has connected a kind of small step—the form usually produced by analogical reasoning—to the special problems created by one-shot interventions into complex systems.29 In Raz’ view, courts reason by analogy in order to prevent unintended side-effects from large disruptions. Similarly supportive of the small-step strategy, the German psychologist Dietrich Dorner has done some illuminating computer experiments designed to see whether people can engage in successful social engineering.30 Participants are asked to solve problems faced by the inhabitants of some region of the world. Through the magic of the computer, many policy initiatives are available to solve the relevant problems (improved care of cattle, childhood immunization, drilling more wells). But most of the participants produce eventual calamities, because they do not see the complex, system-wide effects of particular interventions. Only the rare participant is able to see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions on the system. The successful participants are alert to this risk and take small, reversible steps, allowing planning to occur over time. Hence Dorner, along with others focussing on the problems created by interventions into systems,31 argues in favor of small steps. Judges face similar problems, and incremental decisions are a good way of responding to the particular problem of bounded rationality created by ignorance of possible adverse effects. 
From these points we can see that small steps may be better than rules or than delegation. Often an institution lacks the information to generate a clear path for the future; often no appropriate delegate has that information. If circumstances are changing rapidly, any rule or presumption might be confounded by subsequent developments. What is especially important is that movement in any particular direction should be reversible if problems arise. 
The analysis is similar outside of the governmental setting. Agents might take small steps because they lack the information that would enable them to generate a rule or presumption, or because the decision they face is unique and not likely to be repeated, so that there is no reason for a rule or a presumption. Or small steps may follow from the likelihood of change over time, from the fact that a large decision might have unintended consequences, or from the wish to avoid or at least to defer the responsibility for large-scale change. 
The discussion is summarized in Table 2. Recall that the terms “low” and “high” refer to the overall costs of the decision, which are not necessarily borne by the same agent: with Low-High the costs are split between delegator and delegate; with High-Low they may split between an institution (which makes the rules, say) and an agent (who follows the rules). 
We have not yet discussed an important underlying issue: do people, or institutions, actually make a self-conscious decision about which second-order strategy to favor, given the menu of possibilities? Sometimes this is indeed the case. A legislature may, for example, deliberate and decide to delegate rather than to attempt to generate rules; a court may choose, self-consciously, to proceed incrementally; having rejected the alternatives, a President may recommend a lottery system rather than other alternatives for admitting certain aliens to the country. Thus it is possible to think of cases in which an institution or a person expressly makes an allthings-considered decision in favor of one or another second-order strategy. 
Sometimes, however, a rapid assessment of the situation takes place, rather than a full or deliberative weighing of alternative courses of action. This is often the case in private decisions, where judgments often seem immediate. Indeed, second-order decisions might be too costly if they were a product of an on-the-spot optimizing strategy; so taken, they would present many of the problems of first-order decisions. 
As in the case of first-order decisions, it often makes sense to proceed with what seems best, rather than to maximize in any systematic fashion, simply because the former way of proceeding is easier (and thus may maximize once we consider decision costs of various kinds). For individuals, the salient features of the context usually suggest a particular kind of second-order strategy. Often the same is true for institutions as well. 
These are intended as descriptive points about the operation of practical reason. But at the political level, and occasionally at the individual level too, it would be better to be more explicit and selfconscious about the diverse possibilities, so as to ensure that societies and institutions do not find themselves making bad second-order decisions. It is possible, for example, to find pathologically rigid rules; the Sentencing Guidelines are often criticized on this ground, and whether or not the criticism is just, pathological rigidity is a problem for societies as well as individuals. Legal formalists, like Justice Antonin Scalia, repeatedly argue for a High-Low strategy, but they do so without engaging the pragmatic issues at stake, and without showing that this strategy is preferable to the realistic alternatives.32 Often a court or even a state would do best to proceed via small steps, in such a way as to ensure reversibility; this is an important means of avoiding the problems associated with social planning, even for those who do not believe that a general antipathy to state planning is warranted. But it is possible to find circumstances in which small steps lead to disaster, by preventing those who must deal with the law from predicting its content. People do not generally make selfconscious second-order decisions, and often this is fortunate; but the discussion here has been intended as an initial step toward making it possible to be more systematic and conscious about the relevant options. 
In the course of making decisions, people are often reluctant to calculate the costs and benefits of the alternatives. Instead they resort to second-order strategies designed to reduce the burdens of firstorder decisions while producing a tolerably low number of suboptimal outcomes. This is a pervasive aspect of the exercise of practical reason, and second-order decisions have large consequences for individuals, for institutions, and for societies. 
Some such strategies involve high initial costs but generate a relatively simple, low-burden mechanism for deciding subsequent cases. These strategies, often taking the form of rules or presumptions, seem best when the anticipated decisions are numerous and repetitive and when advance planning is important. Other strategies involve both low initial costs and low costs at the time of making the ultimate decision. These approaches work when a degree of randomization is appealing on normative grounds (perhaps because choices are otherwise in equipoise, or because no one should or will take responsibility for deliberate decision), or when the decision is too difficult to make (because of the cognitive or emotional burdens involved in the choice) or includes too many imponderables and a risk of large unintended consequences. 
Still other strategies involve low initial costs but high, exported costs at the time of decision, as when a delegation is made to another person or institution, or (in a metaphor) to one’s future self. 32 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1997). Delegations can take many different forms, with more or less control retained by the person or institution making the delegation. Strategies of delegation make sense when a delegate is available who has relevant expertise (perhaps because he is a specialist) or is otherwise trustworthy (perhaps because he does not suffer from bias or some other motivational problem), or when there are special political, strategic, or other advantages to placing the responsibility for decision on some other person or institution. Delegations can create problems of unfairness, as when delegates are burdened with tasks that they do not voluntarily assume, or would not assume under just conditions, and when the delegation is inconsistent with the social role of the delegator, such as a legislature or a court. Hence delegations can be troubling from the point of view of democracy or the separation of powers. 
The final set of cases involve high costs both ex ante and at the time of decision, as in certain hopelessly indecisive fictional characters, and in highly dysfunctional governments. We have merely gestured in the direction of this strategy, which can be considered best only on the assumption that bearing high overall costs of decision is an affirmative good or even something to relish. This assumption might appear peculiar, but it undoubtedly helps explain some otherwise puzzling human behavior—behavior that often provides the motivation to consider the other, more promising second-order decisions discussed here. 
This Working Paper is a preliminary draft dated 5/24/98. All rights reserved. Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence The Law School The University of Chicago 1111 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). (October 1993). (March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). (June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). (August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 
This content downloaded from 129.59.95.115 on Sun, 28 Aug 2016 21:52:05 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The P of Punitive Damages DANIEL KAHNEMAN Princeton University, Woodrow Wilson School of Public Policy, Princeton, NJ 08544 DAVID SCHKADE University of Texas, Austin CASS R. SUNSTEIN University of Chicago burden of uncertainty both on plaintiffs If the social function of punitive dam theorists argue (see Polinsky and Shavel that signal. Erratic awards are an ill wi 
The awarding of punitive damages is examined usefully from three distinctive scriptive (Bell, Raiffa and Tversky, 19 ought to be. A normative analysis of pun aspect of legal practice in a broader view Existing normative treatments of the iss phasize ethical concerns, most prominent and Luban, 1993; Polinsky and Shavell, analysis seeks an understanding of the f treatment of punitive damages will b psychological factors that affect the de considers ways to overcome the limitatio decisions. The goal of a prescriptive app jurors' task so as to make it easier for th 
The main focus of the present article is called the outrage model - which descr punitive awards. We also identify a sta much of the random variability in these mapping of a judgment about the approp punitive intent) onto the dollar scale. By sense that we defined earlier: for the per substantial social consensus about the s different cases, and different juries vie punitive intentions. The consensus brea press punitive intent in dollars, the re evidence suggests that different juries c different damages, even if they agree in 
The prescriptive task of legal reform analysis of judgments of punitive damag priate role of community sentiment in t three positions on this issue, ordered b sentiment about awards is normatively this sentiment, because of sampling erro tively acceptable, but community sentim lacks normative force; (iii) the communi tive standard, because it is an illegitima these three assessments are associated wi The normative and prescriptive analyse (Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade, 199 PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 5 1 
We proceed as follows. Section 1 sets out the the study. Section 2 describes the procedures an 3 presents the results. Section 4 reviews the arg findings for legal reform. Section 5 concludes. 
The vast literature on punitive damages has bee the social function of punitive awards and wi Standard accounts suggest that punitive damag the problem of underdeterrence created by the pensate all injured plaintiffs (Landes and Posner, "sense of the community" about the appropria especially serious wrongdoers (Galanter and Lub these treatments for the emotions of outrage an ton, 1993). These emotions are of course cent there are some exceptions, punishment is gen expresses emotions of anger and indignation and 1993; Kahan and Nussbaum, 1996). 
We will propose a descriptive model of the psy a more general theoretical analysis (Kahnem concept of attitude beyond the domain of publi There is much evidence that a basic process of respond to the objects and events of their lives each of these objects and events evokes an attit ation and a response tendency. The evaluation dislike, and the response tendencies vary from aggression. The evaluations and intentions that d multiple ways, ranging from physiological indi surveys. 
The main implication of the present analysi correlate closely if they express the same atti excess of .80) have been observed between grou computed over a set of public issues (Kahneman 1994, 1998; Kahneman et al, 1993). The results generality of this observation. 
Figure 1 summarizes the outrage model of pu are considered an expression of an angry or indi evaluative aspect of the attitude is labeled o punitive intent. The goal of the model is to responses of populations of respondents to va figure is to be read from left to right. 
Features f Subjectivei Factors (Overfl Defendant's Malice, RecMesoiess Extent Victim of Harm 
Identity i r 
Firm Size // / Anchors Standards Figure 
The 
Outrage 
Model of 
Punitive 
Damages 
The variables listed under 'case features' i an action that determine the intensity of figure represents outrage as basic, and punit by additional factors. This representation i rage are a proper subset of the case feature affect punitive intent independently of suffered by the victim and the relationshi the judgment. 
The description of an action can evoke outrage without any information about the harm that it caused. However, the harm that an action caused is a factor in punitive intent. This retributive aspect of punishment is incorporated in many aspects of the law, such as the large discrepancy between the sentences for murder and for attempted murder. The relationship between victim and juror was manipulated in an experiment by Hastie, Schkade and Payne (1997); awards were larger when the plaintiff was located in the jurors' community than when the plaintiff was from a remote location. We speculate that the retributive urge is stronger when the victim belongs to one's group than when the victim is a stranger. Although punitive intent is affected by some factors that do not affect outrage, our general hypothesis is that most of the determinants of the two states are shared - and we therefore expect them to be highly correlated. 
In some situations the expression of an attitude is not spontaneous, but is restricted to a particular scale of responses. Stringent constraints apply, for example, when respondents in opinion surveys are asked to indicate the extent of their agreement or disagreement with a particular statement. In the situation with which we are concerned here, the responses of juries dealing with punitive awards are restricted to a scale of dollars. The PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 53 different expressions of an attitude are affected by specifi (usually slight) differences among them. Thus, the colum Figure 1 identifies some variables that affect the mapping of scale, but not onto a rating scale of punitive intent. For exa of the defendant firm is a scaling factor in translating judgment that appears severe when the defendant is a s inadequate when the defendant is a giant. Other factors th mapping of punitive intent onto the dollar scale are discuss 
In summary, the outrage model assumes internal states of which can be mapped onto different response scales. As both in their complexity and in the precision and reliability support: some scales are 'noisier' than others. The main co that the dollar scale is an extremely noisy expression of pu For more than a century, psychologists have studied the pro are mapped onto overt responses. An important distincti between category scales and magnitude scales. Category s of ordered responses, as in the familiar format of many o can be represented by numbers; in such cases descriptive la extremes of the scale, and sometimes to some or all inter assumed that category scales are invariant to a linear trans a scale that ranges from 1 to 7 is interpreted as equivalent that ranges from 0 to 60. As this example illustrates, the ze no particular significance. 
Internal states can also be mapped onto magnitude scale zero and no upper bound. The study of magnitude scaling (1975). The standard application of this technique is in the physical functions that relate the intensity of subjective expe physical stimulus that evokes them. In a typical experimen series of sounds that vary in loudness, or lights that vary i that vary in painful intensity. The observer is instructed t each stimulus according to the relative intensity of the evokes. Magnitude estimation has also been applied to s heinousness of crimes and the severity of punishments ( 
The research on magnitude scaling has yielded several robu (Stevens, 1975). (1) There is substantial agreement among magnitudes that they assign to the internal responses evo example, if one observer assigns three objects magnitudes o who assigns a value of 5 to the first stimulus would be expe 30 to the other two. (2) The distribution of judgments o positively skewed; skewed distributions are observed both i the same stimulus over repeated occasions judges. (3) The standard deviation of t mean of these judgments; this relations of the same stimulus over repeated oc different judges. (4) Unless the experi that should be assigned to it (called a values of judgments: some observers ass assign low numbers. (5) In general, mag by a power function to the relevant ph function of luminance and loudness is a exponent of approximately 1/3). (6) W a magnitude scale and on an interval sc are related by a power function to thei 
Like other internal states that vary i expressed either on category scales or could be asked to evaluate the outrage ranging from "not outrageous" to "ext could be asked to rate outrage on an un outrage, and a particular number (the specified action (the standard). The mod expect to observe characteristic differe particular, the standard deviations of strongly correlated with the means of j not on the category scale.1 
The dollar scale of punitive awards sa scale of punitive intent: the scale has a measurement (dollars) is specified in thi unit in which judgments are denominat lack relevant experience in mapping the fore expect judgments of punitive awar that are observed in magnitude scaling underlying punitive intent may differ even if they agree on the ratios of awa compare expressions of punitive inten appropriate severity of punishment and 
We use the category scales of outrage punitive damages to examine two relate to punish conform to a bedrock of socia onto category scales with verbally def achieve some uniformity in the use in t social consensus. In contrast, there are f to dollars. Our second hypothesis is th dollar scale induce extremely large v punitive intent in dollar amounts. Here features different 
of 
the dollar scale, two juries punitive awards. that sha We designed a study to test several implications of the outrage model. Respondents were given a set of vignettes of personal injury cases in which a plaintiff (always an individual) sued a firm for compensatory and punitive damages. The respondents were told to assume in all cases that compensatory damages had been awarded in the amount of $200,000, and that punitive damages were to be considered. Different groups provided different judgments of these scenarios. Respondents in the outrage condition were asked to rate the outrageousness of the defendant's behavior. Respondents in the punishment condition rated how severely they wished to punish the defendant. Finally, respondents in the dollar award condition were asked to assess the amount of punitive damages (if any) that should be awarded. 
We examined the following hypotheses: (1) The outrage evoked by scenarios of tortious behavior is governed by broadly shared social norms. The ranking of different scenarios by their outrageousness is expected to be generally similar for different demographic groups (See Section 3.1.3). (2) Punitive intent is determined by the outrageousness of the defendant's behavior and by other case factors, prominently including the harm suffered by the plaintiff. The prediction that harm affects punitive intent but not outrage was tested by presenting alternative versions of some scenarios, in which the severity of the harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied (See Section 3.1.4). (3) Damage awards are determined by punitive intent and by specific mapping factors, prominently including the size of the defendant firm. This prediction was tested by presenting each scenario in two versions, in which the size of the defendant was varied (See Section 3.1.5). (4) Large individual differences in the use of the dollar scale reduce the precision with which population norms for punitive awards can be estimated from the judgments of small samples of respondents, such as juries. This hypothesis was tested in two ways. First, we compared the amount of measurement error in ratings of punitive intent on a category scale and in dollar awards. Second, we predicted that transformations of dollar awards that remove individual differences in scale usage (e.g, transforming each individual's responses to ranks) would result in a sharp reduction in unsystematic variability. The rationale for this prediction is that such transformations eliminate the skewness and reduce the arbitrary variability associated with the dollar scale but retain the ordinal correspondence of punishments to punitive intentions (See Sections 3.2 and 3.3.1). (5) Because there is less error variance in ratings of punitive intent than in dollar awards, these ratings are a more accurate predictor of community sentiment about appropriate dollar awards than dollar awards themselves. The dollar award that a jury sentiment judgments intent could the precision ratings (See 
makes in a particular case can about the appropriate award, in the population. It is possib provide a more accurate esti 
of estimates based on jud 
Section 3.3.2). 
The sample consisted of 899 jury-eligible respondents who were recruited from the Travis County, Texas voter registration list by a professional survey firm and paid $35 for their participation. The resulting sample had good representation from various demographic and socio-economic groups. For example, respondents were 44% male; 64% Caucasian, 16% African- American, 15% Hispanic; median income = $30K-$50K; median education = Some College; median age = 30-39. Thirty-two respondents were dropped from the sample because they gave incomplete responses or failed to understand the task. 
The survey was conducted at a downtown hotel. Participants were run in large groups at pre-arranged times over a four day period. Most respondents completed their task in 30 to 45 minutes. 
Each respondent received three pages of general instructions and four numbered envelopes. The first three envelopes contained the materials for Parts 1 , 2 and 3 of the study, as described below. The fourth envelope contained demographic questions and debriefing information. The instructions (which are excerpted in Appendix I) included (1) an overview of the survey procedure, (2) an explanation of the task of jurors in civil (as opposed to criminal) trials, (3) definitions of and distinctions between compensatory and punitive damages, including the fact that compensatory damages had already been awarded in the cases they would consider, (4) a summary of standard legal conditions for punitive damages (maliciousness or reckless disregard for the welfare of others), and (5) a reminder about the standard of evidence required in this situation (preponderance of the evidence). 
Ten scenarios describing personal injury cases were constructed (summarized in Table 1 ; full versions in Appendix II). The first six were used in Parts 1 and 2 of the procedure and the other four in Part 3. Each respondent rated some version of all ten scenarios. Envelope #1 contained material about one of the first six scenarios. Envelope #2 contained the other five of these six scenarios. Envelope #3 contained the four scenarios used in Part 3 of the experiment. 
In Parts 1 and 2, between-subjects manipulations were response mode (Outrage, Punishment or $ Damages) and firm size (annual profits of $10-$20 million (Medium) or Case Part Description Mary 1 ,2 Employee suffers anemia due to benzene exposure on the job Frank 1 ,2 Motorcycle driver injured when brakes fail Thomas 1 ,2 Circus patron shot in arm by drunk security guard Susan 1,2 Auto airbag unexpectedly opens, injuring driver Carl 1 ,2 Man suffers skin damage from using baldness cure Sarah 1 ,2 Elderly woman suffers back injuries from using exercise video Jack 3 Small child playing with matches burned when pajamas catch fire Joan 3 Child ingests large quantity of allergy medicine, needs hospital stay Martin 3 Disabled man injured when wheelchair lift malfunctions Janet 3 Secretary chronically ill due to radiation from computer monitor $100-$200 million (Large)), and scenario sequence, including which scenario was evaluated first, in isolation from the others (in Part 1 of the procedure). Scenario order was counterbalanced so that each scenario appeared in each ordinal position with equal frequency. Table 2 shows the wording of the evaluation questions in the three response modes. Instructions in all scenarios stated that compensatory damages of $200,000 had already been awarded. 
Part 3 had the same structure as Parts 1 and 2, except that the isolation manipulation was replaced by a manipulation in which the degree of harm suffered by the plaintiff was varied. For each of the four scenarios used in Part 3, we formulated a high-harm and low-harm version. For example, in the case in which a child playing with matches was burned when his pajamas caught fire, the injuries were described as "He was severely $ Damages In addition to paying compensatory damages, what amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? (please write your answer in the blank below) $ burned over a significant portion of his bod and months of physical therapy" (high har and required regular professional medical tr We discuss the results in three parts. Section 3.1 is concerned with the validity of the outrage model shown in Figure 1. Section 3.2 deals with the predictability of dollar damage awards, and with the role of individual differences. Section 3.3 considers the question of unpredictability at the level of juries. We examine the hypothesis that variability in the individuals' use of the dollar scale is sufficient to be a major cause of unpredictability in jury awards. 
The analyses in this section examine some of the social norms that govern evaluations of the actions of firms and the intended severity of punishment for harmful negligence. They focus on the average judgments of the general public (as represented in our sample), and of sub-populations within it. 3.1.1 . Preliminary analysis: The effect of context. Unlike real jurors, who are exposed to a single case for a long time, the participants in our study responded to a total of 10 personal injury cases in quick succession, and had an opportunity to compare these scenarios to each other. To examine the effect of this unusual procedure, every participant first encountered one of the first six scenarios in Table 1, which was presented in a separate envelope and was evaluated in isolation from the others (Part 1). The experimental design provides a comparison of the distribution of judgments to each scenario when it is judged in isolation or in the context of other scenarios. The context was provided in envelope 2, where subjects were instructed to read through all five scenarios therein before responding to any one. In addition, of course, each subject had already responded to the scenario they encountered in envelope 1, which also contributed to the context. The relevant data are summarized in Table 3, which shows the mean outrage and punishment judgments and median dollar awards for each scenario in the isolation and in the context conditions. 
To test whether the availability of a context altered intuitions, we computed rankcorrelations (N = 12) over the scenarios of Table 3, between the judgments in the isolation condition and in the context condition. The correlations are high: .88, and .90, respectively, for the means of outrage and punishment ratings, .89 for the medians of dollar awards. 
We also examined whether the availability of a context of comparison affected the distribution of judgments. Except for a small but significant increase in the severity of punishment in the context condition (i = 3.19,/? < .01), the means of judgments made in 
No Context Context No Context Context No Context Context Medium Firms Mary 3.76 Frank 3.76 Thomas 4.73 Susan 3.12 Carl 2.92 Sarah Mean 3.33 3.31 3.21 3.51 341,667 491,667 Stdev (means) 1.00 1.15 1.18 1.59 229,000 425,000 Stdev Ratio 1.15 1.35 1.86 isolation and in context are also similar. The most consistent effect of a context of similar cases is to increase the range of the judgments of different scenarios. The variances of mean judgments of outrage and punishment over the 12 scenarios are larger in the context condition. In a test for a difference between correlated variances, the effect of context is significant for the punishment condition (F(l,10) = 6.87, p < .05), and marginally significant for outrage (F = 4.07, p < .10). The results for a similar comparison of the medians of dollar awards are similar (F = 4.64,/? < .10). The availability of a context apparently makes a serious case appear more serious than it would on its own, and makes a milder case appear milder. 
The small effect of a comparison context in improving discriminations among cases could be useful in the design of possible reforms of the jury's task. However, the fact that the effect of context is small allows us to generalize the conclusions of the present experiment with some confidence to situations in which no context is provided (the standard case for real juries) or to situations in which other scenarios might be used. 3.1.2. Average judgments of scenarios. Table 4 presents measures of central tendency for the three types of response (outrage, punishment and awards) for each of the scenarios presented in the experiment. Because the context effects analyzed in the preceding section are small, judgments obtained in Part 1 and in Part 2 of the questionnaire are pooled in the a Firm Hann Mean Mean Mean $ Median $ % Zero $ Size Level Scenario Outrage Punish Awards Awards Awards Large High Joan 4.24 4.93 17,853,229 2,000,000 5.7 Large High Martin 3.88 4.78 17,071,115 1,900,000 0.0 Large - Frank 4.32 4.77 9,954,507 1,000,000 0.7 Medium High Martin 4.41 4.73 4,899,710 1,000,000 2.9 Large - Thomas 4.29 4.73 8,703,479 500,000 2.8 Large Low Joan 4.19 4.65 22,131,390 1,000,000 2.8 Medium - Thomas 4.69 4.64 2,152,765 525,000 2.9 Medium - Frank 4.56 4.54 3,450,993 500,000 1.5 Medium High Joan 4.49 4.53 4,871,791 1,000,000 6.0 Large - Mary 4.05 4.50 9,162,137 1,000,000 2.8 Medium Low Martin 4.03 4.32 2,185,522 525,000 1.5 Medium Low Joan 4.67 4.32 6,204,239 550,000 7.2 Large Low Martin 4.01 4.28 9,589,643 1,000,000 2.9 Medium - Mary 4.32 4.24 1,939,926 575,000 2.2 Medium - Susan 2.95 3.12 1,701,522 200,000 18.4 Large - Susan 2.85 3.03 10,254,317 300,000 12.7 Large High Janet 2.91 2.79 5,122,207 250,000 28.0 Large - Carl 2.80 2.79 1,779,264 200,000 9.9 Medium - Carl 2.70 2.59 752,173 175,000 16.2 Large Low Janet 2.84 2.56 7,229,776 200,000 23.9 Medium High Janet 2.65 2.55 1 ,263 ,264 200,000 12.5 Medium Low Janet 2.49 2.54 1,925,031 150,000 29.7 Medium High Jack 1.83 1.58 1,289,063 32,500 43.8 Laige Low Jack 1.75 1.56 1,650,695 100 49.3 Large High Jack 1.83 1.50 917,836 0 58.2 Medium Low Jack 1.49 1.18 483,403 0 66.7 Large - Sarah 1.54 0.93 89,314 0 74.6 Medium - Sarah 1.35 0.61 230,184 0 75.7 data of Table 4. Different summary statistics a are shown for ratings of outrage and of intende presents medians and the proportion of respon be zero. The use of the median is justified becau severely skewed, as expected for judgments on descending order of the mean punishment ra medium-firm and large-firm versions of each high-harm versions of the four scenarios used i 
The main observation from Table 4 is that the mildest is quite similar for the three responses. awards generally decline, concordant with the arrange the scenarios. We computed the Pearson Table 4 (N = 28). The correlation between the is very high (.98). The correlations of these two lower (.69 and .78, respectively for outrage and PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 6 1 these correlations are attenuated by the Because the skewed distribution of dollar a of sample means than of medians, the corre the means of dollar awards are even lowe 3.1.3. Demographic analyses. Do the avera broadly shared social norms? Are there dif answer these questions we broke down the ing ethnicity, gender, education and inc separately for each subcategory (e.g., w correlations between the mean judgments o over the 28 scenarios. Table 5 presents the 
The results of Table 5 indicate that the rati there is little or no disagreement betwee Hispanics and whites, and respondents at similar orderings of the 28 scenarios used i these scenarios of personal injury cases evid are broadly shared in society. 
The results for outrage ratings are generall lower (a median correlation of .94, compa correlations reflect the slightly lower stati lations between mean judgments of dollar was .65), another indication of the poor rel course, could be mitigated by using larger aEntries are correlations between the indicated demographic categori 
The high correlations shown in Table 5 imply o mean judgments of disjoint demographic group They do not preclude systematic differences bet scales. Thus, one group could be generally more make the same discriminations among scenarios. which they discriminate between cases, yielding 
To test for differences between the mean respon multivariate ANOVA for each response mode, wit scenario as a within subject factor, and dummy as covariates. There were no significant differenc important exception of gender. Although the mea highly correlated, women were somewhat more s outrage ratings (a mean difference of .52 scale un (difference of .37,/? < .001), and set higher log a gender X scenario interaction in which women and punishment (but not higher dollar awards) t ( p < .05). 
In summary, we have evidence of a remarkable degree of consensus on the relative outrage evoked by scenarios of personal injury and on the relative severity of the punishment that is considered appropriate in this class of cases. This conclusion may not fully generalize to all domains of the law. We might expect to find much larger differences in the level of judged severity between communities and social categories in other areas, perhaps including attitudes to sexual harassment and civil rights violations, although there could still be agreement across categories on the relative severity of different instances within a domain. 3.1.4. From outrage to punishment: The harm effect. In the outrage model of Figure 1, morally objectionable actions evoke a graded response of outrage or indignation. An action can be judged more or less outrageous without reference to its consequences. Consequences, however, are important to punishment in law, and we suspected that they would also be important to lay intuitions about the proper punishment for reprehensible actions. This prediction was tested in Part 3 of the questionnaire, where different respondents encountered versions of the same scenario that differed in the harm that the plaintiff had suffered. 
The results are summarized in the three panels of Figure 2. In each panel, the mean response to each high-harm scenario is plotted against the mean response to the low-harm version of the same scenario. Because outrage is assumed to be independent of consequences, our model predicts that the points should fall near the identity line. This prediction is confirmed. An analysis of variance shows no main effect of harm on outrage ratings. A different pattern is found for the punishment measure, which is displayed in the middle panel of Figure 2. Here the points all fall above the identity line, indicating that punishment ratings reflect the severity of the harm as well as the outrageousness of the action that caused it. The effect of harm is small, but statistically reliable ( F = 7.4 , p < .01). Because the outrage model involves a cascade of judgments, the effect of harm on punitive intent is expected to transfer to dolla statistically significant effect of harm on the n .05). There is also a Harm X Firm Size interacti of Harm on log awards is enhanced for large fir 3.1.5 . From punitive intent to dollar awar community, opinion is sharply divided on awards should depend on the size of the Galanter and Luban, 1993). Lay intuition model, punitive intent is an intention t defendant matters a good deal. Concepts su or inflicting pain on it are quite meaningf economists and legal scholars may find th intuitively obvious that it takes a louder me a larger loss to inflict pain on it. The outra to punish will be translated into a larger pu if it is small. 
The four panels of Figure 3 present the same as in Figure 2: the mean judgment plotted against the mean judgment for the outrage model predicts that firm size shoul to punish, or on the likelihood of deciding all three measures fall symmetrically abo large effect of firm size is apparent in t significant effect of firm size on log a awards (F = 6.1, p = .01). 
The data reported in this section confir about the acceptable behavior of firms (s They also lend strong support to the outr a basic evaluation of a defendant's action b was caused to the plaintiff, and of the am intended level of pain on a defendant. 
The analyses presented so far were conce the general public, and of sub-populations consensus on social norms, and also concl precise account of moral judgments. Howe ness in individual judgments of dollar awa of small samples of people. Variability, es a critical problem in the world of legal pr section is concerned with an analysis of v 3.2. The unpredictability of dollar award A central goal of the present study was punitive damage awards. Our main hypot onto a dollar scale is a major cause of un distribution of responses associated with variability and little skewness in the mappi scales, because these scales are bounded, and in the task of finding a response that expres we present several analyses that compare the 3.2.1. Measuring unpredictability: Variance which the respondents in our study (and jur tions of various scenarios involving tortious respondents would agree in their evaluatio Table Metrics11 
Proportion of 
Variance in 
Individual 
Respon 
Raw responses .29 .49 .06 Convert to ranks for each subject .42 .58 .51 
Ln($) .42 Proportions w (including fir subgroups in subjects. t narios would be the only source of variance in judgments - in this ideal situation there is only signal, no noise. In a non-ideal world, however, we expect to observe variance from two other sources: (1) individual differences in the average response to scenarios, and (2) "noise," which combines idiosyncratic responses of individuals to particular scenarios with pure measurement error. The proportion of total variance that is accounted for by scenarios provides a useful index of the extent to which judgments approximate the ideal of complete consensus. Table 6 presents the values of this index for the three responses used in the present study, and for some transformations of these responses. 
To produce the values shown in Table 6, separate analyses of variance were conducted for each group of respondents who were exposed to the same combination of 10 of the 28 different scenarios. The values shown are a weighted average of the results obtained in these homogeneous groups. Ratings of outrage and punishment show much higher consensus than dollar awards. Indeed, only 6% of the variance of dollar awards is associated with scenarios. Similar results were reported by Kahneman and Ritov (1994), who compared willingness to pay for various causes (a magnitude sale) to category scale measures of related attitudes. 
Dollar awards exhibit all the characteristics that are expected of magnitude scaling without a modulus, where each respondent in effect adopts a personal modulus. Individual differences in this modulus combined with the proportionality between individual means and standard deviations are expected to produce a high correlation between the mean and the standard deviations of respondents' judgments: if two individuals agree in their underlying impressions but their moduli differ by a factor, both the means and the standard deviations of their expressed judgments will differ by the same factor. For each group of respondents who saw the same set of 10 scenarios we computed the correlation between the mean and the standard deviation of the 10 responses made by each individual. As expected, this correlation was very high for dollar awards (an average of correlation of .90), but small for outrage ratings and (an average of .16) and punishment ratings (an average of .09). 
Second, we observe that the distributions of awards are highly skewed to the right, for each of the 28 scenarios. We trace the skewness to two sources: the characteristic skewness of all magnitude judgments (Stevens, 1975), and the skewness in the distribution of personal moduli. We computed skewness statistics for non-zero awards for each scenario PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 67 for each group of respondents exposed to the s skewness measure.2 Dollar award distributions we age skewness statistic of 3.57), while outrage rati ratings (average of -.13) showed little skewness moduli, we computed the skewness index of th standard deviations of positive individual respo the same set of scenarios. The average skewness standard deviations. Finally, we generated a new s each group of respondents, by dividing all the po individual's mean response. This transformation i individual differences in moduli on the distribut of judgments within scenarios is now 1.35. This v skewness expected for magnitude judgments ob much lower than the skewness of untransformed skewness observed in the judgments of particula distribution of personal moduli. 
In a further test of the hypothesis that the poo attributable to individual differences in modul judgments to ranks. The ranking transformation use of the scale, while retaining the essential co judgments. The transformation yielded a dramati dollar awards: the proportion of systematic varia ranking transformation yielded only a modest im related variance for outrage and punishment ratin conclusion that the unpredictability of raw dolla (and possibly meaningless) individual difference 
A logarithmic transformation of dollar awards the proportion of variance accounted for by scen magnitude scale. The transformation of awards t teristic skewness of the distribution of judgment analysis of the predictability of actual punitiv showed that the logarithmic transformation yiel They also showed that the log of awards is pr objective characteristics of cases in which such cluded that the unpredictability of punitive awar consistency between their analyses of real jury a we agree with their conclusion that log awards a plaintiffs, however, live in a world of dollars, judgments of our respondents and of the real j correctly described as erratic and unpredictable skewness creates the possibility of disastrous l even in very large firms. 
jury 
analyses The unpredictability that is of interest t a group of twelve (and sometimes fewer) about a single case, and an opportunity experiment are of course quite differe possibility of mitigating high individual an attempt not to overstate the variabi analyze the judgments of synthetic jurie respondents. The 'jury judgments' that group of 12 individuals, using the med judgment that a jury composed of thes 
Our decision to use the median of ind research findings which suggest that thi the decision that is likely to emerge fr and Casper (1992) report an extensive e pensatory damages in a price-fixing case. liberation responses of individual jurors either the mean or the mode. 
There is no reason to believe that our main findings would be altered by the process of group deliberation. The conclusion of a now considerable literature using a wide variety of tasks is that deliberating groups hold no generalized advantage over individuals in the performance of judgment tasks (Kerr, MacCoun and Kramer, 1996). More specifically, Kerr, MacCoun and Kramer (1996) concluded from their review of judgmental biases in legal contexts that jury deliberations were actually slightly more likely to amplify the biases of individuals than to attenuate them. In the jury damage assessment context, Diamond and Casper's (1992) mock jury awards were significantly higher than the mean individual award (by 26%), a finding mirrored qualitatively in other studies (Davis, 1996, experiment 1; Kaplan and Miller, 1987, for punitive but not compensatory damages). If this effect applies to our study as well, the right-skewed distribution of damage awards in our data would cause our synthetic jury judgments to underestimate both the mean and the variance of the awards that that deliberating juries would have made. However, in a study with student mock-jurors Davis et al (1997) found that the median somewhat overestimated actual group judgments. While the relationship between individual judgments and that of the groups they compose is still an evolving area of research, this evidence suggests that the results we observe in our synthetic juries provide a reasonable and conservative approximation to the results that would be observed with real juries. 
We created synthetic juries by randomly selecting groups of 12 respondents, with replacement, in each condition and for each scenario, and used the median of the 12 responses to represent the jury judgment (the size of the pool from which juries were drawn varied from 144 to 151 in Part 1-2 scenarios and from 64 to 77 in Part 3 scenarios). One thousand simulated juries were created in this fashion for each scenario and condition. PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 69 
Table 7 presents, for each of the scenarios used in the and upper bounds of a 95% confidence interval for the a as well as the mean ratings of simulated punishment juries. unpredictability and characteristic skewness of jury d under laboratory conditions.4 Note that the extreme striking for the most severe cases. As noted earlier, thi similar observations with magnitude scales in the cont standard deviation of judgments is commonly found (Stevens, 1975). In the data of Table 8, the width of t correlated with both the mean ( r = .90) and the medi 3.3.1 . Measuring unpredictability: correlational analy sidered predictable, in our use of that term, if there i randomly selected from the population. We carried o 
Punishment .86 .89 $ Awards .47 .51 .42 
Overall Median $ Award .71 .77 .69 predictability of the judgments made by simulated ishment juries. The basic unit of this analysis is a s each of the 28 scenarios listed in Table 7. Except fo als appearing in more than one jury, this procedure dent juries to deal with 28 separate cases on the s created 60 sets of 28 simulated jury judgments judgment was contributed by a different jury. We t between each pair of sets. This computation was per correlation between the outrage ratings of succes the correlation between the outrage rating of on another). The data shown in Table 8 are medians of each response mode or of the 3600 correlations ob 
The results of Table 8 conform to our hypothesis. independent synthetic juries judging outrage or p and .89). In contrast, agreement between indepen awards on a magnitude scale is quite weak (r = .42) and skewness of judgments on this measure is so judgments are unstable. The problem could be r samples. For example, we found that when the siz correlation between the dollar awards of independe the problem would be exacerbated in smaller sam 
A jury can be thought of as a sample from the com an estimate of community sentiment. In the contex timent about the punitive damages for a scenario damages set by all the respondents who judged it. T correlations between sets of simulated jury judg sponding estimates of community sentiment, for dollar awards for each scenario. Remarkably, punis timent about dollar awards more accurately than do is especially notable because, as will be shown bel awards and ratings of punitive intent is highly non 3.3.2. Improving predictability. As noted above, t viewed as estimates of community sentiment about in a given case. The accuracy with which a dollar jur be assessed by computing the difference between PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 7 1 community sentiment, for which we use the The root-mean-square of these discrepancies for each scenario, provides a measure of aver standard error of the estimate in a regression 
Hypothesis 5 states, and the correlational an implies, that punishment juries can be used munity sentiment about dollar awards than amine this possibility, we proceed as follows. the functions that relate the overall median o mean judgment of all simulated punishment j we create punishment juries according to the use the median punishment rating of the 12 i We then use the relevant function from Figu ment jury into a dollar award. As before, the the overall median of dollar awards, and we these estimates. 
As can be seen in Figure 4, the relationship between punishment ratings and dollar awards is highly non-linear. On the background of previous psychophysical scaling research, this result is not surprising. Stevens (1975) pointed out that magnitude scales are generally related to category scales of the same underlying variable by a power function. Following Stevens, we therefore fitted (separately for medium and large firms) conversion functions of the following form: 
A = af* + e (1) where D¿ = median jury award for scenario i. Mean punishment ratings lower than 1 . and a prediction of $0 was made for these on those scenarios that exceeded this thres for medium and large firms, respectively) estimated a and b using a nonlinear nume and the estimated functions for this analy 
To assess the relative quality of the esti verted punishment ratings, we created 100 and each scenario, in the same fashion a estimate of the population median of dol simply the median of the twelve individu of individual responses was converted to a function for the appropriate firm size. T and the observed median dollar award for each scenario were summed across the 100 juries. Finally, we computed for each scenario the ratio of the RMSE for dollar awards to the RMSE for converted punishment ratings. The last column of Table 7 presents these ratios, which we use as a summary statistic of the relative accuracy of the two estimation procedures. 
As is apparent from the large ratios (the median ratio is 2.18), the estimates derived from punishment ratings are far more accurate than estimates from dollar awards. For example, for the case of Joan with a medium firm size and high harm, the ratio is 2.27 (Table 7), the median individual award is $1,000,000 (Table 4), and the estimates of dollar juries have an average error from this value of $913,481 compared to $402,414 for estimates based on punishment juries. A difference in this direction was found for 25 of the 28 scenarios. These results support the rather counter-intuitive conclusion that the goal of estimating community sentiment about dollar awards can be achieved more efficiently by asking juries to rate their intent to punish than by asking them to set dollar awards provided of course that the requisite conversion function is available. The research we have reported was designed with three objectives in mind: (i) to learn about the psychology of punitive damages; (ii) to understand why punitive damages are sometimes arbitrary and unpredictable; (iii) to consider possible reforms in the task assigned to the jury, which might reduce this uncertainty. We discuss the three objectives in turn. 
PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 73 made no attempt to analyze in this researc elementary internal state is a central determi that could be asked about the same incident: a rating of appropriate punishment or in set tions of the image of a defendant firm and 
Although many questions about the case wo also raises a particular set of consideration attitude structure in which several internal increasing complexity; a more complex respo its predecessor in the chain, and also on som of outrage is basic, punitive intent is interm are most complex. The determinants that affe determinants of earlier links. 
We have identified some of the determinants the list we offered is not complete. For exam not the only factor that influences punitive ignation of an action as a repeated offense c even if it does not increase the outrageousnes the only factor that affects dollar awards be another likely candidate. Because there is no to punish a company "severely" or "very se dollars is likely to be highly susceptible to su anchors (Chapman and Bornstein, 1996; Ha cannot reject the interpretation that the fir study was produced by anchoring on the num of different sizes. More generally, we view t as a framework for future investigation of t 
The normative status of the outrage model this model appears to capture moral norms t hand, there are reasons to question whether to be honored by the legal system in awardi retributive focus of outrage is not well-suite theorists view as the main justification for Polinsky and Shavell, 1997). Those who emph damages should be awarded to make up fo detected and punished. This idea is not rep suspect that the brazen actions of an agent tha of day may occasion more outrage than the Thus, efforts to make punitive awards ser intuitions that jurors bring to their role. Leg intuitions that treat corporations as persons, persons. In some areas, legislatures commit social norms of lay persons. We return to the of a radical change in the role of juries in se 4.2. A cause of unpredictable awards The task of setting punitive damages most method, which we have labeled magnit earlier, subjects in most applications of particular number (the modulus) to a spe stimuli in terms of ratios of subjective int both arbitrary and inconsequential: the s whether the standard stimulus is to be jud also be conducted without a modulus, by ments of different stimuli should reflect th In the context of psychophysical scaling that are quite similar to those that are obt noisier and more skewed. It appears that adopts a modulus - and different subjects a greatly increases the variability and ske stimulus. The effects of individual diffe eliminated in the statistical analysis of ps many stimuli. Under current legal practic considers only one case in isolation, and i it to others. 
The close similarity of our results to the two questions: (i) what is the significance tude of responses? (ii) what is the status given scenario (or stimulus)? In the contex tions are (i) individual differences in the si of an arbitrary modulus; and (ii) the ave largely arbitrary, although the ratios of re 
Do these conclusions also apply to the se the mapping from punitive intent to dollar would be in a psychophysical experiment? the overall magnitude of awards need no genuine differences of opinion about the p the amount required to engage the attentio The data of the present study do not perm dollar awards is due to such systematic e believe that arbitrary differences in indiv first is the evidence indicating the grea dubious informative value. In addition, we onto dollars raises normative and concep expert. It is likely that lay persons faced choices. The normative relevance of doll which the moduli used by jurors are arbitr 
We have considerable confidence in the con of the dollar scale were an important cause study. A more difficult question concerns the circumstances of the present experiment propose, is that actual juries and the parti mapping punitive intent onto an unbound them. Under these circumstances we expect susceptible to any anchors that may be p deliberations. 
A final note of caution is in order here. The fact that punitive damages share the known deficiencies of magnitude scaling is likely to be a significant cause of unpredictable punitive awards - but it is not the only one. Other relevant factors include regional differences, plaintiffs demand, the quality of the lawyers on both sides, and doubtless others. 
In spite of the acknowledged limitations of our experiment, we believe that our findings have substantial implications for reforms of the role of juries in setting punitive awards. Of course the decision of whether and how the current system should be reformed must be guided by a normative analysis of the social and legal function of punitive damages. In the subsequent discussion we distinguish among three canonical positions, which differ in the diagnosis of the principal weakness of the current system, and imply different recommendations for how it might be improved. The issues raised in the following sections are discussed in greater detail in Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade (1998). In that paper, we also discuss other reform proposals, such as damage caps, compensatory damage multipliers, and an increased supervisory role for judges. 4.3.1. High variability of dollar awards. The first and least radical of the three positions we shall discuss assumes that the only problem with the punitive awards made by juries is that they are erratic and unpredictable, because of the large individual differences between jurors in the mapping of punitive intent into dollars. In this view the "community sentiment" about the appropriate dollar punishment in a case is the normative standard. The task of the jury is simply to reflect this sentiment, which we have operationalized here as the median of the judgments that would be made if the entire eligible popúfation participated in setting dollar awards. The problem of unpredictability arises from an identifiable source: a sample of twelve is too small to provide an accurate estimate of community sentiment, because of the large individual differences in the mapping of punitive intent. The goal of reform is merely to obtain a more accurate understanding of that sentiment. 
How might this problem be solved? The analysis that we described in Section 3.3.2 showed that asking juries to assess severity of punishment, and converting this assessment to dollars by a conversion function leads to much greater accuracy (by a factor of more than 2 in these data) than asking juries to set dollar awards. The procedure of this experiment provides a blueprint for a m could yield a substantial improvement in 
In the first phase of such reform, a s generated - perhaps several sets correspo injury or financial misconduct. These individuals (or experimental juries) to ob respondents would set dollar awards. Oth perhaps rank the scenarios by this vari conversion function that could subsequen of punishment (or their ranking of the into dollar awards. The analysis that we r new procedure. As we have seen, the resu can be reduced by changing the jury's ta rating or by ranking), and avoiding th Specifically, we found that it is possibl (where the error variability and the mea accurate estimate of community sentime dollar awards can provide. 
The proposed procedure raises many qu point of view, however, it is straightfor damages should reflect the central ten modest critique of the existing system, change, providing improved estimates without questioning the normative force 
If we pursue this perspective, then other of community sentiment can be consi gested to us by Dan McFadden involves relevant category (e.g., personal injury c of the community median. This approach on the stability of the category mean. A punitive intent and it is possible that fu stable and reliable scale, which would sentiment about dollar awards. Many ne "How can we obtain the best estimate of % 
the legal system should deny the normative status of community sentiment about dollar awards, but accept community sentiment about punitive intent. If the translation of punitive intent onto the dollar scale is arbitrary and poorly informed, the goal of the jury system should not be to predict community sentiment about dollars - even if this prediction could be made accurate. 
On this view, the conversion functions that take punitive intent to dollars (see Figure 4) reflect intuitions about appropriate dollar awards that are neither informed nor particularly reasonable. Even if it is granted that the jury is sovereign is deciding how much an PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 77 individual or a corporation should be made to that would enable them to convert their punit Even experts would find that question diffic plausible that individuals and juries answer i clinging to numerical anchors provided in th sentiment on awards is seen as representing t moduli, another procedure will be required to t 
The proposal that naturally emerges from determination of punitive awards. As before, j a ranking of the case at hand on a scale of pun However, the conversion function from puni legislative or regulatory process, not by the community sentiment to another. The convers the factors that affect community judgment, su informed analysis of the harm that different ity of a formal scheme to convert punitive in unpredictability of awards; it is also likely to 4.3.3. Rejecting the outrage model A still mo could draw on our findings about the moral in model. Our results suggest that these intuiti focus; that they appear to neglect issues of d persons; and that they require punitive damag the defendant. From the normative standpoint aspects of the outrage model. Many observers damages should be deterrence, not retributi Shavell, 1997). The view of the corporation a than perfectly robust: would potential jurors b who ultimately pay the punitive damages are most of them individually powerless to change have also been raised about the justification fo ages should be adjusted to the size of the def 
It appears that jurors bring to their task som moral intuitions, which may not correspond t Accepting this position not only denies the leg legitimacy of the punitive intent of the comm in the right direction? Perhaps; but a large litera suggests that the intuitions of the outrage mod in the face of explicit instructions to the cont coming). 
If accepted, the logic of this analysis would lead to a proposal that appears radical in the special context of American legal tradition and practice: Juries should not be assigned the task of setting punitive damages, because they are unlikely to carry out their task appropriately in light of the best understanding of the goal of punitive awards. It follows that the task of determining the size of awards administrative process. If a jury is used at about the outrageousness of the defenda several inputs in a punitive decision that (see Sunstein, Kahneman and Schkade, 
We have shown that the difficulty of map potentially important source of unpredicta dollar response contrasts with another im ment in the population with respect to judg consensus operates across differences of substantial consensus on outrage and punit awards are much less so. 
This finding leads naturally to some specific reform proposals. In particular, it suggests that any effort to improve predictability in the award of punitive damages will be most successful if it assists with the task of mapping outrage and punitive intent onto a dollar scale. A conversion formula might well be adopted to provide this assistance. The content of the conversion formula depends on the normative status that is accorded to community sentiments. As we have seen, different recommendations for reform emerge from three different diagnoses of the problem: (i) dollar awards are susceptible to excessive sampling error; (ii) the mapping of punitive intent to dollars is poorly informed; (iii) the judgments of jurors are likely to be affected by outrage and by retributive urges that are not in line with appropriately designed legal principles. 
Our findings have implications well beyond the area of punitive damages, because the legal system is pervasively in the business of requiring people to map normative judgments onto dollar amounts. Our analysis suggests that the mapping of attitudes onto unbounded scales creates problems that are both predictable and severe. We suspect, for instance, that similar difficulties exist in the setting of awards for pain and suffering, libel, and civil rights violations, and in attempts to use measures of willingness to pay to estimate the value of public goods.6 There is a need to develop mechanisms for eliciting social preferences and values that do not suffer from the problems and defects identified here. We do not expect to find an uncontroversial way of eliciting, or constructing, social preferences and values, but some approaches to this important task are demonstrably worse than others, because they make people perform tasks for which they are illequipped. The problems we have identified and the solutions we have sketched here are likely to be relevant to many questions currently facing law and policy. PSYCHOLOGY OF PUNITIVE DAMAGES 79 In this study we would like you to imagine t court. Civil law suits can involve disputes individuals and companies, in which the plain or their property in some way. A civil suit i gaining compensation from the defendant f 
Civil suits involve two different types o defendant that is found liable for damages. compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered damages are intended to achieve two purpo misconduct, and (2) to deter the defendant a in the future. 
In the cases you will consider, the defendan satory damages to the plaintiff. This does must also be awarded. Whether or not puniti large they should be, is completely separate 
Punitive damages should be awarded if a pr defendants either acted maliciously or with Defendants are considered to have acted ma someone. Defendants are considered to have of others if they were aware of the probable actions were a gross deviation from the stan 
Civil suits differ from criminal cases, in wh or a company for alleged violations of the la claim by "a preponderance of the evidence," that the plaintiffs claim is justified. This dif tion must prove the defendant's guilt "bey 
In each of the cases you will consider, the ju decided to accept the plaintiff's claim. As a c dant to pay $200,000 in compensatory damag defendants are large [medium-sized] compa lion per year. 
hospital stay she is now better, the condition has not been fully cured. She believes that exposure to benzene in her work place caused the condition and sued her employer, TGI International. The jury (of which you are $200,000 in compensation. 
TGI International is a large company (wi manufactures high-tech machine parts. So discovered that manufacturing workers benzene, a substance that can cause ane show that the top management at TGI Int problem, because benzene levels in the p allowed by OSHA regulations. They though any luck no one will get sick." They also "warnings would just create panic." Frank Williams Frank Williams suffered serious internal injuries when the braking system on his motorcycle failed to work at a traffic light. He felt that that the brakes were defective, and sued National Motors, the company that manufactures and sells his motorcycle. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered National Motors to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
National Motors is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that makes motorcycles, scooters, and other motorized single person vehicles. The evidence showed that the braking system used by National Motors has a basic design defect. National Motors was aware that "there might be a problem with our brakes," because in pre-market tests, the defect appeared on several occasions. But the pre-market tests were not extensive, despite the fact that auto industry regulations require elaborate testing. Internal company documents show National Motors' belief that "it would be quite expensive for us to do much more now, we can't be certain we have a serious problem here, and anyway we can fix the problem afterwards if it really does turn out to be serious." Thomas Smith While he was visiting the circus, Thomas Smith was shot in the arm by a security guard who mistakenly thought that Smith had threatened another customer with bodily harm. The security guard was drunk at the time. Smith sued Public Entertainment, the company that operates the circus. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Public Entertainment to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
Public Entertainment is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) which operates circuses and public fairs. Fred Williams, the security guard who was involved in the incident, is an alcoholic with a history of incidents of drunkenness on the job. During one of these incidents Williams took out his gun and started waving it around wildly, but he did not shoot anyone. Public Entertainment had repeatedly warned Williams to "clean described risk to fire up his act" as "basically him." but a 
took good no guy other with action. In a bit of 
opened unexpectedly while she was driving the vehicle. She believes that the airbag was defective and sued the manufacturer, Coastal Industries. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Coastal Industries to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Coastal Industries is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in parts and accessories that can be added to existing vehicles, such as adding the latest safety equipment to older cars. While its airbag conforms to the requirements stated in government regulations, it does not include certain additional "fail-safe" systems that are used in other airbags to ensure against accidental opening. Internal documents show that most but not all of the Coastal Industries designers believed that their system "is certainly safe enough, even if it does not include all possible safeguards" and that their marketing department said that "there will be no market for our airbag if we raise its price by adding more safety bells and whistles." Carl Sanders Carl Sanders used Nalene, an over-the-counter baldness treatment available at drugstores. While a small amount of hair did grow back, he also developed severe side-effects, including open sores on the scalp and permanent brown spots over his forehead. He sued the manufacturer, A&G Cosmetics. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered A&G Cosmetics to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
A&G Cosmetics is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that sells many different cosmetic products, including wigs, "weaves" and chemical solutions designed to combat baldness. Nalene has proven effective in promoting hair growth in 30% of people in clinical trials. However, Nalene caused unpleasant side effects in some cases, although none were as severe as those Carl Sanders experienced. When marketing Nalene, A&G Cosmetics did not fully disclose these findings. It only said "minor side effects have been observed in a very small number of people tested." While this amount of disclosure was within legal limits, other companies that make hair products voluntarily disclosed more about their products. 
community health center. When Stanle herself unable to do so, but she presse that she was not adequately warned of Gersten Productions. The jury (of whic to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
Gersten Productions is a large company produces informational materials in heal concerning healthy lifestyles. The " exercises suitable mostly for people in and models in the video are all relativ exercise videos to come with any special case testified that Gersten Production when the exercises were beyond their good results for almost all people who h injuries of any type from doing so. Jack Newton Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. He was severely burned over a significant portion of his body and required several weeks in the hospital and months of physical therapy. His parents sued the manufacturer of the pajamas, Novel Clothing. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered Novel Clothing to pay the Newtons $200,000 in compensation. 
Novel Clothing is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that specializes in making clothes for children. Before marketing the pajamas, Novel conducted the tests normally used in the industry for problems like flammability, and observed no incidents like the Newtons experienced. Companies in the industry as well as federal regulators have known for a while that it is possible to add extra fire-retardant chemicals to their fabrics (in addition to those specified in current regulations), but these extra measures are not required. The process is very expensive, and no other manufacturers currently use it. Internal documents show that the management of Novel Clothing had decided that "when it comes to costly safety innovations we will follow our competitors. We don't want to be less safe than anyone else but we don't have to lead the way either." Low harm version: Jack Newton, a five year old child, was playing with matches when his cotton flannel pajamas caught fire. His hands and arms were badly burned, and required regular professional medical treatment for several weeks. 
Joan Glover Joan Glover, a six year old child, ingested a large number of pills of Allerfree, a nonprescription allergy medicine, and required an extensive hospital stay. The overdose weakened her respiratory system, which will ma diseases such as asthma and emphysema for an inadequately designed child-proof safet Allerfree, the General Assistance company. General Assistance to pay the Glovers $20 
General Assistance is a large company (wit manufactures a variety of non-prescripti "child-proof" safety caps on all medicine ignored the intent of this regulation by sel with a child-proof safety cap that was gen higher than any others in the industry. A stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a that Allerfree may be punished for violatin ment has many other things to worry abou any case "the punishments for violating the be asked to improve the safety caps in th Administration had previously warned a v were "on shaky ground" but the company d Low harm version: Joan Glover, a six year Allerfree, a non-prescription allergy medici and is now deeply traumatized by pills of any even beneficial medications such as vitamin trollably and says that she is afraid. Martin West Martin West, a right-handed disabled veteran who lived in a two story house, was seriously injured in a fall when the chain broke on his electric lift-chair (a device that allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair that moves up and down an angled track). He fell from near the top of the stairs and tumbled awkwardly all the way to the bottom landing, damaging his spinal cord in the process. As a result he now has only partial control of his right arm, a condition which doctors believe is permanent. He sued the manufacturer of the lift-chair, MedTech Products. The jury (of which you are a member) ordered MedTech to pay him $200,000 in compensation. 
MedTech Products is a large company (profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures many types of medical equipment, including wheelchairs, car-lifts, and other devices used by the disabled. The lift-chair is a new product for MedTech, and instead of producing a new design, company engineers decided to adapt the design of the hydraulic lifts for cars already on the market. Unfortunately, there are several unique problems in designing a safe and effective lift-chair that are beyond the experience of the company's engineers. Product managers said that hiring new engineers with the proper expertise was "too expensive, and would take too long" and ordered current engineers to "just do the best you can, but be sure you meet The inexperience of the engineers and the rush to testing procedures that were less rigorous product regulations. 
Low harm version: Martin West, a left-handed house, was injured in a fall when the chain bro allows someone to be carried up stairs in a chair He fell from near the bottom of the stairs and t spinal cord in the process. His right arm was doctors were able to repair most of the injur previous range of motion in the arm. 
Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on com skin cancer. After a long course of painful che cancer, although they cannot be sure that it wi caused by the computer monitors that she wor national Computers. The jury (of which you a puters to pay her $200,000 in compensation. 
International Computers is a large company (p manufactures components of computer syste monitor that Ms. Windsor used emits an unu other similar monitors, a level that pushes t Internal company documents cite experts who c of radiation could create any serious risk to company was not legally required to disclose t do so. 
Low harm version: Janet Windsor, a secretary who works on computer equipment, suffered from frequent and severe migraine headaches. As a result, for several years she often experienced nausea, insomnia and depression, and missed many workdays and family events. 
This research was supported by Exxon Company, U.S.A. The data reported and the opinions expressed in this article belong to the authors. John Payne, Lawrence Mark, Lawrence Ward, Dan McFadden and Rob MacCoun provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. We also thank Ron Carrell for his able assistance with the administration of the study. Notes 1 . Except for cases at the extremes of the scale, where all respondents agree. a z-score (i.e., substract the sample mean and divide by the sample standard deviation) for each observation, cubing it, and then computing the average of these cubed z-scores. A positive value means the distribution is skewed to the right, a negative statistic means it is skewed to the left, and zero means it is symmetric. promise for improving on the median, but there is as yet no clear evidence for this claim. For example, in Davis (1996) the SJS was slightly better than the median at predicting the responses of individual juries but slightly worse at predicing the overall distribution of awards. 
Polinsky (1997). that ranking could be more useful than rating; see section 3.1.1. to pay for public goods (Kahneman and Ritov, 1994). 
Davis, James H., Wing Tung Au, Lome Hulbert, Xiao-ping Chen, and Paul Zarnoth. (1997). "Effects of Group Size and Procedural Influence on Consensual Judgments of Quantity: The Example of Damage Awards and Mock Juries," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, 703-718. 
Diamond, Shari, and Jonathan Casper. (1992). "Blindfolding the Jury to Verdict Consequences: Damages, 
Experts, and the Civil Jury," Law and Society Review 26, 513-563. 
Eisenberg, Theodore, John Goerdt, Brian Ostrom, David Rottman, and Martin Wells. (1997). "The Predictability of Punitive Damages," Journal of Legal Studies 26, 623-662. 
Galanter, Marc, and David Luban. (1993). "Poetic Justice," American University Law Review 42, 1393-1453. Hampton, Jean. (1993). "The Retributive Idea." In J. Hampton and J. Murphy (Eds.), Forgiveness and Mercy. 
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Hastie, Reid, David Schkade, and John Payne, (forthcoming). "A Study of Juror and Jury Judgments in Civil 
Cases: Deciding Liability for Punitive Damages," Law and Human Behavior. 
Hastie, Reid, David Schkade, and John Payne. (1997). "Effects of Plaintiff Identity and Plaintiffs Damage 
Request on Juror Assessments of Punitive Damages," Working paper. 
Huber, Peter. (1989). "No-fault Punishment," Alabama Law Review 40, 1037-1049. 
Jeffries, John. (1986). "A Comment on the Constitutionality of Punitive Damages," Virginia Law Review 72, 139-151. 
Kahan, Daniel, and Martha Nussbaum. (1996). "T'vo Conceptions of Emotions in Criminal Law," Columbia Law Review 96, 269-374. Kahneman, Daniel, and liana Ritov. (1994). "Deter 
Study in the Headline Method," Journal of Risk Kahneman, Daniel, and liana Ritov. (1998). "Prefe tainty , in press. 
Kahneman, Daniel, liana Ritov, Karen Jacowitz, 
Goods: A Psychological Analysis," Psychological Kahneman, Daniel, and Jack Knetsch. (1992). "Va 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Manag Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard T 
Entitlements in the market," The American Eco Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch, and Richard Th 
Journal of Political Economy 98, 1325-48. Kaplan, Martin, and Charles Miller. (1987). "Grou Influence: Effects of Type of Issue and Assigned ogy 53, 306-313. 
Kerr, Norbert, Robert MacCoun, and Geoffrey K 
Groups," Psychological Review 103, 687-719. Landes, William, and Richard Posner. (1993). Econ 
Press. 
Lodge, Milton. (1981). "Magnitude Scaling: Qua 
Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steve Shavell. (1997). 
Review. 
Stevens, Stanley S. (1975). Psychophysics. Introduction to Its Perceptual , Neural , and Social Prospects. Wiley: 
NY. 
Sunstein, Cass, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade. (1998). "Assessing Punitive Damages," Yale Law Journal, May. 
that it is merely one of several equally valid ways of viewing the world, we disagree; we believe that behavioral law and economics should be regarded as more than an "interpretive trope" and that it will help to shed light on legal problems and produce improvements in the legal system. 
A small note at the outset: Both Judge Posner and Professor Kelman frequently use the word "irrationality," and they write as if "irrationality" and "irrational behavior" are at the heart of behavioral economics and behavioral law and economics. But our article intentionally avoided that word, on the ground that it is not useful and is likely to mislead. We do far better to specify how human beings actually behave (and depart from the conventional theory) than to argue whether they are "irrational." Hence we refer to quasi rational agents and to bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest, three ideas of special relevance to Posner's comment, to which we now turn. 
A reader of Judge Posner's commentary might be left with the impression that there are large disagreements between us. This impression would be false. Posner accepts the most important points of our article; he acknowledges the existence of the three bounds, and he agrees that the phenomena we discuss are real and potentially important to economics and law. Much of his discussion consists of quibbling about what is really a minor matter: whether we should call a given behavior rational or not. Posner is also concerned to show the sources of the three bounds, an important subject to be sure, but one on which we are agnostic. Our goal here is to reduce the perceived distance between our views and straighten out the most important misunderstandings. 
Seeming to have learned more from the study of cognitive psychology than he lets on, Judge Posner begins with a clever framing manipulation. He says that we (implicitly) define behavioral economics negatively as "economics minus the assumption that people are rational maximizers of their satisfactions."8 He contrasts this negative approach to what he prefers, the positive "enriching" approach he claims for standard economic theorizing.9 As readers of our article realize, we offer no such negative definition; in fact we often use precisely the same concept, "enriching" the standard economic model, that is offered by Judge Posner.10 
Indeed, as we will make clear below, our goals and tools are remarkably similar. The primary problem Posner seems to have with our approach is our reluctance to call all behavior rational. To Posner, a model that is rational is good, disciplined, scientific, and enriching, whereas a model that is quasi ra8.Posner, supranote 1, at 1552. 
Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 1475 (1998) [hereinafter "JST"]. 
HeinOnline -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1594 1997-1998 tional is bad, undisciplined, unscientific, and subtracting. Posner seems to be using the heretofore undiscovered "rationality heuristic" (if it uses rational models, it is good). Like all heuristics, this one sometimes works well, but it can lead to systematic biases. 
In this case the primary bias is one that Colin Camerer calls, in conversation, the "sufficiency bias." Throughout Posner's commentary, he goes through the following ritual. He discusses one of the phenomena we identify as problematic for economic theory; he offers a modification or elaboration on the standard theory that could, in principle, be consistent with this phenomenon; and then he declares victory. Posner seems to think that the fact that it is possible to tell a rational choice story consistent with the data is sufficient to establish that this explanation is the correct one. This is obviously a fallacy. In no case does he offer evidence to suggest that his preferred explanation is correct, nor even a test that would, in principle, discriminate between his explanation and ours. For those of us who believe in falsifiability, this is an unfortunate omission. 
To his credit, Posner offers a definition of rationality: "choosing the best means to the chooser's ends."" But at many places he acknowledges that people often do not choose the best means to their own ends. He agrees that there is substantial evidence in favor of what he insists, in our view misleadingly, on calling "cognitive quirks"' 2 (a subtle suggestion that these are minor and unsystematic departures from the standard model). Still, he claims that, in general, bounded rationality either can be accommodated within a more refined rational choice model, or does not upset the predictions of the standard model, or both. He claims that we are simply willing to "give up on rationalchoice economics too soon."'13 
Whether this is true of course depends on what the evidence shows. Posner suggests, for example, that the standard economic analysis of transportation is unaffected by people's ("irrational"--his term) fear of flying, and that the economic analysis of voting is unaffected by ("irrational"--again his term) voting behavior. 14 In some contexts a standard analysis of transportation and of voting may work (although for the same reasons we gave in our article, we continue to question assertions such as that standard analysis is helpful in predicting "why the old vote more than the young"; 5 if in fact the young voted more, could it not be said that voting for them was more novel and thus generated greater utility?). A standard analysis cannot, however, tell us all of what we need to know. Behavioral economists would predict that both market behavior and government behavior in the airline industry are affected by bounded rationality, as, for example, when additional safety measures are taken and mandated in the aftermath of a crash (a prediction of the availability heuristic)-even if such measures are not defensible on traditional grounds and even decrease aggregate safety (by producing a shift toward other, more dangerous modes of transportation, such as driving). We would also predict that bounded rationality (the availability heuristic, overoptimism, and framing effects) is relevant to voting behavior-and also that people are more likely to vote if they think that most people are voting (not a prediction of the conventional analysis, in fact a conundrum under that analysis, but a reasonable inference from models involving cooperative behaviorl 6). 
The behavioral economics of transportation and voting are in fact extremely interesting; the notion that all the important aspects of these behaviors are well-explained by standard economics strikes us as, well, overoptimistic. 
Posner agrees that self-control problems are real: "I do not doubt that there is such a thing as weakness of will.' u 7 Indeed, he thinks that analysis of the behavior that presents such problems "may require abandoning a tacit assumption of most economic analysis-that the self is a unity."' 8 We share the view that people are often in struggles with themselves-struggles that the wiser part of their personality sometimes loses. (Posner suggests at one point that we "do not discuss the 'multiple selves' approach"; 19 but such temporal inconsistency of preference is precisely what hyperbolic discounting reflects.2 0) 
We disagree, though, with Posner's view that information provides an obvious explanation for hyperbolic discounting.2 ' Posner suggests that people may discount sharply in the relatively near future because they know they have a particular need for cash now, whereas for times in the distant future it is hard to envision "what might make [one] pay in effect a huge interest rate to reallocate consumption. '22 It is true that people may sometimes have less information about their future needs than about their present ones, but it is not clear why lack of information alone would cause them to err systematically on the side of underestimating future needs. Given the lack of information about the future, it is quite possible that the need for immediate cash will be much more intense in the future. 
HANDBOOK OF EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS 111, 121-22 (John H. Kagel & Alvin E. Roth eds., 1995). 

(1997). 

Posner agrees that people do not act only from financial self-interest, and he appears to think that this is important to both economics and law. His chief objection to our discussion of bounded self-interest is that we do not link it with the two other bounds, making our approach to enriching the standard economic model appear disconnected and, in his view, antitheoretical. We do not see how Posner's proposed approach is more theorized, in the relevant sense, than ours, as we will now explain. 
As noted, Posner claims that behavioral economics is "undertheorized. 2' 3 Our article should have been entitled, he says, "A Psychological Critique of Economic Analysis of Law" rather than "A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics. '24 In his view, behavioral economics is "purely empirical," defined "by its subject rather than by its method," and unable to make predictions?5 
We intended to create-and to show to be warranted-precisely the opposite impression. There have been many important theoretical advances in behavioral economics; a number of them are cited in our article.26 Consider, for example, prospect theory, the specification of biases and heuristics, and models of fairness-related behavior-all discussed in some detail in our article. Though much remains to be done, each of these contains a set of theoretical claims. Behavioral economists interested in law would predict, for example, that injunctions will stick in nuisance cases, that participants in lawsuits will display self-serving bias, that the allocation of a legal entitlement will matter to the ultimate outcome, that laws will reflect widespread judgments about fairness organized around reference points, that the pattern of environmental regulation will reflect the use of familiar heuristics, that people will be overoptimistic about risk-all topics developed in our article. Of course it is true that there is much more to be learned and that in many contexts good predictions are difficult. To the extent that he is saying more than this, we are left with the impression that Posner's claim of undertheorization is based on Posner's (undefended but more than implicit) view that an essential part of a good theory is that it be a rational choice theory. 
Predictions can be hard for any model, standard or behavioral, and a basic problem in judging the success of any model, rational or quasi rational, is knowing what constitutes a true prediction of the model rather than a post hoc explanation. A case in point is Posner's discussion of AIDS. In support of the rational choice model, he cites the prediction that the AIDS epidemic will increase the rate of unwanted pregnancies by "inducing a rational substitution of condoms" for birth-control pills.27 But the example raises two obvious questions. First, was this really an ex ante prediction? Second, if so, is this really a victory for rationality? Isn't it quite possible that a rational woman who viewed both AIDS and pregnancy as undesirable would choose to use both a condom and a pill (despite the cost of using two forms of protection)? How would a rational actor model decide, ex ante, between this prediction and the alternative? How, then, does the rational choice approach provide a more "theorized" analysis than the behavioral approach? 
Of course, predictions are sometimes robust to departures from unbounded rationality; an example discussed in our article is downward-sloping demand.28 If economics only consisted of this sort of prediction, many of the bounds we discuss would not matter. But in these cases there would also be no need for (or benefit from) rational choice models. Recall that Posner defines rational as "choosing the best" in terms of benefits and costs, implying an optimal tradeoff analysis (including decisionmaking and information acquisition costs). 29 This optimizing model is much richer than merely buying less of a good when the price goes up; as we pointed out, even laboratory rats do this.30 The richness adds precision to the theory and also renders it falsifiable (and in many cases, false; Posner's own discussion acknowledges many examples). In defense of rational choice theory, and in urging that we give up on it too quickly, Posner cites our claim that the fact that random choice (by rats or human beings) in a situation of scarcity will generate a downwardsloping demand curve shows that downward-sloping demand "is not evidence in support of optimizing models."' 31 He declares our analysis "wrong": "Buyers do not choose randomly. Rationality is the only reasonable explanation for their reactions to changes in relative prices. '32 Wrong. Gary Becker's demonstration that random choice yields downward-sloping demand extends easily to almost any choice behavior.33 A mix of budget-constrained consumers, some of whom just buy the brand their mother did, some of whom buy anything with Michael Jordan's picture on it, some of whom always buy the brand on the right, and so forth, will also buy less of goods whose prices 
(1962). rise (because they have limited budgets). As Becker says, "[T]he negative slope of market demand curves... is equally consistent with individual irrationality [and individual rationality] and cannot distinguish between them." 34 Consumers can be doing almost anything and this result will still hold. (Would Posner respond that whatever they do, people are "choosing the best means to the chooser's ends"? If so, does that theory make any falsifiable predictions?) 
We stress this relatively minor point because much of the evidence Posner marshals in support of rational choice models falls into just this category. We are willing to stipulate that demand curves slope down. But we agree with Becker's analysis that this result depends not at all on unbounded rationality. We also think that for analyzing behavior related to law, it is necessary to say much more, by way of theory, than that demand curves slope down and that people choose the best means to their ends. 
Posner offers a further criticism of the idea that sound predictions about law must take into account the bounds we emphasize. He says that random behavior may often be treated as rational actor behavior because "the distribution of... random behaviors" may have the same mean as rational actors' behavior.35 This is a common response to behavioral economics, and conceivably it could be true; but there is absolutely no reason to think it is, and (as is usually the case) none is offered by the source of the criticism. Each of the legal applications discussed in our article is an instance in which the evidence suggests that people are likely to err in a systematic direction-and hence that they will behave differently in systematic ways from unboundedly rational agents. 
Following Karl Popper, Posner is enthusiastic about falsifiability as the essential feature of a successful scientific theory.36 For present purposes we intend no quarrel with this idea. Posner is even more enthusiastic about evolutionary biology, and he thinks that it is important to show that behavior which departs from traditional economic assumptions is a result of evolutionary forces. 37 For present purposes we do not intend to quarrel with evolutionary biology either. (As we stated in our article, the notion that the bounds on human behavior are adaptive is wholly consistent with our approach.38 ) But it is not easy to stand, as Posner does, with both Popper and evolutionary biology. The problem is that Popper's views have been subject to criticism in the 
appear that the agents are acting irrationally," it is possible that they are "processing incomplete information as well as it can be processed." Kelman, supra note 4, at 1583. For instance, the use of "more general rules of thumb about when information is relevant" may be the best approach under the circumstances, "even if it results occasionally in the use of information that is not in fact probative." Id. philosophy of science, and evolutionary biology is part of the standard criticism of Popper. The reason is that evolutionary biology is an unfalsifiable theory. 
We are agnostic on the question whether biology can explain the behavior we discuss in our article, but we do not think that Posner has shown that it can. Consider, for example, his claim that the endowment effect (in which opportunity costs are underweighted relative to out-of-pocket costs) or the sunk cost fallacy can be derived from evolution.39 No doubt it is possible to produce an evolutionary model in which paying attention to sunk costs, or displaying loss aversion, is adaptive. The problem is that it is also possible, indeed easier, to derive another model in which ignoring sunk costs, and equating opportunity costs to out-of-pocket costs, is also adaptive (based on the standard reasoning offered to economics students who are being taught why sunk costs should be ignored and opportunity costs equated with out-ofpocket costs). Indeed, there is a long tradition in economics, going back at least to Milton Friedman, of arguing that such forces are precisely why the assumptions of economics must be true (that competition or evolution will drive out the people who don't do what they are supposed to).40 It is difficult to see what conclusions should be drawn from the fact that evolution can be shown to produce a behavior andthe absence of that behavior. 
Note that we are not saying that biology is not capable of making predictions. We are simply saying that the fact that one can tell an evolution-based story for why a particular behavior might have emerged neither implies the existence of a falsifiable theory nor (more importantly) is particularly helpful. To do better economic analysis we need theories that can help us predict when sunk costs are more likely to be ignored, or when opportunity costs are more likely to be given full weight. So far, however, such insights have come more from psychology than from biology. 
We agree that much of the behavior we discuss can be considered a vestige of our long held instincts. In the case ofbounded willpower, this is obviously true. The instinct to eat when hungry is present in every species, but it can get one in trouble when food becomes abundant and exercise unnecessary. Ancient man needed neither Weightwatchers nor Stairmasters. Aspects of bounded rationality can also be explained, speculatively but plausibly, in evolutionary terms; the heuristics and biases literature in psychology is explicitly based on the premise that the heuristics which emerge are those that are useful on average.41 Availability is highly correlated with frequency, and using the availability heuristic may be a sensible strategy in most circumstances. Behavior that has survived the test of time may or may not have a lot to do with biology, and while it would be interesting (and in some ways potentially valuable) to know, a behavioral approach to the economic analysis of law can proceed whether or not the evolutionary account is right. 
ECONOMICs 3, 21-22 (1953). 

HeinOnline -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1600 1997-1998 
We do not intend here to respond to all of Posner's particular claims. In many places he has raised good questions for further research, behavioral and otherwise. 
Posner claims that our analysis of the ultimatum game is merely a "labeling of the result of the game. '42 He prefers an analysis that depends on what he calls "negative altruism" and "signaling. '43 We are not sure that we understand the difference between his negative altruism explanation and our own; here is another case where Posner's "enriched" version of economics is simply a form of behavioral economics. Where we part company has to do with signaling. If the signaling explanation has any content, then it would seem to predict that Responders would accept small offers (such as the fifty cents offered by the least generous of the Proposers in our study) as long as their actions were completely anonymous (not known to the Proposer or anyone else including the experimenter.) Of course, these are exactly the conditions in our experiments (as well as the other ultimatum game experiments in the literature). How then can their actions be called signaling-unless they are signaling to themselves? 
Posner also has various explanations for why we might observe the endowment effect within a rational choice model. 44 Though he claims that these explanations are falsifiable, he offers neither evidence in support of them nor tests he would accept as valid. For example, he points out that an endowment effect might be rational for a good with no substitutes, and that this observation might explain the large discrepancies that are observed between willingness to pay and willingness to accept for environmental goods.45 However, this observation cannot explain the difference in buying and selling prices for the coffee mugs in the mugs experiments (since the mugs were for sale in the campus book store). This suggests that the absence of substitutes cannot be the only explanation for the observed behavior. 
Posner also suggests that the outcome of the mugs experiments might be explained by rational habit formation. 46 He does not say exactly how this works; one possibility is that we are used to thinking, correctly, that we like the things we own because we picked them out ourselves and have subsequently become accustomed to them. In the mugs experiment, this is not the case, but perhaps we act, out of habit, as if the mug had been in our possession for a long time. This is an interesting speculation, though no empirical support is offered on its behalf. More important, suppose this explanation is true. This in no way alters the behavioral analysis. Recall that the mugs ex42. Posner, supra note 1,at 1564. periments were designed to test (i.e., falsify) a prediction of behavioral economics, namely that the ultimate allocation of property rights would depend on the initial assignment of those rights even when transaction costs were zero. The experimenters were unable to reject this prediction. The "prebehavioral economic analysis" (to use Posner's phrase 47-one we like!) of this experiment was surely that the mugs market would be identical to the token market; that is, the Coase theorem would hold. The behavioral economic analysis is that the granting of property rights will affect the allocation of those rights. Posner's "habit formation" hypothesis leads to exactly the same prediction as the behavioral analysis, and hence to rejection of the Coase theorem. We are not sure about the hypothesis, but we are pleased to agree on the prediction, and we are looking forward to a revised treatment of the Coase theorem in the next edition ofEconomic Analysis ofLaw. 
Posner has various responses to our interpretation of Jon Gruber's empirical study of childbirth benefits. 48 Many of these responses are acknowledged in our original discussion; we expressly stated that the endowment effect is not the only possible explanation for the empirical findings. One response that we did not mention-and that strikes us as particularly odd-is Posner's objection to our stressing the role of one variable (the endowment effect) while retaining the rest of the rational choice apparatus. Why, he asks, do we not think that other behavioral factors were not also at play?49 The answer, of course, is simplicity. We add complexity one step at a time just as he does. When he suggests that signaling, asymmetric information, risk aversion, altruism, and other traditional rational choice add-ons provide an alternative explanation for some phenomenon, he does not say why another factor is not also present. We do not challenge this way of proceeding. Users of both methods are forced (because of bounded rationality) to enrich their models one step at a time. It is, of course, possible to combine two features in one analysis. This is exactly what we have done in our sunk cost ultimatum game. We used the mental accounting of sunk costs to predict that Responders would demand even more (closer to half the amount to be divided) if they had put up the money themselves. We then attempted to falsify this prediction, unsuccessfully. 
Still, Posner grants that we are "on to something. '50 He just predicts that rational choice plus evolutionary biology will prove more useful in understanding these phenomena. Time will tell. 

Posner says that we make "exaggerated claims for the empirical robustness of behavioral economics." 5 1 What, he asks, is the theoretical or empirical basis for supposing that the experimental environment is similar to the real world? This is a perfectly reasonable question that behavioral economists have been busy exploring. For example, the original research on both mental accounting and prospect theory was experimental. Yet these concepts have proven useful in explaining field phenomena as diverse as the asset allocation decisions of pension plan participants, the behavior of cab drivers, and the equity premium puzzle.52 We await similar tests of the alternatives Posner favors. 
One of the best examples of doing precisely what Posner seems to want is the study of self-serving bias by Linda Babcock, Xianghong Wang, and George Loewenstein. 53 Posner misinterprets the results of this study. He is right, of course, that there is nothing surprising in the fact that each side in a lawsuit will publicly adopt self-serving analogues. And he grants that there is such a thing as a role bias. But he is wrong in concluding that this study adds nothing, or that the survey respondents are just posturing to the researchers (as well as to their counterparts).5 4 What the authors show is that the answers the two parties give to the survey help explain the incidence of strikes. Why, if the two sides are just posturing, would their "meaningless" answers help explain their actual behavior? It seems that, while posturing to the other side (or even to the researchers), the bargainers end up posturing to themselves in a way that they have difficulty overcoming. We also refer readers once again to the study's own discussion of the problem of strategic behavior and the evidence against this explanation for the study's findings. 55 
Posner is also incorrect in asserting that the empirical findings on whether parties bargain around court orders "vindicate rather than challenge rationality."' 56 Posner reasons that "[i]f a case that has become final through exhaustion of appellate remedies could have been settled, because the remedy sought by the plaintiff would cost the defendant more than it would benefit the plaintiff, the case would have been settled earlier-at the latest after the judgment in the trial court and before the appeal. '57 We fail to see this reasoning. For if the defendant thinks there is a good chance a verdict for the plaintiff will be overturned on appeal, it will have no reason to settle the case prior to appeal, even if the plaintiffs remedy would cost the defendant more than it would benefit the plaintiff; the defendant is hoping to have to pay nothing. In any event, we offer the empirical findings on settlement not to challenge "rationality," but to suggest that motivations other than material self-interest help to account for behavior relevant to law-a point to which Posner offers no objection. 
Posner's commentary on our normative analysis is misplaced. We never suggested that experts would be charged with determining the populace's "authentic preferences. ' 58 We do not think people have orderly preferences, so charging anyone with determining them would be a meaningless assignment. Nor do we suggest that bureaucrats would be immune from bounded rationality. Indeed, we emphasize precisely the opposite position.5 9 
Posner also faults us for not advocating education and psychiatry to cure "cognitive quirks and weakness of will. '60 In some circumstances, debiasing techniques may work for instances of bounded rationality, and this is an important area for further investigation. We mention several specific applications in our article. 6 1 Perhaps education and psychiatry can help with bounded willpower as well, but the problem has been with us at least since the time of Adam and Eve, and we are not optimistic about a cure any time soon. In any case, while educators and psychiatrists are doing their best to reduce the impact of bounded rationality and bounded willpower, we will continue our efforts to model these phenomena and learn more about how they affect the economics of the law, and also about how their harmful effects might be reduced. We hope that no one will attempt to cure bounded self-interest. 
Posner suggests that we have succumbed to the hindsight bias; he says we conclude that people are irrationally risk averse from the fact, known only in hindsight, that stock returns have been so high.62 We should note that we are not responsible for declaring the high returns on equities a "puzzle." The puzzle was declared by rational choice theorists Mehra and Prescott, who were admirably attempting to make the theory of investment decision-making falsifiable by asking how large an historical equity premium would be consistent with reasonable (in their view) levels of risk aversion. 63 They decided that the returns up to the mid 1980s, when they wrote their article, were too high. Since their article was written, the equity premium in the United States 
Mehra & Edward C. Prescott, The EquityPremium:A Puzzle, 15 J. MONETARY ECON. 145 (1985). 
HeinOnline -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1604 1997-1998 has been even higher than in the past, and a substantial equity premium has been found in most countries around the world.64 These facts provide out-ofsample tests of the equity premium puzzle. 
Professor Kelman has considerable sympathy for behavioral economics. His basic complaint is that far from providing a "fuller, more accurate" account of human behavior, behavioral economics should recognize that it is merely one of "a variety of interpretive traditions" engaged in making up "stories" about social practices. 65 Kelman thinks that behavioral economics and rational choice theory are "bound together in a form of rhetorical duet or ritualized dance. '66 In his view, the two therefore stand together in "irreconcilable mutual dependence. '67 Kelman also contends that behavioral economics mostly offers "anecdot[es]. '' 68 In Kelman's view, this is not so much a criticism as a suggestion about the need to avoid "hubris. '69 In light of "the rich, inexorably overwhelming data with which we have to deal,...o.pentextured interpretivism" is all that we have.70 His complaint is that behavioral economists, and the behavioral approach to law and economics, claim to provide more than that. 
It is not clear to us why Professor Kelman prefers "interpretive tropes" to what behavioral economists are trying to do. Kelman does not show that analysts are unable to develop and to test hypotheses about the relationship between incentives, including law, and human behavior. We hope to have suggested a number of promising examples in our article. To be sure, in many areas we know much less than we should; as we emphasized throughout the article, one of our most important goals in this project is to outline an extended research agenda. The solution to this problem is to do more investigating in order to figure out which hypotheses are true. There is nothing hubristic about that. 
Kelman thinks that our hope that behavioral economics can supplement standard economics is wrong because they are in "irreconcilable mutual dependence. ' 71 We do not understand this objection. While it is surely true that behavioral economics relies greatly on traditional economic tools (since it is, indeed, merely an approach to doing economics), behavioral economics is intended as an improvement because it contains more realistic assumptions about human behavior. 
Of course Kelman is right to say that some imaginable debates amount to stylized rhetorical patterns, or "moves," involving those who are not and those who are committed to traditional rationality assumptions. Psychologists concerned with bounded rationality may claim to have found hindsight bias; those committed to unbounded rationality may say that what appears to be hindsight bias is really not that at all, but rather is a normative judgment about the appropriate legal regime. Behavioral economists may point to the results of the ultimatum game as suggesting that people will sacrifice some money to punish someone who they think has mistreated them; traditional economists may reply (as Kelman does in their name) that people care about various psychic goods and are willing to sacrifice their material self-interest to obtain these goods.72 And so on. 
Some debates may indeed have this form. But taken in this stylized way, the disagreements between the two camps are awfully tedious. The real task is to be clear about both the hypothesis being tested and the data, and to go back and forth between them to see whether the hypothesis in question can be falsified. 
Consider a few examples. Of course there is nothing to prevent economists from saying that because people care about "psychic goods," the results of the ultimatum game are no surprise. But this response has a major defect. It either makes rational choice theory incapable of generating predictions at all (because whatever happens can be said to have been a result of the relevant utility function, constructed ex post), or it converts rational choice theory into a primitive form of behavioral economics. It is plainly better to do what behavioral economists are doing, that is, to be explicit about the bounded nature of self-interest and to see what hypotheses fit the data and might be used to make predictions, and then test them. Indeed, it is worth remembering that the ultimatum game was invented precisely to test ideas about resisting unfair behavior.73 
Or consider Kelman's claim that hindsight bias is not what it appears to be and the results may well reflect a form of rational Bayesian updating or normative judgments about liability schemes. 74 This is an intriguing claim that is difficult to evaluate without seeing the relevant experiments, but Kelman does not say anything to undermine the central empirical work on hindsight bias. Consider, for example, Baruch Fischhoff s early study, where people were asked to say how likely certain events were to happen during 
ofUltimatum Bargaining,3 J. ECON. BEHAV. & ORG. 367, 367-68 (1982). Giith, Schmittberger, and Schwarze, after defining the ultimatum game, proceeded to test people's behavior in the game. See id. at 373-77. 

HeinOnline -- 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1606 1997-1998 Nixon's trip to China, and then asked to remember their earlier predictions.75 Their remembered probabilities were higher for things that happened. This is surely a bias. Or consider the work by Colin Camerer and others on the "curse of knowledge," in which subjects who are told the actual earnings for a company are unable to give good estimates of what other subjects, who do not know the outcome, will predict.76 Of course there may be some studies that attribute some behavior to hindsight bias where some other interpretation is possible, or even plausible. 
With respect to the equity premium puzzle, Kelman thinks that a surprisingly high equity premium gives people the profitable opportunity to sell bonds to unwitting investors and use the proceeds to buy stocks, making a killing.77 Although this critique is based on standard economic thinking, the analysis is flawed. The opportunity Kelman identifies is not a true arbitrage opportunity (meaning without risk); as we suggested in our article, there are costs to arbitrage in equity markets.78 Investment bankers could try what Kelman suggests, at their own risk, assuming they could convince investors that their bonds were risk-free (despite the risks the banks were taking on). If enough people could do this, then the equity premium might shrink. But this is precisely the kind of question that behavioral economists have been successfully addressing, namely, how do the forces of competition and arbitrageurs interact with quasi rational agents? 79 
Kelman is right to emphasize the importance of sorting out possible alternative explanations and of understanding what kinds of effects are at work in different settings. Our basic point is that we have important empirical issues here, and no reason to think that we are left only with "interpretive tropes" or "dances." Dancing has its place, but in this context, people should stop dancing and get to work. 
Sounding a bit like Posner, Kelman also complains that behavioral economics is an incomplete theory.80 He objects, for example, that behavioral economics cannot predict the domain in which quasi rationality will be important; that we do not know when and how much people will sacrifice their material interest for the sake of fairness; that the relationship between legislative behavior and widely shared fairness norms is ambiguous; 81 that the use of the availability heuristic to explain environmental law leaves many gaps in understanding the demand for environmental regulation. Generally speaking, we agree. There is a lot of work to do. To be sure, we already have far more than "counterstories." Matthew Rabin, for example, has developed a model of fairness behavior, 82 and there is a good deal of empirical work (cited and discussed in our article) in this domain. The role of the availability heuristic in producing regulation has already received considerable attention (again, examples are cited in our article). This is not to say that all of Kelman's questions have been answered; as we have repeatedly said, we think there is a lot more to do. 
Our discussion of the legal examples just mentioned, and the others in our article, was intended both as an effort to make new progress in behavioral law and economics, and, equally importantly, an effort to suggest directions for future research. One of our central points is that behavioral law and economics is "incomplete" at this extremely early stage. A great deal remains to be learned about the actual (as opposed to hypothesized) relationship between law and human behavior. We hope that Posner and Kelman, both occasional past practitioners of behavioral economics, will join the many people now engaged in that endeavor. 
reelection above all." Kelnan, supra note 4, at 1590. We have only assumed this for purposes ofanalysis. 
