Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Michigan Law Review. 
This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
Whatis permitted,and what is prohibited,by the equalityprinciple of a liberal democracy? Does affirmativeaction run afoul of that principle? And where should we look to answer these questions? 
Many critics of affirmativeaction take it as axiomaticthat affirmativeaction violates the equalityprinciple. But this is far from clear. Every law classifies. The currentlaw of equalityitself classifies by, for example,treatingdiscriminationon the basis of race differentlyfromdiscriminationon the basisof age. No one thinksthat the law of equality is, for this reason, inconsistentwith the Equal ProtectionClause. No one thinksthat constitutionaldoctrinegives a "specialpreference"to race discrimination.Whetheraffirmative actionviolates the equalityprincipledependson the content of that principle. 
Thereis good reasonto thinkthat the best understandingof the equalityprincipleof the United StatesConstitutionhas a greatdeal to do with a prohibitionon second-classcitizenship,or "caste."1 An anticasteprinciplecan claimconsiderablesupportfromthe theory and the practiceof those who defend the FourteenthAmendment. Such a principlealso fits well - far from perfectly,but well - with the generalfabricand thrustof constitutionaldoctrine. As a matterof politicaltheory, the anticasteprinciplealso has considerable appeal,connectedas it is with some of the definingideals of liberal democracy,which is designed to ensure that morallyirrelevant characteristicsare not turnedinto a systematicbasis for social disadvantage.2The anticasteprincipleseems to serve as a promising basisfor both organizingand reformulatingmanyaspectsof the law of equal protection. 
Of course the implicationsof the anticaste principle must be specified,and here reasonablepeople can differ. I have urged,for 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. 
2410 (1994). 

1311 example, that the principle forbids government from turning morally irrelevant and highly visible characteristics into a basis for systemic social disadvantage. Whether or not that particular specification is valid, and whether or not it counts as a sufficient specification, it seems clear that the anticaste principle would raise no serious questions about affirmative action policies. The basic reason is that it is implausible to say that such policies entrench second-class citizenship. No one urges, or could urge, that such policies would make whites, or for that matter African Americans, into second-class citizens. This is not to say that affirmative action policies are a good idea. To be sure, they may have stigmatizing effects on their intended beneficiaries, and they may also increase rather than decrease racial antagonism. But these are essentially political complaints, not constitutional ones. Some people, for example, object that affirmative action programs reflect pity and condescension toward African Americans3 - an interesting objection to the meaning and consequences of such programs, not entirely disconnected from the problem of second-class citizenship. But this objection, partly empirical in nature, is best heard in legislatures rather than courtrooms. 
Clark Cunningham and N.R. Madhava Menon have contributed a great deal to the debate over racial equality through their intriguing discussion of caste, and anticaste, in India. American legal debates are often remarkably parochial, and the American debate over the anticaste principle has given strikingly little attention to comparative questions. This is an especially serious omission in light of the fact that the caste system in India seems to be a primary inspiration for those complaining about caste-like features of American life. Let me emphasize a few of the valuable points that Cunningham and Menon offer. First, they suggest that the Indian caste system operates without "highly visible" characteristics. 
High-caste Indians might look much like low-caste Indians. Second, they suggest that in India, systemic social disadvantages began first, and only later created stigmatic differences to "mark the disadvantage." In America, the sequence was, or seems to have been, just the opposite. Thus, in India caste is "clearly a social construction," unlike in the United States, where it is believed that "race" is an immutable and obvious physical condition. 
Third, and perhaps most interestingly, India has gone down the route not traveled by the United States, which has adhered to the view that past discriminationis sufficient justification for affirmative action. India has tackledwith some sophisticationthe issue whetherdifferent,particulargroupshave differentneeds for affirmative action. For example,the Indiangovernmentlooks to various factorsindicatinggroup status,placingimportanceon whether the relevantunit "practicesextensiveendogamy,restrictingmarriageto other group members." In India, social and economic factorshelp undergirdthe judgmentaboutthe kindof compensatorymeasureto which membersof the relevantgroup are entitled. 
Severalfeaturesof this discussionare particularlystriking. Perhapsthe most strikingis the very differentnatureof Indiandebates over affirmativeaction. While Indiahas not avoidedthe high level of contentiousnessthat has characterizedAmericandebates, it has self-consciouslygone in the direction of a highly programmatic method for redressingpast social discrimination- an experiment in social engineeringfar beyond anythingin Americanlaw. From the authors' description,moreover, it is unclear to what extent there is a widespreadperception of a pervasive conflict between merit and affirmativeaction, or between libertyand equality,or of affirmativeaction as an insidiousway of providingprotectionto a "specialinterest." 
Cunninghamand Menon deserve a great deal of credit for the simplefeat of bringingnew informationto bear on the debate over affirmativeaction. Too often the Americandebate has operatedin a factualvacuum- a vacuumaboutboth internationaland domestic experience. Their new facts should spark fresh discussion. I would like to begin that discussion by offering three comments. 
The firstinvolves the criticalrole of facts in constitutionallaw;the second involvesthe potentialvirtuesof rule-freeconstitutionallaw; the thirdinvolvesthe uses and limitsof comparativeconstitutionalism. The first two are inspired by what Cunninghamand Menon have to say, but I do not directlyengagetheirargument;in the third comment,I attemptto do this. 
I. FACTS RATHER THAN CONCEPTS 
Constitutionaland political debates about equality and liberty often operate at a high level of abstraction. They raise questions, for example,aboutwhetherwe are committedto equalityof opportunity or instead equality of result, to individualrights or group rights, or to equality over liberty or vice-versa. Often the arguments work by choosing one concept over another,by assembling some particularpracticethat is said to tell, decisively,againsta certain claimor allegedprinciple(for example,the generallyaccepted preferentialtreatmentgiven to childrenof alumni),by suggesting that a certainconcept necessarilymeans a certainthing (as in the view that equality necessarilyforbids, or requires,affirmativeaction), or by specifyinga conceptwith the suggestionthat this,rather than that, is the best specification(perhaps because it fits better with the rest of what we believe). 
These debates, though common and frequently illuminating, often seem hopelesslyconceptualandinterminable,stylized,a form of Kabukitheater;often no one is convincedat all, and,even worse, often no one learns anything. I think that a great deal of further progressmightbe madeby learningmore aboutthe facts. It is very hard to know where to stand on affirmativeaction programswithout investigatingsome empiricalquestions. Whatdo suchprograms look like? How do they differ? The term "affirmativeaction"is extremelybroad,and it covers a wide rangeof activitiesin the private and public sectors and at the national,state, and local levels. 
Do such programsactually stigmatize people, and if so in what sense? These are empiricalquestions,not (only) conceptualones. 
And what are the actual differencesin qualificationbetween the programs'beneficiariesand theirvictims,and how much difference do these differencesmake? What would happen if affirmativeaction programswere abolished? What would happenif some alternative short of affirmativeaction were adopted, such as wealthbased admissionsjudgments? What are the effects of affirmative action programsfor their intended beneficiariesin, for example, college, medicalschool, and law school? Do such programsmake people better off, and if so in what sense?4 
These questionsareimportantbecausewhen progresscannotbe made on conceptual matters or on issues in high-level theory, it might instead be made by investigatingfacts. This is the great promise of empiricalwork: to enable progress and even closure when conceptualdebates produceuncertainty,holy wars,or blank stares. I hypothesize, for example, that many people would be skepticalof affirmativeaction programsto the extent that the record shows that they involve hiringpeople whose qualificationsare not marginallylower, but actuallymuch lower than those of their (majoritygroup)competitors. It also seems likely that manycritics of affirmativeaction would be less criticalif it appearedthat the 
seems to me to be the most valuable contribution to the affirmative action debate in the last decade. abolition of affirmativeaction would mean that only a handfulof AfricanAmericanswould be able to attend the majorlaw schools. 
When people disagree on high principle, they can often be broughtinto agreement,or at least make progress,if they investigate the facts.5 In the context of affirmativeaction we need much more in the way of facts. A SupremeCourtbrief dealingwith the consequences of a principle of colorblindnesswould be far more helpfulthan a briefquotingfrompast cases andpushingconceptual arguments one way rather than another. The discussion by Cunninghamand Menon is very muchin this spiritinsofaras comparativework bringsactual experienceto bear on equalityclaims. 
II. AGAINST RULES, AGAINST JUDICIAL RESOLUTIONS6 
It is tempting to think that the Supreme Court has erred in maintaining its casuistical, rule-free, fact-specific course in the context of affirmativeaction. Thiscoursemightwell seem to represent a failure of the rule of law. But there are good reasons for the Court to have followed this path. No clear constitutional commitment forbids affirmativeaction programs;as a matter of text and history,the attackon such programsis remarkablyweak.7 It is imperativethat constitutionallaw not be used to strikedown political judgmentsabout which reasonablepeople differ and to which the Constitution does not clearly speak - especially in light of the absence of much factual knowledge by the judiciary of domestic or internationalexperienceswith affirmativeaction. My emphasison the centralityof facts to the legal questionis thus a reasonfor caution from the judiciary,which ought not to invoke a controversial readingof the Constitutionwhen it is at least possible that a good understanding of the facts would lead in another direction. 
At the same time, it would be wrong to celebrate the democratic character of the institutions that have adopted affirmative action programs. On the contrary, the nation has not, until recently, had much of a debate about affirmative action, and some of the relevant programs have been adopted with far too little deliberation and far too little democracy. In these circumstances, the Court has adopted, perhaps by inadvertence, an intriguing alternative to the three conventional options of validation, invalidation, and denial of certiorari. That alternative consists of rulings that draw sharp at 

See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT (1996). 
tention to underlyingquestionsof policy and principle- whichactivatespoliticaldebate - but that do not displacepublicdiscussion and that leave a great deal undecided. This may well be taken as a democraticapproachto judicialreview, one that falls in the basic categoryof representation-reinforcement. 
I think that Cunninghamand Menon fortify this basic point. 
They show that any simple solution to the problem may overlook the wide range of possible approaches,and their investigationof India reveals that a nation in some ways like our own has approachedthe issue quite differently. We need much more work of this kindin constitutionallaw. A judicialforeclosureof experimentation informedby internationalexperiencemay well be hopelessly parochial. The point applies not only to the law of equality, but also to other areas of constitutionallaw;the approachto libel law, for example,maywell be improvedby seeing how other nationsdo things. 
III. NOTES ON COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONALISM 
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the discussion by Cunninghamand Menon involves its depictionof a path not taken by the United States. Recall that India maintainsa list of 3,500 "backwardclasses"and that empiricalfactors,includingsocial discrimination,educationaldeprivation,and economicstatus,are used to determinegroupstatus. Some groups- the most disadvantaged - have their own independent quotas, generally proportionalto population. Other groups also receive a reserve, but one smaller than their population share. Individualentitlementsmay depend on whetherthe relevantindividualshave been raisedin privileged circumstances.Thusthere is a careful,elaborate,and quite refined methodfor determininghow governmentpolicieswill counteractor even dismantlethe system of caste. India appears,in short, to be engaged in a process of social engineeringthat goes well beyond anythingin Americanpractice. 
A full assessmentof India'sprogramwould requireanswersto two questions: (1) Does the Indianapproachmake sense for India? (2) Wouldthat approach,or some variationon that approach,make sense for the United States? I cannot attempt a full assessment here, but let me venturea few puzzlesandthoughts. The firstquestion itself raises several questions. 
Does this kind of close attention to caste backgroundincrease or decrease social antagonism? Timur Kuranhas written of the dangersof "ethnification,"in which small shocks to a system can shape in the firstinstance.) create widespread consciousness of ascriptive (or other) differences, in a way that eventuallycauses segregation,resentment,hatred, and even violence.8 Is there any similar problem in India? Cunninghamand Menon suggest the possibility of an affirmative answer. A great risk of race-consciousor ethnicity-consciouspolicies is that they can heighten attention to questions of race and ethnicity in a way that compromisessocial cohesion. (Of course social cohesion is not the only social goal, and may not be in good 
Does the system create, or is it perceived to create, a kind of caste spoils system? Judgmentsabout the degree of disadvantage are hardly a purely scientific enterprise, and controversialjudgments are likely to enter into any decisionaboutwho countsas sufficientlydisadvantaged.Thereis also a naturalriskhere of strategic and self-interestedbehavior,in which groupsjockey with one another for position as "most disadvantaged,"with harmful consequences for society as a whole. Nor is it an unambiguousgood if membersof one or anothergroup play the game of "morevictimized than thou." Does this happen in India? 
Does this system significantlyweaken the Indian economy? Does it compromiseperformance-relatedgoals, and if so to what extent? It is surely imaginablethat such a system might compromise merit,rightlyconceived (thoughof coursethis is a contestable ideal). From what Cunninghamand Menon have said, however, there is no clear answerto this question. 
The fact that India seems to have arrived at its approach throughsomethingclose to agreement(if that is a fact) is extremely illuminating,but it is not by itself a sufficientreason to think that the approachis justified. It would be helpful if Cunninghamand Menon would, in the future,say a bit more about the above questions. Their currentdiscussionfocuses more on describingthe Indian practice than on demonstrating its success, or even on identifying the criteria by which success or failure might be measured. 
What about America? Cunninghamand Menon appearto believe that America should have taken the road suggestedby some Justicesin Bakke: that is, the Courtshouldhave allowedthe political branchesto concludethat past social discriminationis sufficient to justify affirmative action programs.9 I very much agree with this judgment: if the nation, or a state, would like to compensate for the continuing effects of past discrimination, there should be no constitutional problem so long as the program is reasonably well-tailored. 
The Court should have allowed the government room to maneuver in this way, and future courts should allow the democratic process to handle this sharply contested issue in any reasonable manner.10 But the further question remains: Should the political process in America attempt to do something like what India has done? 
The most obvious response is that this is a genuinely academic question. There is no possibility that the United States would attempt to identify the fifty groups, let alone the 3,500 groups, which ought to qualify as backward classes. But as in India, the existence of a political consensus or obstacle cannot be decisive; perhaps the consensus or obstacle is wrong. Our own anticaste principle, reflected in our history and our practices, seems to emphasize highly visible identifying characteristics (most notably race and gender), on the theory that such characteristics present the greatest opportunities for unjustified and pervasive subordination. The anticaste idea builds narrowly from the cases of African Americans to pick up women and the handicapped (with a partial, limited inclusion of homosexuals). This limitation is not entirely without appeal. A decent society does not humiliate its members,1l and humiliation is especially likely when the government discriminates against people whose characteristics are highly visible. (Of course it is not limited to those cases.) 
In addition, and perhaps most importantly, it is easiest to maintain a caste society, even when market forces are quite vigorous, when the characteristics that lead to lower-caste status are highly visible. It is in such circumstances that customers and coworkers can most easily entrench existing inequality.12 It is in such circumstances that rational discrimination may result in the use of sex and race as proxies. And it is in such circumstances that screening strat 
and Blackmun, JJ., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part). 
F.3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996), was a mistake, indeed a form of hubris; a lower court should not forbid educational institutions from proceeding in this way without a much clearer signal from the Supreme Court. 
Goldblum trans., 1996). 
Harry J. Holzer & Keith R. Ihlanfeldt, Customer Discrimination and Employment Outcomes for Minority Workers, 113 Q.J. ECON.835 (1998). egies may perpetuatesocial subordination.13Marketforces are especially unpromisingcorrectives to caste-like aspects of society when a highlyvisible characteristicis at work in the context of systemic social disadvantages. 
None of these points suggeststhat this limited anticasteprinciple, understoodby reference to American understandingsand experiences,is ideal, even for America. Surelythe anticasteprinciple does not exhaustthe content of the notion of equality. At a minimum, there is also a place for an antidiscriminationprinciple,for fairequalityof opportunity(an idea that cutsvery broadly),andfor programsof redistributiondesignedto ensurethat everyonelives in minimallydecent conditions. These ideas overlapwiththe anticaste principlebut are independentof it. It is even possible to thinkthat the three ideas would do most of the good work done by the anticaste effortsin India,perhapsmoresuccessfully.Thus,for example, I might speculatethat an effort to ensure fair equalityof opportunity, andminimallydecent conditionsfor all, bearssomethingof the same relation to the Indian experience as a negative income tax bears to minimumwage legislation. A negativeincome tax is a far more effective and directway of assistingthe poor than a minimum wage increase.14So too, an insistence on fair equalityof opportunity and minimallydecent conditionsmight well be a far more effective and direct way of dealing with systemicdisadvantagesthan India'sextremelycomplex affirmativeaction program. 
For America, with its very differenthistory,a large question is whether a limited anticaste principle,suitably supplementedwith these other ideals, is not a better approachto the problem of inequalitythan an approachthat would attemptcompensatorymeasures for a wide range of socially disadvantagedgroups. It is even possible to wonder whether India might not have done better to adopt a narroweranticaste principle for the most disadvantaged groups,and to attemptto promote other equalitygoals with other policies, includingbetter education and job training,and minimal economic and social guaranteesfor all, ensuringagainstdesperate conditions.15But it is very hardto disentanglethis normativejudgment from an awarenessof political and culturalunderstandings, whichobviouslydivergebetween Indiaand America,perhapsespecially so in their differentconceptionsof what it means to undo a system of caste. 
CONCLUSION 
Forconstitutionalpurposes,the Americanequalityprinciplehas been an anticasteprinciple- one that forbids governmentfrom turninga morallyirrelevantand highlyvisible characteristicinto a systemicbasisfor second-classcitizenship. Thisprincipleought not to be taken to authorizefederaljudges to invalidatereasonableaffirmativeaction programs. The appropriatecontent of such programsshould be a democraticratherthan a judicialresponsibility; the most extreme judicial attacks on affirmativeaction programs are a form of hubris. 
On the other hand, we know far too little to declare that our currentprogramsare workingwell. There are two promisingpaths for the future,both of them involvingfacts. The firstis to learn a greatdeal more aboutthe operations,achievements,and failuresof multiple approaches, race-conscious and otherwise, and to see whichof them providesa good model for the future.16The second is to see what might be learned from the experience of other nations. The analysisprovidedby Cunninghamand Menon offers no unambiguouslessonsfor the United States,but it offersa greatdeal of illuminationabout our possibilitiesand prospects. 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 81 (2D SERIES) 
David Schkade,* Cass R. Sunstein,** and Daniel Kahneman*** 
How does group deliberation affect individual judgments? How does the outcome of jury deliberations differ from some aggregation of individual decisions pre-deliberation? Speculation is not difficult. Perhaps juries converge toward the mean of individual judgments; perhaps juries move away from, or toward, the high or low of individual extremes. Perhaps juries approach an outcome that is more just or more accurate; perhaps juries produce more predictable and less erratic judgments, so that unpredictability at the individual level, or at the level of the mean or median of (six or twelve) individual judgments, does not exist at the jury level. A pervasive question is whether a deliberating jury has the effect of producing outcomes that treat the similarly situated similarly—perhaps in terms of civil or criminal liability (do people who have engaged in the same conduct receive the same verdict?), perhaps in the determination of appropriate damage awards, either compensatory or punitive (do similarly situated people receive the same awards?).1 
We attempt to make some progress on these questions. We do so principally by reporting the results of an extensive study of mock * Professor of Management and William R. Spriegel Fellow, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Austin. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. *** Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University. The authors are grateful to Exxon Company, U.S.A. for support of the research in this Article. Exxon bears no responsibility for our analysis or our conclusions; the data reported and the opinions expressed here belong to the authors. For helpful comments we are grateful to Robert MacCoun, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner. 1 For concerns along this line, see BMW of North America v. Gore, 116 S Ct 1589 (1996); John Calvin Jeffries, Jr., A Comment on the Constitutionality of Punitive Damages, 72 Va L Rev 139 (1986). juries (over 500 juries in total). In the study, these juries were asked to deliberate about punitive damage awards; individual judgments were collected before the jury deliberated. To compress a long story, our principal finding is that deliberation increased both unpredictability and variance, by making large awards much larger and small awards smaller still. Thus the principal effect of deliberation is often to polarize individual judgments, a pattern that has been found in many other group decision making contexts.2 This finding—the first of its kind in the particular context of punitive damage awards—has important implications for jury awards involving both punitive and compensatory damages. It bears on group deliberation in other contexts as well. The same phenomenon of polarization that occurs in our punitive damage juries can be used to explain why a group of people moderately predisposed in favor of gun control will, after discussion, tend to be more than moderately predisposed in that direction, and why a group of individuals cautiously opposed to affirmative action is likely, after discussion, to oppose affirmative action with considerable fervor. 
The study reported here has the advantage of being extremely close to—in fact part of the design is based on—an earlier one involving not deliberating juries but responses of 899 individuals to punitive damage cases.3 Our earlier study showed a remarkable consensus in individual judgments, made along a bounded numerical scale, about a series of personal injury cases. That study therefore found that with respect to the underlying moral evaluation, different (synthetic, non-deliberating4) juries are likely to reach similar 2 See, e.g., David Myers and Helmut Lamm, The Group Polarization Phenomenon, 83 Psych. Bulletin 602 (1976); Daniel Isenberg, Group Polarization: A Critical Review and Meta-Analysis, 50 J. Personality and Social Psychology 1141 (1986). 3 See Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale LJ 2071 (1998). This presentation is geared to analysis of the legal issues; the underlying data, and relevant psychological points, are presented in more detail in Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, 16 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 49 (1998). 4 As explained below, synthetic juries consisted of random groups of twelve individual judgments, with the mean or median judgment of the group of twelve reflecting the “verdict.” See 107 Yale LJ at 2098. conclusions about the relative severity of different cases.5 Thus allwhite, all-poor, all-rich, all-educated, all poorly educated, all-male, all-female, all-young, and all-old juries would probably come to very similar rankings of a set of cases, at least in personal injury cases and very possibly elsewhere.6 It follows that averaging the judgments of any random group of twelve people is likely to produce a moral judgment that predicts, with a reasonably high degree of accuracy, the judgment of any other group of twelve people. At the same time, the study found that when asked to assess cases in terms of dollars, (synthetic, non-deliberating) juries become extremely unpredictable.7 They become unpredictable in the specific sense that the judgment of any particular group of twelve is a poor predictor of the judgment of other groups of twelve.8 We speculated that it is the dollar scale that accounts for evidently erratic monetary judgments in many areas of the law, including not only punitive damages but compensatory awards in areas involving libel, sexual harassment, pain and suffering,9 and intentional infliction of emotional distress.10 When juries use the dollar scale, their verdicts probably do not treat the similarly situated similarly, with some awards that are arbitrarily high and others that are arbitrarily low. This unpredictability is also likely to produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants or in any case muffled and confusing (and to that extent costly) signals.11 
A natural question is, however, raised by these conclusions. This question is one of concern to those interested in damages, juries, and 5 Id. at 2095-2100. 6 Id. at 2097-2100. 7 Id. at 2100-2104. 8 Note that in our study we hold constant several factors that can be used to capture some of the variability in punitive damage awards, such as compensatory damages, case category, case particulars, and jurisdiction. It has been proposed by some authors that when analyzed using these factors, punitive awards are reasonably predictable. See Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J. Legal Stud. 623 (1997), Because we hold these factors constant, the unpredictability that we documented previously, and that we document here, cannot be accounted for by any of these factors. 9 See, e.g., David Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior to Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 256 (1989). 10 Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, supra, at 2131-2140. 11 See Paul Rubin et al., BMW v. Gore: Mitigating the Punitive Economics of Punitive Damages, 1997 Sup. Ct. Econ. Rev. 179, 184. deliberative processes in general12: whether a deliberating jury might reduce or even eliminate the unpredictability of dollar awards. How does the process of jury deliberation affect the remarkable moral consensus? Will different juries converge toward the same dollar amount? The answers should have implications not only for punitive awards, but also for other damage judgments, certainly when these are hard to monetize, and possibly for questions of civil and criminal liability as well and even for deliberation generally. An additional question, also important, is what happens to dollar awards when juries deliberate: As compared with individual conclusions predeliberation, do such awards tend to go up, go down, or remain the same? 
On the basis of a study of 3048 jury-eligible citizens in Phoenix, Arizona, participating in 509 mock juries, we offer two principal conclusions here, which we now state in somewhat less compressed form. The first is that juries do not produce less erratic and more predictable awards than individuals. On the contrary, deliberating juries tend to generate, with respect to dollar awards, even greater variance and unpredictability than is present in the judgments of the jurors who compose them. This is no mere technical conclusion; it suggests that the problem of erratic awards is intensified, not reduced, by deliberating juries. 
The second conclusion, a corollary of the first, is that deliberating juries significantly, and systematically, increase large punitive damage awards and also decrease small punitive damage awards. In our study, jury judgments were more lenient than individual juror judgments for cases of less serious misconduct by the defendant; for cases of moderately serious and very serious misconduct, however, jury judgments were harsher, in many cases dramatically so. In 21% of the cases, the jury verdict was as high as or higher than that of the highest individual judgment predeliberation. As we discuss below, this result is part of the general phenomenon of group polarization, in accordance with which a deliberating group tends to shift toward a more extreme version of 12 On the latter topic, see Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1997); our analysis of group polarization raises some questions for the deliberative conception of democracy, though we leave those questions largely implicit here. the views its members brought with them. The phenomenon of group polarization—with discussion amplifying initial individual tendencies, whatever they may be13—operates in accordance with identifiable mechanisms (thus far unexamined within the legal culture), which, unfortunately, do not suggest that the shifts are necessarily desirable, or that they implement any legitimate concerns of the legal system. 
What follows at the normative level? The safest and most cautious conclusion is that to the extent that unpredictable punitive damage awards raise a serious concern, the problem is magnified rather than diminished by the process of deliberation. But is the increase in awards a tribute to the benefits of collective discussion? Without an independent theory of what awards should be, the evidence found here does not rule out that hopeful conclusion. But it certainly provides no affirmative support for it, or for the suggestion that group deliberation will, in this context, increase the rationality and soundness of outcomes. On the contrary, the substantial increases of high awards and the (smaller) decreases in low awards are predictable consequences of the effects of deliberation on a scale having a lower bound but lacking an upper bound. 
In these circumstances, there are two implications for reform. The first involves the possibility, now shown to be feasible, of asking jurors to generate not a dollar figure, but a normative judgment on a bounded numerical scale. As we will explain, the deliberating juries in this study were able to use a punishment scale quite effectively; such a scale might be used as the foundation of dollar awards, in a way that could dramatically decrease unpredictability. The second implication follows from the fact that deliberation increases high awards and decreases low ones, in a way that increases variance and unpredictability. To the extent that unpredictability is a problem, our findings provide additional support for the view that punitive awards should be made not by juries, but by judges or some kind of administrative institution.14 13 Note also that mere exposure to the views of others, without discussion, has a similar amplifying effect. See David Myers, Polarizing Effects of Social Comparison, 14 J Experimental Soc. Psych. 554 (1978). 14 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, Stanford Law Review (forthcoming 2000). The point is generally discussed in Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, supra note, at 2126-2130. 
This Article comes in six parts. Part II sets the stage, with brief discussions of the problem of calculating punitive damage awards, the legal background, the existing literature on unpredictable awards, and the effects of deliberation. Part III, the heart of the Article, discusses the methodology and results of the current study. Part I V investigates group polarization and associated causal mechanisms, involving social influences and persuasive arguments. Part V discusses the implications of the study for punitive damage reform. Part VI is the conclusion. 
controversial topics in modern public law.15 To take just one example, an award of $4.9 billion against General Motors attracted a great deal of national attention in July, 1999.16 It is now clear that the due process clause imposes constraints on permissible awards.17 A number of statutes, enacted and proposed, create punitive damage “caps,”18 and high awards have become a primary impetus for tort reform in general.19 There are also controversial issues about punitive damage awards in civil rights cases, most notably sexual harassment.20 At the same time, the problems created by punitive awards bear on related questions in other areas of the law, involving, 15 See, e.g., Symposium, 1998 Wisconsin L. Rev. 1; A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869 (1998); Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice, 42 Am U L Rev 1393 ( 40 Ala. L. Rev. 705 (1989); William Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law 160-65, 184-85, 223-24 (1987).. 16 See The New York Times, July 31, 1999, Section A; Page 9; Column 3, General Motors Appeals Record Lawsuit Damages. 17 See BMW v. Gore, 116 S. Ct. 1589 (1996). 18 See generally Developments in the Law—The Civil Jury, 110 Harv L Rev 1408, 1533 n. 158 (1997) (discussing actual and proposed caps). 19 See, e.g., Product Liability Reform Act of 1997, S. 5, 105th Cong. Section 108 (1997). For general discussion, skeptical of the attention paid to high awards, see Marc Galanter, Shadow Play: The Fabled Menace of Punitive Damages, 1998 Wisconsin L Rev 1. 20 See Judy Shih and Cass R., Sunstein, Damages in Sexual Harassment Cases, in Sexual Harrassment (Catharine MacKinnon and Reva Siegel eds, forthcoming 2000). for example, compensatory damages for pain and suffering, libel, and intentional infliction of emotional distress.21 Similar problems arise whenever an administrative agency is asked to impose civil fines and also in the area of criminal sentencing.22 
Participants in the legal system are often requested to come up with some kind of judgment, factual or normative, and then to “translate” that judgment into a dollar award. In the area of punitive damages, it is necessary to make some assessment of the character of the defendant’s behavior, and then to ascertain the appropriate dollar amount to be paid to the plaintiff by way of punishment. In many domains, compensatory judgments raise similar puzzles. While juries are nominally expected to find a “fact”—what amount of money would restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante?—it is often extremely difficult to monetize the relevant harm, and normative judgments undoubtedly play a significant role.23 In the case of punitive damages, it is extremely difficult for even experts to agree on what dollar amount constitutes adequate “punishment” or produces an appropriate deterrrent signal. 
In all of these areas, the legal system is pervaded by a degree of unpredictability and variance, resulting in apparent arbitrariness, as similarly situated people are treated differently.24 An extensive study of pain and suffering cases found that as much as 40% of the awards consists of “noise,” unexplained by objective factors.25 A study of all reported sexual harassment cases was unable to connect either compensatory or punitive awards to any case characteristics that 21 See, e.g., Randall Bovgher et al., Valuing Life and Limb in Tort, 83 NW U L Rev 908 (1989); David Baldus et al., Improving Judicial Oversight of Jury Damages Assessments, 80 Iowa L Rev 1109 (1995); David Leebron, supra note. 22 See Edward L. Rubin, Punitive Damages, 1998 Wisc. L. Rev. 131. 23 See generally Michelle Anderson and Robert MacCoun, Goal Conflict i n Juror Assessments of Compensatory and Punitive Damages, 23 Law and Human Behavior 313 (1999); Patrick Atiyah, The Damages Lottery (1997). 24 See, e.g., David Leebron, supra note; Jonathan Karpoff and John Lott, O n the Determinants and Importance of Punitive Damages Awards, 42 J. L. & Econ. 527 (1998). 25 See Leebron, supra note. might be thought to explain jury judgments.26 The punitive damage area is more complicated—a point to which we will return shortly—but there is evidence of significant variability here as well.27 The most ambitious claims to the contrary attempt to show that once the compensatory award has been made, the punitive award becomes predictable to a certain degree28; but the same data show that at the time a case is filed, it is very hard to know the expected punitive award, and that there is a generally a great deal of “noise” in outcomes.29 
To understand the current study, it is necessary to understand its predecessor by the way of background. Our earlier study involved a demographically diverse set of jury-eligible citizens from Austin, Texas.30 The relevant experiment involved 28 personal injury cases, which respondents were asked to assess in one of three ways: outrageousness, on a bounded numerical scale (0 to 6); intent to punish, on a bounded numerical scale (also 0 to 6); and actual 26 See Judy Shih ad Cass R. Sunstein, Damages in Sexual Harassment Cases, forthcoming in Sexual Harassment (Catharine MacKinnon and Reva Seigel eds. 1999) 27 See Karpoff and Lott, supra note. There is some dispute over the degree of unpredictability. Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J. Legal Stud. 623 (1997), shows that the log of punitive awards is predicted reasonably well from a set of objective characteristics of cases i n which awards were made; in particular, it is shown that the compensatory award is a fairly good predictor of the punitive award. See id. at 644. In terms of real dollars rather than log dollars, however, there is a degree of unpredictability in the Eisenberg data as well, because the severe skewness of the awards creates a possibility of either small or huge awards in identical cases. See also Karpoff and Lott, supra. 
Note also that predictability can be understood in different ways: (a) predictability exists when case characteristics predict punitive awards; (b) predictability exists when the judgments of one group of six or twelve predicts the judgments of another group of six or twelve; (c) predictability exists when an actor can assess expected liability when something goes wrong. Our principal emphasis here is on (b); Eisenberg’s emphasis is on (a); both are relevant to (c). Of course the three are closely related in practice. 28 See Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J Legal Stud 623 (1997). 29 See Karpoff and Lott, supra note. 30 See Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale LJ 2071 (1998). awards, on the unbounded scale of dollars. As noted, our principal findings were twofold. People’s moral judgments are widely shared and predictable, in fact strikingly so, at least in the personal injury cases studied in the experiment.31 But in spite of this point, and in the presence of shared moral judgments, people’s judgments on a dollar scale—the scale, or “response mode,” favored by the legal system—are highly unpredictable in the sense that the median judgment of any group of twelve people is an extremely poor predictor of the median judgment of any other group of twelve people.32 Lacking a reliable understanding of how deliberation would affect individual judgments, we used the median of groups of twelve individuals, randomly selected from our pool of 899 and combined into a large number of “synthetic juries.”33 At least in the experimental setting, the primary identifiable source of the noise is the difficulty jurors have in translating their punitive intent into dollars. Dollar awards are highly variable despite the existence of shared moral judgments. 
variability, we explored a link between the dollar scale and psychological research on the problem of “magnitude scaling,” which occurs when people are asked to assess stimuli—the brightness of lights, the loudness of noise—along an unbounded numerical scale.34 This research shows a great deal of variability in assessments. The underlying problem is that people are being asked to scale without a “modulus,” that is, without a standard that would help give meaning to various numbers on the scale.35 Consider the words of one of the subjects in the relevant experiments: “I felt freer to use numbers over a wide range. I liked the idea that I could just relax and contemplate the tones. When there was a fixed standard I felt more constrained 31 Id. at 2097-2100. 32 See id. at 2100-2103. 33 We relied on evidence that median judgments are a good predictor. See James Davis, Group Decision Making and Quantatitive Judgments: A Consensus Model, in Understanding Group Behavior 35, 47 (Erich White and James Davis eds., 1996); Shari Diamond and Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the Jury, 26 L & Society Rev. 513, 553 ( effects of the sort observed in the study here. See SKS at 2101 at n. 128. 34 See S.S. Stevens, Psychophysics (1975). 35 SKS at 2106-2107. to try to multiply and divide loudnesses, which is hard to do; but with no standard I could just place the tone where it seemed to belong.”36 
The key point is that when a modulus is supplied, the variability greatly decreases. Juries asked to assess punitive damage awards are in effect asked to scale without a modulus. Unpredictable judgments are a natural result even when people do not disagree about the significant issues37—even when, that is, there is a kind of “bedrock” moral judgment in place. If this point is correct, it helps explain the observed variability in dollar awards in many areas of the law. It also helps explain the disparities that led to the enactment of the Sentencing Guidelines38; before the guidelines, judges were being asked, in effect, to scale without a modulus, since the relevant scale (years) has a great deal in common with the dollar scale (i.e., bounded below at zero, but with great discretion at the high end). 
and a natural question is whether deliberating juries would produce similar or quite different results. Perhaps deliberation would reduce variability.39 In any case a test of deliberating juries would help to 36 See S.S, Stevens, Psychophysics 37 (1975). 37 For similar results, see Michael J. Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, Law & Human Behav., Spring 1997, at 243. 38 See Sandra Shane-DuBow et al., US Department of Justice, Sentencing Reform in the United States (1985). 39 In a series of papers, Michael Saks has argued that juries actually reduce variance. Saks’ research began by comparing twelve person juries to six person juries, see the overview in Michael Saks, The Smaller the Jury, the Greater the Unpredictability, 79 Judicature 263 (1996)—a comparison on which our study here does not bear. But the analysis has been extended to comparisons of juries and judges, with the suggestion that juries are likely to produce less variability by virtue of their numbers. See Michael Saks, Do We Really Know Anything About the Behavior of the Tort Litigation System—and Why Not? 140 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 1147 ( Unrecognized Benefits of Aggregation and Sampling in the Trial of Mass Torts, with Peter D. Blanck, 44 Stanford Law Review 815 ( Variability in Civil Jury Awards, with Lisa A. Hollinger, Roselle L. Wissler, David L. Evans, and Allen J. Hart, 21 Law and Human Behavior 243 (1997). This basic conclusion is briefly challenged in a footnote in Robert MacCoun, Inside the black box: What empirical research tells us about decisionmaking by civil juries, in Verdict: Assessing the civil jury system 137, 178 n. 26 (Robert E. Litan ed. 1993): “The argument is based on statistical sampling theory, but confirm or deny the wisdom of the decision, for purposes of creating synthetic juries, to treat the median judgment of a group of twelve as the likely judgment of any deliberating group. An alternative possibility, referred to in the introduction, was to assume that there would be group polarization—that the process of collective deliberation would move the group further in the direction of the initial tendency suggested by the median of individual judgments. Hence our main purpose in this study was to examine the effects of jury deliberation on dollar awards and in particular to see whether deliberation would increase or decrease predictability. In the process we also hoped, as a secondary goal, to find out whether the original findings—strikingly shared moral judgments but erratic awards—would be replicated with a new sample of citizens from a different state, and with new and richer case materials. 
A. Method 
Jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited and paid by a survey firm. Participants were randomly assigned to a sixperson jury, and to a response mode order; some juries judged dollar awards first and punishment ratings second, and others completed the tasks in the opposite order. Six juries (out of a total of 480) had only five members because an insufficient number of participants showed up at a given appointment time. A pilot test of 29 juries was conducted in Phoenix to test the materials and procedure. Because adjustments were very minor, these juries were added to the main sample and the combined sample was analyzed together. Therefore, a total of 3048 citizens participated in 509 juries. the analogy between empaneled juries and random samples is an imperfect one. Thus, it is a plausible hypothesis, but requires more rigorous testing than it has received to date.” We have attempted a more rigorous test here, finding that juries produce more variability as compared with the mean of individual predeliberation judgments. This finding suggests, though it does not prove, that juries will produce more variability in awards than judges (a suggestion supported by the possibility that judicial experience with a wide range of cases will introduce the equivalent of a “modulus” by which to discipline dollar awards). The procedure consisted of four parts. In Part 1, all participants in a given session viewed a videotape for the case they would consider, read the corresponding written materials, and recorded their personal judgment of the appropriate punitive damage award or punishment rating (Table 1). In Part 2, participants were randomly assigned to a jury of six members, and given 30 minutes to deliberate on and reach a unanimous verdict on a punitive damage amount or a severity of punishment rating. Punishment 
How much should the defendant be punished because of their actions, and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses the jury’s judgment of the appropriate level of punishment. 
Severe 3 4 5 6 7 8 $ Damages 
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the amount of punitive damages that the jury agreed on in the blank below. $ _____________________ 
In Part 3, a new individual response form was distributed, which asked them to record a second personal judgment for the same case, using the complementary type of verdict (punishment rating or dollar damages) from the one they had already used. I n Part 4, the jury again deliberated to reach a unanimous verdict on this second type of judgment for the same case. Thus, for each individual, and for each jury, we have both a dollar award and a punishment rating for the case they considered. 
The stimuli consisted of fifteen personal injury scenarios.40 An example is provided in the Appendix. A videotape was prepared for each case, in which a professional actor read the text of the case and all instructions aloud. To maximize comprehension, participants were required both to view the videotape and to read the written version. Firm size (annual profits of $100-200 million) and compensatory damages ($200,000) were held constant for all cases. Thus, the variability we observe cannot be accounted for by a model that depends on variability in compensatory damage awards. B. Results 
Despite the half hour time limit for deliberation, 91% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on the punishment scale (a total of 461 verdicts) and 82% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on a dollar amount (a total of 416 verdicts). The remainder had not reached a verdict when the time limit expired; these were treated as hung. All further analyses were conducted on the 401 juries that reached both a punishment verdict and a dollar verdict.41 Because there were no significant differences between response mode orders (i.e., dollarspunishment or punishment-dollars), we pooled verdicts made by dollar-first juries and dollar-second juries in our analyses (punishment verdicts were treated similarly). 40 Of these ten were more elaborate versions of the same scenarios used i n Kahneman, Schkade and Sunstein. supra, and five were completely new scenarios which, like the first 10, were based on real cases (Table 1). The main substantive elaboration on the original scenarios was the addition of a paragraph of closing arguments by attorneys for each side. 41 We chose the more conservative path of focusing on juries with complete responses to ensure that comparisons between punishment and dollar verdicts, and between individuals and juries, were based on the same set of respondents. Recreating our Tables and Figures with all available responses produces the same pattern of results, with some slight differences in exact numbers. Case In the aggregate, jury punishment and dollar verdicts produced very similar rankings of the cases: there is a rank correlation of .88 between the jury dollar and punishment verdicts in Table 3.42 42 The Spearman rank correlation is an index of agreement between rankings that is analogous to first converting each column to ranks (from 1 to 15 in this Case case) and then computing the correlation between the two sets of ranks. It i s interpreted similarly to conventional correlations. 
A view of the overall results for individuals and juries in Table 3 appears to show a striking and simple picture: juries produce higher dollar awards than the individuals who compose them. This pattern is also reflected, to a lesser degree, in punishment ratings. Higher jury awards are not confined to the middle of the award distribution, and also show up clearly in the extreme low (10th percentile) and high (90th percentile) ranges of the distribution as well (Table 4). 
This dramatic upward shift is indeed an important part of the picture, but it does not tell the whole story. A closer look at Table 3 reveals a systematic difference among cases in the degree to which juries are harsher than individuals: the more egregious the case, the greater is the margin by which jury awards exceed individual awards. For the five cases with the lowest awards, individual and jury awards are approximately equal, but for the middle five cases jury awards are twice as large, and for the top five cases five times as large. Indeed, on the punishment scale, deliberation actually causes cases the bottom five cases (those below the midpoint of the scale) to drop, and those at or above the midpoint to rise. 
As we will see, this is a characteristic response pattern when group polarization is present. Thus it appears that polarization occurs in the underlying moral judgments, as indicated by the punishment ratings, and that the effect of this shift is amplified when expressions must be made on the unbounded dollar scale. The fact that dollar awards for the least severe cases did not decline is probably a consequence of the absolute minimum award of zero, below which awards could not go, rather than of a lack of a shift in underlying judgments. 
A more direct measure of polarization can be computed by comparing jury verdicts to the judgments of the specific jurors that compose them, regardless of which case they considered. If group polarization is indeed occurring, we would expect that juries whose individuals initially judge a case to be more severe would more frequently produce high jury verdicts, compared to the predeliberation judgments of individuals. The reverse would be true of juries whose individuals initially judged a case to be less severe. Note that this contrast can happen for the same legal case, depending on the individual judgments jurors bring to deliberation. 
To summarize the pre-deliberation judgments of jurors, we use three logical benchmarks as points of comparison: the median, the maximum, and the minimum judgments of the individuals in a jury. A clear pattern emerges on all three of these measures, as depicted in Figure 1. As a jury’s individuals judge a defendant’s behavior to deserve more severe punishment, the tendency of the jury to exceed the median dollar award of its members rises rapidly, reaching 100% at an average rating of 7 or more. 
s u J u 
J 1 e h r o r u J y r u J r o r u J m u m i x a M = > y r u J r o r r o r a i u d J e u J n M > y r u J % % % % % 0 0 0 0 0 % % % % % 0 0 0 0 0 % % % % % % 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 % % % % % 0 0 0 0 0 7 g -6 in t a 6 R 5 t n e 5 m - h 4 s i 6 - t 5 n 
e 5 - h 4 s m i n u -4 P 3 r o r 3 u - J 2 a r -2 e 1 v e g KSS98* * KSS98 numbers are from the large firm/isolation condition, which is directly comparable to the individual condition in the current study. 
In addition, the ordering of case evaluations closely matches that in our previous study. There are ten cases that are common to both studies, and evaluations made by Texans in the previous study are highly predictive of those made by Arizonans in the current study—the rank correlation between the two samples is .90 for punishment ratings and .98 for dollar awards. Finally, the absence of an effect of response mode order suggest that prior deliberation about a case, and even agreeing on a punishment rating, does little to reduce unpredictability in dollar awards. Thus, the current larger study, with several nontrivial changes, confirms the conclusion of our previous study that individual moral judgments are predictable and shared, but that expressing them in dollars produces unpredictability and confusion, and especially so in juries. 
Plainly many of the 509 deliberating juries were subject to group polarization. Indeed, we believe that this is the first experimental evidence of group polarization in punitive damage awards.49 It is highly likely that the same pattern would be found 49 Group polarization has been shown with simulated juries in the context of guilt and innocence. See David Myers and Martin Kaplan, Group-Induced Polarization in Simulated Juries, 2 Personality and Soc. Psych. Bulletin 63 (1976). with compensatory awards involving hard-to-monetize injuries, such as libel, civil rights violations, pain and suffering, and emotional distress. In this section, we provide a general discussion of group polarization, both to explain our results here and because the phenomenon, which has received no sustained attention in the legal literature, is of general interest. 
A. The Basic Phenomenon 
Group polarization is one of the most common patterns of difference between individual decisions and deliberating groups,50 and it has been found in many diverse tasks. Polarization “is said to occur when an initial tendency of individual group members toward a given direction is enhanced [by] group discussion.”51 The result is It might be tempting to suggest that the results are partly or largely a function of the decision rule, in this case unanimity. Perhaps the requirement of unanimity pushed people further in the direction of the dominant view, without any group polarization, an idea that might be fortified with the thought that those with outlier positions (in favor of extreme awards) would be especially likely to hold out against a compromise view, thus producing pressure toward the extremes. In the abstract it seems plausible to suggest that the decision rule would matter, but as an explanation for our findings, it seems less plausible in light of the fact that 20% of the jury judgments were as high as or higher than that of the highest individual judgment pre-deliberation. Note also that numerous studies show that group polarization occurs regardless of the decision rule and hence it is extremely unlikely that the unanimity rule accounted for other results here: “The shift effect is about equally robust regardless of whether a group decision is required.” See David Myers and Helmut Lamm, The Group Polarization Phenomenon, 83 Psych. Bulletin 602, 611 (1976). Of course we cannot exclude the possibility that the results would be somewhat different without a unanimity rule; this is in fact a good area for subsequent empirical study, especially in light of continuing questions about the consequences of requirements of jury unanimity. 50 Some studies suggest that the median predeliberation judgment is a good predictor of outcomes; but in some situations groups have indeed been observed to make quite different decisions from those of the median or average of individuals that compose them . See Norbert Kerr, Robert MacCoun, and Geoffrey Kramer, Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individuals and Groups, 103 Psychological Review 687 (1996); Daniel Gigone and Reid Hastie, Proper Analysis Of The Accuracy Of Group Judgments. 121 Psychological Bulletin149 (1997). 51 See Isenberg, supra note, at 1141. that groups often make more extreme decisions—both higher or lower—than would the typical or average individual in the group. 
Consider some examples. (a) A group of moderately profeminist women will be more strongly profeminist after discussion.52 (b) Citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid.53 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.54 (d) After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question.55 It should follow, for example, that a group moderately predisposed in favor of affirmative action should strongly favor it after discussion; that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort would, after discussion, sharply oppose the war; that a group moderately predisposed to hire a certain job candidate will, after discussion, support the application with considerable enthusiasm. The phenomenon has conspicuous importance to the operation of deliberating bodies, including juries; but it has been barely noticed in the legal culture. Obviously the pattern described above is exactly what would be predicted if group polarization were at work.56 52 See D.G. Myers, Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization, 28 Human Relations 699 (1975). 53 Brown at 224. 54 D.G. Myers and G.D. Bishop, The Enhancement of Dominant Attitudes in Group Discuission, 20 J Personality and Soc. Psych. 286 (1976), 55 See id. 56 There is one difference: In the group polarization studies, the phenomenon is usually defined by reference to scales having two sides, with a “neutral” midpoint. This is the arrangement by which it makes sense to speak of initial dispositions and their aggravation. Dollar awards, by contrast, have no “neutral” midpoint. Our study suggests that what matters is the psychological predisposition—to increase the tendency in which the group is leaning—rather than the methodological definition. Hence the processes that produce polarization occur even in the absence of a defined midpoint. We are grateful to Robert MacCoun for help with this point. B. Risky Shifts, Cautious Shifts 
Group polarization was first found in a series of experiments involving risk-taking decisions.57 Before 1961, conventional wisdom had been that as compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decision-makers—for example a committee or board—would be likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. But the relevant experiments found otherwise; they identified what has become known as the “risky shift.”58 A group of deliberating people was more likely to take risks than are the individual members. 
In these experiments, people were asked to assess the probability that a new company, for which some person A is considering employment, will prove “financially sound.” Group decisions showed a repeated pattern toward greater risk-taking—that is, after discussion, participants tended to assess the likelihood of financial soundness as consistently higher than the median judgment of the group predeliberation. But later studies showed that under certain conditions, it was possible to induce a “cautious shift” as well. Where the judgments of individual group members were relatively cautious, deliberation would produce a strong tendency toward greater caution. Thus ”a group discussion moves decisions to more extreme points in the direction of the original inclination . . . , which means shift to ether risk or caution in the direction of the original disposition, and the size of the shift increases with the degree of the initial polarization.”59 Similar results have been found in many contexts, involving, for example, questions about economic aid, architecture, political leaders, race, feminism, and judgments of guilt or innocence.60 The parallel here is of course the increase in large awards (for juries whose members were individually disposed in this direction) and the decrease in small awards (for juries whose members were originally so disposed). 57 We draw in this and the following paragraph on Brown, supra note, at 58 See J.A.F. Stoner, A Comparison of Individual an d Group Decisions Including Risk, unpublished master’s thesis, School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; J.A.F. Stoner, Risky and Cautious Shifts in Group Decisions, 4 J Experimental Social Psych. 442 (1968). 59 Brown, supra, at 211. 60 See id. C. Two Mechanisms 
There have been two main explanations for group polarization, both of which have been extensively investigated.61 Massive support has been found on behalf of both explanations.62 
The first involves social comparison.63 On this view, people want to be perceived favorably by other group members (and also to perceive themselves favorably), and once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such by comparison to other group members.64 The result is to press the group’s position toward one or another extreme. 
The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort—in the case of risk-taking, for example, they may want to be perceived (and to perceive themselves) as moderate risktakers, and their choice of position may be partly a product of this 61 Isenberg, supra, and Brown, supra, review this literature. We draw largely on work done in the 1970s, because that was the period in which group polarization was studied most extensively, and because the principal findings, for our purposes, have not been challenged in the subsequent literature (with several exceptions to be noted below). 62 Note that conformity does not explain group polarization. People are not attempting to conform, even under the social comparison theory; they are attempting to maintain their relative position, and the revelation of the views of others shifts people’s conception of what judgment is necessary to maintain that position. See Myers, supra note, at 562, indicating that people “want to perceive themselves as somewhat different from others” and that “people want to differentiate themselves from others, to a small extent and in the right direction.” 63 There is an obvious connection between this point and recent work i n economics on reputational influences on behavior. See Timur Kuran, Private Truths, Public Lies (1996). Note, however, that the social comparison approach emphasizes presentation of self to self, as well as self to others. “By ‘oneupping’ the self-presentations of others, people can see and peresent themselves as basically similar, yet desirably distinctive.” Myers, supra, at 562. 64 On signalling generally, see Eric Posner, Symbols, Signals, and the Law (forthcoming 2000). desire.65 No one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.66 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. A key claim here is that information alone about the actual positions of others—without discussion—will produce a shift, and evidence has confirmed this fact. Research shows that this effect helps explain a shift toward caution (the “cautious shift”) as well.67 
The second explanation emphasizes the role of persuasive arguments.68 The key point here is that an individual’s choice or position on an issue is a function of the number and persuasiveness of arguments presented. The choice therefore moves in the direction of the position held by the most confident and outspoken members of the group. Because a group that is inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. 
The persuasive arguments theory begins with the intuition that if a group is deliberating about some difficult question with a factual answer (how many countries are there in Africa, for example), discussion will produce some movement, not toward the mean, but toward the minority view on which one or a few members have 65 For a quite vivid demonstration of such a process in the enactment of the Clean Air Act, one that does not, however, identify the mechanisms, discussed here, see Bruce Ackerman, John Millian, and Donald Elliott, Toward a Theory of Statutory Evolution: The Federalization of Environmental Law, 1 J. L. Econ. & Organization 313 (1985). 66 “Once the real locations of the mean was known, should it not be the case, granting that everyone wanted to see himself as reasonably audacious, that those who were really below the mean would be motivated to adopt riskier positions and so change the mean and produce the risky shift?” Brown, supra, at 214. 67 Investigations of social influence have emphasized both one-upmanship and the removal of pluralistic ignorance, that is, ignorance of what other people think (or are willing to say they think). Note that it is implicit in these findings that people seem to want not to conform, but to be different from others in a desirable way. “To be virtuous . . . is to be different from the mean – in the right direction and to the right degree.” Brown, supra note, at 469. 68 There is an obvious connection between this theory and recent work i n economics on informational influences on behavior and in particular on information cascades. See David Hirchleifer, The Blind Leading The Blind, i n The New Economics of Human Behavior (1997). accurate information. Of course many of the questions involving group polarization do not have purely factual answers. But a key aspect of those discussions is that the person with the correct answer is likely to state his view with a high degree of confidence, and also be able to make some argument in favor of that view. Novel arguments, bringing up fresh points, are especially likely to be persuasive. Thus it is suggested that the “important thing that happens in discussion is that individual arguments are expressed and become fully shared.”69 
When people hear arguments that they perceive as valid, or find to be new, they will shift in the direction suggested by those arguments. Discussion produces larger “argument pools.” If a group of moderately feminist women become more feminist, a group moderately opposed to gun control more extremely so, and so forth, the reason is that the “argument pool” of any such group will contain a preponderance of arguments in the direction suggested. Once the set of individual arguments is exposed to all individual members, there will be an inclination in the direction of initial inclinations, but more extremely and intensely so. ”Because the choice dilemmas have total argument pools in which the balance favors either risk or caution, the larger sample of the pool made available to all in discussion will produce either a risky shift or a cautius shift according to the direction of prediscussion inclinations as revealed in the means of initial decisions.”70 The suggestion is that group polarization will occur when convincing arguments produce a shift in the direction of prediscussion inclinations, revealed in the means of the initial decisions. At the same time, the persuasive arguments theory suggests that there will be “depolarization” if and when new persuasive arguments are offered that are opposite to the direction initially favored by group members, and there is evidence for this phenomenon as well. 71 69 Brown, supra, at 219. 70 Brown, supra, at 219. 71 A third possibility is that hearing other similar opinions produces greater confidence in individual positions, opening members to a more extreme judgment in the same direction. raised recently by Heath and Gonzales . See Chip Heath and Richard Gonzales, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence But Not Decision Quality: Evidence Against Information 
Of course it is not the case that all groups polarize. There are two qualifications to the claims made thus far. First, these are statistical regularities, and some groups will not polarize at all, a statement confirmed by many individual juries in our study. Second, depolarization, rather than polarization, will be found when the relevant group consists of individuals drawn equally from two extremes.72 Thus if people who initially favor caution are put together with people who initially favor risk-taking, the group judgment will move toward the middle. It is remarkable, then, that despite the presence of some groups who did the opposite, the groups in our study who did polarize were numerous enough to cause the aggregate pattern of our results to mimic polarization. 
A. Is There A Problem? What Kind of Problem? 
The group polarization phenomenon (and other evidence involving group performance) raises questions about the common belief that groups, and in particular juries, generally make better decisions than individuals. The common belief does seem sensible if only because the averaging of multiple judgments should reduce errors and variance—even if group deliberation has no effect on individual judgments.73 But a now considerable literature, using a wide variety of tasks, concludes that deliberating groups hold no generalized advantage over individuals in the performance of judgment tasks.74 
More specifically, a review of judgmental biases in legal contexts suggests that jury deliberations are actually slightly more likely to amplify the biases of individuals than to attenuate them.75 Indeed, a series of studies involving juries suggests that in a variety of contexts, Collection Views Of Interactive Decision Making, 61 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305-326 (1997). 72 See H. Burnstein, Persuasion As Argument Processing, in Group Decision Making (H. Brandstetter, J.H. Davis, and G. Stocker-Kreichgauer eds., 1982). 73 See the discussion of Saks, supra note. 74 Norbert Kerr, Robert MacCoun, and Geoffrey Kramer, Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individuals and Groups, 103 Psychological Review 687-719 (1996). 75 Id. jury judgments are likely to be more erratic than the judgments of (the mean or median of a group of the same number of) individuals.76 The simplest conclusion from our study here is that to the extent that there is a concern about unpredictable damage awards, deliberation is not likely to alleviate that concern. On the contrary, deliberations increase unpredictability in the particular sense that the dollar judgment of one group of six (or twelve) is highly unlikely to predict the dollar judgment of another group of six (or twelve)—in fact it is less likely to predict that judgment that it would if the group judgment were based on the median judgment of the individual members.77 
because it ensures that the similarly situated will not be treated similarly (and thus produces unfairness for plaintiffs and defendants alike), partly because it may produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants, partly because of the sheer cost involved in litigationrelated expenses. But unpredictable awards might be worthwhile if many or most of them are sound; predictable awards are nothing to 76In the jury damage assessment context, Diamond and Casper’s ( jury awards were significantly higher than the mean individual award (by 26%). See Shari Diamond and Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the Jury to Verdict Consequences: Damages, Experts, and the Civil Jury, 26 Law and Society Review 513-563 ( studies, see James H. Davis, Group Decision Making and Quantitative Judgments: A Consensus Model, in Understanding Group Behavior: Consensual Action by Small Groups (E. Witte and J. Davis eds. 1996); Martin Kaplan and Charles Miller, Group Decision Making and Normative Versus Informational Influence: Effects of Type of Issue and Assigned Decision Rule, 53 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 306 (1987) (for compensatory but not punitive damages). If this general trend applies to our previous study, see Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schakde, supra, at 2100-2104, then the synthetic, statistical “juries” analyzed there will have underestimated both the mean and the variance of the awards that deliberating juries would have made. Consistent with this conjecture, Gigone and Hastie, supra, found that group judgments have higher error variances than the average judgment of group members. 77 Note also that because our study stipulated compensatory damages, and held them fixed across cases, we may well have understated true variance in punitive awards, because according to previous research, see Eisenberg, supra note; Karpoff and Lott, supra note, real juries anchor on their own compensatory award, rather than into some constant value celebrate if they are invariably too low or too high. Indeed, it is possible that the deterrent signal created by a range of variable awards, including a number of very high awards, is better, from the standpoint of preventing undesirable conduct, than the comparable signal of any realistic alternative.78 There is thus an important remaining question: whether jury deliberation, including group polarization, produces a better deterrent signal or more accurate judgments than alternative arrangements. 
It is certainly possible that the median judgment of a set of (say) 100 deliberating juries is more accurate than the median judgments of (say) 600 individuals. Without an independent account of good outcomes, in this contested area of the law, this possibility is very hard to assess.79 But an understanding of the mechanisms that underlie group polarization certainly does not give much reason for optimism, at least in the context of damage awards. To the extent that polarization occurs as a result of social comparison, there is no reason to think that the higher and lower post-deliberative awards are better (or for that matter worse) than the lower and higher median of pre-deliberative individual judgments. When social comparison helps generate both larger and smaller awards, no relevant information is producing improved judgments.80 The increased unpredictability caused by polarization, however, is still present and problematic, even if the means are no more or less valid. 
To the extent that polarization occurs as a result of persuasive arguments, there might appear to be more reason to believe that group discussion produces better, more informed outcomes. Recall that with respect to purely factual questions on which one or a few 78 Cf. Galanter and Luban, supra note. 79 Compare the interesting claim that there is a “leniency shift” in criminal juries and that this shift produces more accurate judgments, because juries are more likely than individual jurors to apply the reasonable doubt standard correctly. See Robert MacCoun and Norbert Kerr, Asymmetric Influence i n Mock Jury Deliberation: Jurors’ Bias for Leniency, 54 J Persononality and Social Psych. 21 (1988). There is no obvious analogy here, because it is not easy to find a legal standard against which to evaluate the increase in large awards and the decrease in small awards. 80 To be sure, discussion does dissipate pluralistic ignorance, by showing people what others think; but this is hardly a guarantor of better outcomes, whatever may be our criteria for defining them. group members have expertise, people are pushed toward a (correct) minority view simply because one or a few members of the group actually know the right answer.81 But it is not at all clear that there is an analogy in the context of punitive damage awards. In this setting, arguments that turn out to be persuasive may or may not be sound. This is especially so in light of the pervasive problem of “scaling without a modulus.” Even those with convincing arguments are likely not to have a good reason to favor one or another dollar figure (which is not to say that their numbers are worse than those of anyone else), We conclude that the fact that high awards become higher, and low awards become lower, should not be seen as a tribute to the power of deliberation to lead people in better directions—though aside from exacerbating the problem of unpredictability, it may not lead them in worse directions either. B. Reform Proposals 
With respect to punitive damage awards, and damages awards in related areas, many proposals have been motivated by a desire to decrease unpredictability. This goal has, for example, played a role in proposals for damage caps, for simple multipliers (relating punitive awards to compensatory awards), and for informing the jury of average awards or of intervals.82 It has played a role in constitutional limitations as well.83 The desire to reduce unpredictability motivation our discussion of the possibility of eliciting from the jury not dollar awards, but normative judgments on a bounded numerical scale.84 These judgments might be converted into a dollar award through some kind of calibration function, based on experts (“technocratic populism”) or on population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards (“predictable populism”).85 Of course it is possible to question whether it is practical to ask a deliberating jury to make a moral judgment on a bounded numerical scale, hardly an ordinary practice in daily life, and indeed a task that might seem even odder 81 Compare the finding of a “leniency shift” in MacCoun and Kerr, supra note. 82 See Saks et al., supra (discussing alternative approaches and their effects). 83 See BMW v. Gore, 116 S. Ct. 1589, 1601 (1996) (Breyer, J., concurring). 84 See Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade at 2112-2121. 85 See id. than the somewhat more familiar one of punishing wrongdoers through dollar awards. 
The findings here do not lead directly to any particular reform proposal86; but they add two points to the existing literature. First, they demonstrate that juries can use a bounded punishment scale reliably. Juries are able to answer the normative question directly, and they are also able to use a bounded numerical scale far more reliably than the familiar dollar scale. And if deliberating juries are thought to have advantages over other, less populist institutions—as many people clearly believe87—then there is reason to consider a reform proposal that would involve directly eliciting the jury’s moral judgment. As noted, these judgments might be converted into a dollar award by some kind of calibration formula, defined by expert judgments about what different dollar awards would mean or do to particular defendants, or instead on population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards. Either route would greatly diminish unpredictability.88 The data here, along with previous data, show that a calibration formula is also feasible to develop and use.89 
The second point stems from the finding that deliberating juries do not reduce erratic awards, and indeed that the process of deliberation is one of the causes of unpredictability. We have seen that deliberation can even produce “runaway juries,” if these are understood as juries in which group discussion yields awards much higher than those of even the highest of pre-discussion judgments. Such juries can be produced even in a mock jury task. Thus our findings fortify the suggestion that difficulties with the dollar scale make it hazardous to continue to rely on the current system, in which juries must map their moral judgments onto that scale without being given any guidance about the meaning of the various “points” on the scale. 86 They do suggest, somewhat amusingly, a simple way to promote predictability: Do not allow jurors to deliberate, and simply take the mean of their individual damage judgments! We do not discuss this alternative, however, because it is so foreign to our traditions, and also because a great deal of unpredictability would remain, as suggested by our data here, see Table 4, and see also SKS at 2100-2104. 87 See Galanter and Luban, supra note. 88 See Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, at 2113-2120. 89 Id. at 2112-2118. 
To be sure, eliciting moral judgments rather than dollar awards would not answer all of the relevant questions, because group polarization also produces not only higher and lower dollar awards, but also higher and lower moral judgments. There is no reason, however, to think that the resulting “verdicts” are worse than the mean of individual judgments before discussion, just as there is no reason to think that they are better (except that increased unpredictability is unambiguously worse in itself). In the absence of an independent criterion of rightness, it probably makes sense to continue the tradition of obtaining the deliberative judgment, without at the same time creating the forms of unpredictability and unfairness that can come from the unbounded dollar scale. 
The most radical reform would be to dispense with the jury entirely and to move toward judicial judgments or even to develop a kind of penalty schedule, based on the judgments of some combination of representative and expert institutions.90 We cannot evaluate these alternatives here. But to the extent that our study shows both decreasing and increasing awards as a result of group polarization, operating independently of better-informed or sounder judgments of any kind, it supplies additional support for that more radical reform. Of course the radical reform might be rejected if the relevant institutions would be unreliable, perhaps because bureaucracies might be vulnerable to the exercise of politically powerful private groups. The question is one of comparative institutional competence. What we have added here is that the process of deliberation will increase high awards and diminish low awards, a result that cannot be comforting in light of the increased unpredictability and the pervasive problem of scaling without a modulus. 90 The idea has received considerable attention in the analogous area of contingent valuation. See Murray Rutherford et al., Assessing Environmental Losses: Judgments of Importance and Damage Schedules, 22 Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 51 (1998); Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury, i n Analyzing Superfund 219, 241-44 (Richard L. Revesz and Richard B. Stewart eds. 1995). In the area of compensatory damages, see the plea for damages schedules in Bovbjerg et al., supra. In the punitive damage context, see Viscusi, supra note; Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, supra, at 2121-2126. For damages generally, see Atiyah, supra note. 
We have found that as compared with the median of individual judgments, deliberation substantially increases group polarization: Small awards become smaller, and large awards become (significantly) larger. The point has implications for damage awards in general and also for understanding social deliberation. From the normative point of view, it is hard to know whether the resulting judgments are better than the median of pre-deliberative individual judgments. But four points seem clear. First, moral judgments about personal injury cases are very widely shared over diverse communities and demographic categories. Second, those shared moral judgments do not produce predictable dollar awards. Third, group polarization occurs, in a quite dramatic fashion, in the context of damage awards. Hence both social influence and persuasive arguments drive group judgments to more extreme points in the direction of the inclination originally indicated by the median of pre-deliberation judgments. Fourth, the problem of unpredictable and erratic judgments is likely to be aggravated, rather than alleviated, by virtue of the fact that juries are deliberative bodies. 
Joan Glover, a five-year-old child, ingested a large number of a non-prescription allergy medicine called Allerfree, and required a three-week hospital stay. The Allerfree bottle used a faulty childproof safety cap. The Glovers sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company. The trial jury ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $200,000 in compensatory damages. 
Facts of the Case Established at Trial 
Joan’s parents testified that after her birth they had “childproofed” their house and ensured that all of their medications had childproof safety caps. The Allerfree bottle carries a label reading “Childproof Cap.” Joan found the pills in a kitchen drawer and ingested most of the bottle. The overdose permanently weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life. 
General Assistance is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of non-prescription medicines. The company has sold tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with childproof safety caps that were generally effective, but had a failure rate much higher than any others in the industry. Internal company documents showed that General Assistance had chosen to ignore federal regulations requiring more effective safety caps. An internal memo presented at trial says that “this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money”; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree might be punished for violating the regulation but says “the punishments are extremely mild; basically we’d be asked to improve the safety caps in the future.” An official at the Food and Drug Administration had previously warned a General Assistance executive that the company was “on shaky ground on this one.” 4 0 Closing Argument by Glovers’ Attorney 
The attorney for the Glovers argued that General Assistance’s disregard for children’s safety and for the law was abhorrent and represented exactly the kind of reckless corporate greed deserving of a high award of punitive damages. He concluded that General Assistance’s shocking profit-mongering should be punished so that the company would not feel itself at liberty to put children at risk in the future. 
Closing Argument by General Assistance’s Attorney 
The attorney for General Assistance emphasized that while the cap had a high failure rate relative to others on the market, it had nonetheless been conceded at trial that the cap was effective in most cases. She argued that, given that the FDA official had only communicated to them verbally, and had not required the company to take any action, it was not at all clear that the cap was actually in violation of the regulation at all. This is a preliminary draft of a paper forthcoming in the Columbia Law Review. All rights reserved. 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
(Second Series) Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). (October 1993). (March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). (June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
Escrows (August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Availability Cascades 
and Risk Regulation 
Timur Kuran* and Cass R. Sunstein** 
An availability cascade is a self-reinforcing process of collective belief formation by which an expressedperception triggersa chain reaction that gives the perception increasingplausibility through its rising availability in public discourse. The drivingmechanism involves a combination ofinformationaland reputationalmotives: Individuals endorse the perception partly by learning from the apparent beliefs of others and partly by distorting their public responses in the interest of maintainingsocial acceptance. Availability entrepreneurs-activistswho manipulate the content ofpublic discourse-striveto trigger availability cascades likely to advance their agendas. Their availability campaigns may yield social benefits, but sometimes they bring harm, which suggests a needfor safeguards. Focusingon the role of mass pressures in the regulation of risks associated with production, consumption, and the environment, Professors Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein analyze availabilitycascades and suggest reforms to alleviate theirpotential hazards. Theirproposals include new governmentalstructures designed to give civil servants better insulation againstmass demandsfor regulatorychange and an easily accessible scientific databaseto reducepeople's dependence on popular(mis)perceptions. 
* Professor of Economics and King Faisal Professor of Islamic Thought and Culture, University of Southern California. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
We are grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Nicholas Argyres, Ian Ayres, Mary Anne Case, Tyler Cowen, Richard Epstein, Jack Goldsmith, David Hirshleifer, Saul Levmore, Jane Mansbridge, Bentley Macleod, Vai-Lam Mui, Martha Nussbaum, Linwood Pendleton, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and Roberta Romano for helpful comments, and to Julie Hupton, Tolga K6ker, Brian Lehman, and Margaret Peterlin for research assistance. We also received valuable help from participants in legal theory workshops at the Washington University School of Law and Yale Law School, and at economics workshops at George Mason University and the University of Southern California. 
INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this article is to identify a set of interlinked social mechanisms that have important, sometimes desirable, but at other times harmful effects on risk regulation. The harmful effects range from inconsistent health regulations to mass anxiety about foods with no scientifically confirmed health hazards. The underlying mechanisms help shape the production of law through their effects on legislators, administrative agencies, and courts. 
The mechanisms presented below are mediated by the availabilityheuristic, a pervasive mental shortcut whereby the perceived likelihood of any given event is tied to the ease with which its occurrence can be brought to mind. Cognitive psychologists consider the availability heuristic to be a key determinant of individual judgment and perception. They have demonstrated that the probability assessments we make as individuals are frequently based on the ease with which we can think of relevant examples.' Our principal claim here is that this heuristic interacts with identifiable social mechanisms to generate availability cascades-social cascades, or simply cascades, through which expressed perceptions trigger chains of individual responses that make these perceptions appear increasingly plausible through their rising availability in public discourse. Availability cascades may be accompanied by counter-mechanisms that keep perceptions consistent with the relevant facts. Under certain circumstances, however, they generate persistent social availability errors-widespread mistaken beliefs grounded in interactions between the availability heuristic and the social mechanisms we describe.2 The resulting mass delusions may last indefinitely, and they may produce wasteful or even detrimental laws and policies. 
An availability cascade subsumes two of the special cascades that have recently received considerable attention in the social sciences, though not in law: informational cascades and reputational cascades.' An informational 
Biases, in JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES 3, 11 (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky eds., 1982) (describing the availability heuristic) [hereinafter JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY]. 
been used widely. See ANTONIO R. DAmASIO, DESCARTES' ERROR: EMOTION, REASON, AND THE HUMAN BRAIN 192 (1994). 
the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in THE NEW ECONOMICS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 188 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathym Ierulli eds., 1995); Lisa R. Anderson & Charles A. Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory,87 AM. ECON. REV. 847 (1997); W. 
Brian Arthur & David A. Lane, Information Contagion, 4 STRUCTURAL CHANGE & ECON. 
DYNAMICS 81 (1993); Abhijit V. Banerjee, The Economicsof Rumours, 60 REV. ECON. STUD. 309 (1993); Abbijit V. Banerjee, A Simple Model of HerdBehavior, 107 Q.J. ECON. 797 (1992); Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch, Learningfrom the Behaviorof Others: Conformity, Fads,and Informational Cascades,J. ECON. PERSP., Summer 1998, at 151 [hereinafter Bikhchancascade occurs when people with incomplete personal information on a particular matter base their own beliefs on the apparent beliefs of others. To be more specific, suppose that the words and deeds of certain individuals give the impression that they accept a particular belief. In response to their communications, other individuals, who lack reliable information, may accept that belief simply by virtue of its acceptance by others. As long as members of the relevant group are heterogeneous along one or more dimensions (e.g., initial personal information, willingness to rely on others for information, timing of social contacts), the transformation of the distribution of beliefs can take the form of a cascade, known also as a bandwagon or snowballing process.4 Not every member of a society experiencing an informational cascade need be influenced; those with considerable private information may remain unswayed. Under the right conditions, however, many or most of the society's members, potentially even all, will end up with essentially identical beliefs, which may well be fanciful. 
Insofar as society is socially fragmented, it may exhibit local informational cascades. A local informational cascade is one limited, for example, to a geographical area, a demographic subgroup, or a core of activists who share a political objective. Local informational cascades are quite common and, as we shall see, potentially quite important. 
Like an informational cascade, a reputational cascade is driven by interdependencies among individual choices. It differs, however, in the underlying personal motivations. In the case of a reputational cascade, individuals do not subject themselves to social influences because others may be more knowledgeable. Rather, the motivation is simply to earn social approval and avoid disapproval. In seeking to achieve their reputational objectives, people take to speaking and acting as if they share, or at least do not reject, what dani et al., Learningfrom Others]; Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch, A Theory of Fads,Fashion,Custom, andCulturalChangeas InformationalCascades, 100 J. POL. ECON. 992 (1992) [hereinafter Bikhchandani et al., A Theory of Fads]; and Vai-Lam Mui, Information, Civil Liberties, and the PoliticalEconomy of Witch-hunts, 15 J.L. ECON. & ORG. (forthcoming July 1999). 
For analyses ofreputational cascades, see George Akerlof, The Economics of Caste and of the 
pean Revolution of 1989, 44 WORLD POL. 7 (1991) [hereinafter Kuran, Now Out of Never]; and Timur Kuran, Sparks and PrairieFires:A Theory of UnanticipatedPoliticalRevolution, 61 PUB. CHOICE 41 (1989) [hereinafter Kuran, Sparks and PrairieFires]. 
ers' Demand, 64 Q.J. ECON. 183, 190-99 (1950) (describing the bandwagon effect). Leibenstein's article is among the earliest contributions to the analytical literature on which we are building. The major subsequent contributions include THOMAS C. SCHELLING, MICROMOTIVES AND MACROBEHAVIOR (1978); Mark Granovetter, ThresholdModels of Collective Behavior, 83 AM. J. 
CausalProcesses,51 AM. SCIENTIST 164 (1963). they view as the dominant belief. Everyone has had the experience of modifying public statements or actions in order to win praise or avoid censure. If a particular perception of an event somehow appears to have become the social norm, people seeking to build or protect their reputations will begin endorsing it through their words and deeds, regardless of their actual thoughts. As in the informational case, the outcome may be the cleansing of deviant perceptions, arguments, and actions from public discourse. And just as informational cascades may be limited in their reach, there may exist local reputationalcascades-self-reinforcing processes that reshape the public pronouncements of particular subgroups without affecting those of the broader group. 
Reputational and informational cascades are not mutually exclusive. Ordinarily, they exhibit interactions and even feed on one another.5 The resulting composite process, which is generally triggered by a salient event, is what we are calling an availability cascade.6 
Social agents who understand the dynamics of availability cascades and seek to exploit their insights may be characterized as availability entrepreneurs. Located anywhere in the social system, including the government, the media, nonprofit organizations, the business sector, and even households, these entrepreneurs attempt to trigger availability cascades likely to advance their own agendas. 7 They do so by fixing people's attention on specific problems, interpreting phenomena in particular ways, and attempting to raise the salience of certain information. For example, availability entrepreneurs acting on behalf of corporations focus on cases of strikingly large punitive damages awards as a means of building support for tort reform. Likewise, environmental organizations draw attention to apparent disasters (e.g., Love CONSEQUENCES OF PREFERENCE FALSIFICATION 157-95, 289-309 (1995) (describing the interactions between public discourse and private thought). 
cascades. Another broad category consists of networking cascades,which are driven by increasing returns to network size. The utility people derive from e-mail rises with the number of people on the Internet, which means that the Internet's expansion, once the process is under way, is selfreinforcing. For insights into networking cascades, see W. BRIAN ARTHUR, INCREASING RETURNS AND PATH DEPENDENCE INTHE ECONOMY (1994); Paul A. David, The Hero and the Herdin TechnologicalHistory: Reflections on Thomas Edison and the Battle of the Systems, in FAVORITES OF FORTUNE: TECHNOLOGY, GROWTH, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT SINCE THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 72 (Patrice Higonnet, David S. Landes & Henry Rosovsky eds., 1991); and Thomas C. Schelling, Dynamic Models of Segregation,I J. MATHEMATICAL SOC. 143 (1971). Networking effects do not enter our analysis here. 

REV. 1, 11-12 (1998). We do not mean to suggest that the concerns of these entrepreneurs are unjustified. Canal, Chernobyl, Three Mile Island) to support their calls for tighter regulation.9 
Such availabilitycampaigns often produce social benefits by overcoming public torpor and fueling debates on long-festering though rarely articulated problems. These desirable effects can arise in domains as diverse as economic regulation, identity politics, and social customs. At the same time, availability campaigns sometimes do great harm by producing widespread availability errors.10 This danger points to the need for institutional safeguards to ensure better priority-setting and fuller use of scientific knowledge. Proper safeguards, which need not entail either "more" regulation or "less" regulation, can save both lives and dollars. 
Offering recent examples of availability cascades that have resulted in socially harmful regulatory responses, we shall propose institutional reforms to insulate the government and the legal system against the political pressures generated by harmful cascades. Insofar as the reforms turn out to be effective, they would ensure that when government responds to political pressures, it does so because the underlying problems are serious. Although our proposals are developed with special reference to the tripartite governmental system of the United States, with minor modifications they can be applied to any democratic system. Our analytical framework and policy conclusions carry major implications for both populist and deliberative conceptions of democracy. A central theme in contemporary debates on democracy is that political judgments should reflect much more than a technocratic exercise; these judgments should be based on the facts, to be sure, but also on people's reflective values, including their tolerance for uncertainty. The analysis below is followed by concrete proposals on how these objectives can be advanced. 
All of our major illustrations involve availability cascades pertaining to the regulation of risks," a topic especially well-suited to exploring interactions between democracy and law. We hasten to point out, however, that the general framework can be applied to a wide variety of other areas. Among the diverse social transformations that exhibit striking examples of availability cascades are the rise and decline of McCarthyism; the struggle for black civil rights; the student rebellions of the 1960s; the spread of affirmative action and the recent explosion of public opposition to it; the rise of feminism, the anti-tax movement, and the religious right; ongoing campaigns against pornography, hate speech, smoking, health maintenance organizations, and 
accompanying note 2 supra. 
or animals. As legend has it, Gertrude Stein gave a more engaging definition. Faced with William James' exam question, "What is risk?" she offered a concise answer: "This is." the burning of black churches; the spread of ethnic and religious separatism across the world; the persistence and sudden fall of communism; the global turn toward market-friendly government policies; campaigns for safe sex; the enforcement of Megan's Law, designed to inform a community when a convicted sex offender moves in; and finally, the emergence of the Federalist Society at American law schools. 12 
Legal scholars are now devoting considerable attention to the virtues and vices of rational actor models, including those of models that accommodate social influences. 13 It will therefore be useful to specify at this juncture how our approach bears on various claims in the existing literature that, for all its diversity, falls under the rubric of "rational choice." There is nothing irrational about participating in an informational cascade. Often people have little information about the magnitude of a risk or the seriousness of an alleged social problem. They stand to gain from tuning into, and letting themselves be guided by, the signals of others. Although informational cascades may cause false beliefs to spread and strengthen, they are nonetheless consistent with individual rationality as the concept is generally understood. Indeed, models of this phenomenon are expressly based on the rational actor framework. They treat individuals as utility maximizers who weigh all their options.14 Nor is there anything irrational about being concerned with one's reputation or anything rational about being unconcerned. To lack an interest in protecting and improving one's reputation is not an indicator of rationality; rather, it is a mark of sociopathy. Models of reputational cascades depart from the conventional economic model merely by recognizing that reputation is an ingredient of individual utility functions. 
The only element of our analysis that challenges the conventional rational actor model is the role we attribute to the availability heuristic. Those who have investigated this heuristic tend to consider it a cognitive limitation or, to use alternative terminology, an indicator of quasi-rationality. They at 118-27, 137-54, 205-43, 261-88 and Kuran, Now Out of Never, supra note 3. Modem ethnic separatism is interpreted in Kuran, Ethnic Norms, supra note 3. For pertinent insights into some of the other transformations, see Bikhchandani et al., Learningfrom Others, supra note 3 (discussing observational learning in crime, politics, and medicine); Mui, supra note 3 (discussing McCarthyism and other witch-hunts); and the Conclusion infra. 
Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 1473-74 (1998) (suggesting that law and economics analysis may be improved through increased attention to actual human behavior); Lawrence Lessig, The Regulation ofSocial Meaning,62 U. CM. L. REV. 943, 951-52, 1019-20 (1995) (explaining the influence of social norms or "social meanings" on human behavior, and how the law can regulate social meanings); Richard H. McAdams, Relative Preferences,102 YALE L.J. 1 (1992) (discussing the importance of the desire to equal or surpass the consumption level of others for descriptive and normative legal theories); Symposium, Social Norms, SocialMeaning, and the Economic Analysis of Law, 27 J. LEGAL STUD. 537 (1998). 
stress that the heuristic confirms the difficulties people face in processing information. 15 But using the availability heuristic may be entirely rational from the standpoint of an imperfectly informed real agent. After all, the cognitive powers of a real agent, unlike those of the fictitious agents in conventional models, are limited. People who seek to minimize search and decision costs, and who look for reliable information about a particular risk, may do best to form their assessments according to what incidents come most readily to mind. It is true, however, that the availability heuristic can produce systematic and persistent misperceptions. It also appears that people resort to this heuristic more than they would if they were perfectly rational. 6 But we do not need to pursue these points here. None of our analysis rides on the precise definition of what it means to be rational. What does matter is that we consider a society composed of boundedly rational individuals who benefit immensely from using cognitive rules of thumb. 
This article contributes to the nascent field of behavioral analysis of law,17 which stresses the significance of both cognitive limitations and social influences. Steering clear of the most vexing controversies about the extent to which people are "rational," we explore how interactions between people's reliance on the availability heuristic and identifiable social mechanisms direct the transformation of laws and policies. The consequences can be socially disastrous, so we proceed to explore institutional reforms that may diminish the potential hazards. 
Part I begins with an account of an availability cascade that has imposed immense costs on Americans, and it continues with shorter accounts of two additional cases. Forming the article;s theoretical core, Parts II and HI provide a conceptual framework for studying availability cascades and identifying their social and legal consequences. Part IV draws implications for the regulation of risks within a democratic social order. Addressing the appropriate role of science, it also points to the possible disadvantages of basing laws and policies solely or mechanically on publicly expressed judgments. This Part also connects availability cascades with democratic aspirations, including the ideal of deliberative democracy. Our concrete policy suggestions are in Part V, which includes proposals to improve the workings of Congress, the courts, and the executive branch. Offering institutional de15. See, e.g., RICHARD H. THALER, QUASI-RATIONAL ECONOMICS 152-53, 242 (1991) (endorsing the work of Herbert Simon, which suggested that humans use heuristics because of their limited ability to process information); Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 1, at 3-20 (describing the use of heuristics in thepresence of uncertainty). 
heuristic and how it leads to errors). 
et al., supra note 13, at 1473-74 & n.3 (citing literature on behavioral analysis of the law); Symposium, The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Bahavior,Behavioral Economics, and the Law, 51 VAND. L. REV. 1495 (1998). fenses of peer review and cost-benefit analysis, this Part also relates our theoretical argument to the matter of product disparagement laws, which received substantial media coverage through a suit brought by beef producers against talk-show host Oprah Winfrey. Finally, Part VI goes beyond the subject of risk regulation, touching on the broader social significance of availability cascades. 
I. COSTLY AVAILABILITY ERRORS 
We now present three examples of availability errors, which will form a background for the subsequent analysis. The first, which is the most detailed, will be particularly valuable in demonstrating the significance of availability cascades, including their potentially lasting influence on law and policy.', 
Between 1942 and 1953, the Hooker Chemical Company filled Love Canal, an abandoned waterway that feeds into the Niagara River in New York State, with more than 21,000 tons of chemical waste. 19 It then covered the waste with dirt and sold Love Canal to the Niagara Falls Board of Education for $1.20 The local government developed the area, turning it into a neighborhood of more than 200 houses.21 The neighborhood was settled in 1957, and the site of the old canal, which many of the new homes bordered, became a school and a playground. 
After several years of unusually heavy precipitation, the canal overflowed its banks in 1976.22 In that year a commission responsible for monitoring the Great Lakes detected the insecticide Mirex in Lake Ontario fish, and the New York Department of Environmental Conservation identified Love Canal as a major source. When the local press began reporting that area residents were worried about the health effects of Love Canal, frighten18. Perceptive readers may sense that in trying to convince them of the availability heuristic's significance we will be exploiting their own reliance on this heuristic. We plead guilty! GIBBs, LOVE CANAL: THE STORY CoNTnIE... (1998) [hereinafter GIBBS, THE STORY CONTINUES]; LOIS MARIE GIBBS, LOVE CANAL: MY STORY (1982) [hereinafter GIBBS, LOVE CANAL]; MARC K. LANDY, MARC J. ROBERTS & STEPHEN R. THOMAS, THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY: ASKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS (2d ed. 1994); and AARON WILDAVsKY, BUT Is IT TRUE? (1995). In the interest of readability, we do not provide page citations for every proposition, but we draw primarily on GIBBS, THE STORY CONTINUEs, supra; GBBs, LOVE CANAL, supra; and WILDAVSKY, supra. 
ing tales spread quickly: 23 children being burnt, omnipresent odors inducing nausea, undrinkable water, and black sludge everywhere.24 According to the front-page stories, residents feared that the buried chemicals had resurfaced, making their neighborhood unlivable. 
At this stage, neither the state government nor the federal government attempted to reassure the residents about their neighborhood's safety, probably for fear that such efforts would only engender distrust and because they thought the anxieties would dissipate on their own. Taking the cautious route, government officials ordered a series of tests. 25 These detected low levels of carcinogens in basements near the dump site, and in early 1978 the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) confirmed the findings. The EPA also reported, however, that the observed toxicity was not at all threatening; the water was safe to drink, and Lake Ontario was not alarmingly contaminated.26 Nevertheless, lawsuits kept the residents' complaints steadily in the news. 27 
In June 1978, frightening stories in the Niagara Falls Gazette came to the attention of Lois Marie Gibbs, a housewife living in the area.2 8 Gibbs, who became president of the Love Canal Homeowners Association, played a key role in reinforcing fears of adverse health effects and mobilizing public attention. 29 Indeed, she would eventually appear on national television programs and receive invitations to the state capitol and even the White House ° In brief, she served as a leading availability entrepreneur of the episode, which culminated in the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), generally known as the Superfund statute.3' 
Angered by claims in the Gazette, Gibbs organized a petition drive and started going door-to-door to mobilize protests, eventually developing "a set speech. 3 2 Partly as a result of these efforts, the local residents held a meeting, and those who "hadn't attended the meeting heard what was going on by 
A VAILAB1LITY CASCADES word of mouth. Everybody was very curious. 33 The local health department initially attempted to counter the campaign by referring to controlled studies that found no evidence of leukemia or even of low or fluctuating counts of white blood cells. But because the health department provided no interpretation of what the numbers meant, they "had no meaning" for the residents, and concerns did not dampen.34 "One woman, divorced and with three sick children, looked at the piece of paper with numbers and starting crying hysterically: 'No wonder my children are sick. Am I going to die? What's going to happen to my children?"' 35 Notwithstanding the results of scientific investigations, she felt that "no one could answer. '36 Her anxieties and fears came to be shared by the entire community, which united around the problem: "People who had been feuding because little Johnny hit little Billy were now talking to each other. They had air readings in common .... The word spread fast, and the community became close-knit. Everywhere you looked, there were people in little groups talking and wondering and worrying." 37 
Responding to the outcry, New York State Health Commissioner Robert Whalen declared a public health emergency in the area in early August of 1978.33 Characterizing Love Canal as a "great and imminent peril," he urged area residents to stay out of their basements and to avoid eating anything from their gardens. 39 He also sought the temporary relocation of twenty-five pregnant women and children under two years old, whereupon residents whom the plan would leave behind inquired why their own health should be treated as less important. Gibbs, now a widely recognized activist on the issue, was furious. 
I jumped up and said to Commissioner Whalen: "If the dump will hurt pregnant women and children under two, what for God's sake, is it going to do to the rest of us!? What do you think you're doing?" Now very emotional, I said; "You can't do that! That would be murder!" 40 She and her associates treated technical explanations as just "a bunch of baloney."'41 They also instructed residents to report to doctors and local officials any and all suspected health abnormalities. "Tell them everything," Gibbs exhorted, "If you had three pimples this time last month, and this time you have five-tell them!" 42 
A month later, in September 1978, Whalen published a report entitled Love Canal: Public Health Time Bomb, which described Love Canal as a "modem day disaster" that was "both profound and devastating. '43 Other government officials either expressed agreement with Whalen's concerns or simply stood silent. Meanwhile, Governor Hugh Carey, who was in the midst of a close contest for re-election, was trying to be at least as responsive to the concerns as Whalen.44 The stakes for his political career were already obvious, and the residents would reinforce the point by screaming at him: "You're a murderer! You're killing our children!" 45 In early August, he created a multi-agency Love Canal task force and promised state aid for the locality.46 And two weeks later he agreed that 239 of the families living closest to the canal would be relocated at state expense.4 7 The federal government, too, responded to the growing sense of crisis. The top official of the Federal Disaster Assistance Administration toured the area very visibly on August 5, 1978, and two days later President Jimmy Carter declared an emergency in the area. 48 
Within a few days of Carter's declaration, scientists re-examining the evidence began signaling that the dangers were being overblown. Their findings prompted some government officials, including Carey, to tone down their statements.49 But fears would not dissipate. On the contrary, they intensified when certain new studies, presented before Congress in early 1979, pointed to sky-high rates of nervous breakdown, miscarriage, and various diseases of the urinary system in the Love Canal area.50 These data would be thoroughly discredited two years later;51 some of the effects were evidently fictitious, and others were undoubtedly produced by panic; but at the time the data were widely reported as scientifically sound.52 To call for caution in interpreting the data, even to question their validity, was to risk fierce and widespread criticism.53 Information that flowed rapidly among groups was heightening anxieties, and those who challenged the prevailing interpretations of Love Canal were being labeled as accessories to a heinous cover-up. 
HEALTH, LOVE CANAL: PUBLIC HEALTH TIME BOMB 1, 30 (1978)). 

The title of an ABC television program on Love Canal is representative of the perceptions that now held currency nationwide: The Killing Ground.54 Similar programs followed. In October 1979, for instance, public television aired a documentary on toxic waste, with a long segment on Love Canal.55 Gibbs made every effort to keep the nation focused on Love Canal. "One day, we decided we'd take a child's coffin and an adult coffin to the state capitol ... . It was a way of keeping us in the news. 5' 6 
In January 1980 the Justice Department commissioned a study that found chromosomal abnormalities in eleven of thirty-six Love Canal residents. The study would eventually be discredited as scientifically flawed, but it was leaked to the press before peer review at the EPA, and in May the New York Times promptly gave it front-page coverage. 57 The news media descended on Love Canal once again, painting the image of an ordinary American community mired in a swamp of carcinogenic wastes as the rest of the country just watched. A resident found to have chromosomal aberrations appeared on national television, sobbing that she "just wanted to be a housewife" as in the days before the poisons of Love Canal destroyed her idyllic life.5 8 
In early 1980, at a time when Love Canal was prominently featured in network newscasts almost every day, Governor Carey established a blueribbon panel to review the scientific evidence. Remarkably, given the political climate, the panel endorsed none of the reports of serious health effects. However, its evaluation had no appreciable influence on subsequent events. In May of the same year, a group of Love Canal residents held two EPA officials hostage at the headquarters of the Homeowners Association.5 9 The next day President Carter ordered the relocation of an additional 700 families at a cost of at least $3 million.60 And soon thereafter, exploiting the President's need for his support in the Kennedy-Carter contest for that year's Democratic Presidential nomination, Carey obtained $15 million in federal assistance toward the purchase of new homes for the relocated residents. 61 
The Love Canal "time bomb," as the press dubbed it,62 was not the original source of government concern about abandoned hazardous waste dumps. Even before the 1978 news blitz, the EPA had worked on drafting an ambitious new law to address contamination problems. But publicity about Love Canal was crucial to this law's passage in 1980. Love Canal, and its attendant publicity, was a watershed event that crystallized public concern about toxic waste sites. In that year, Time magazine made the topic of waste sites a cover story, and new network documentaries followed suit. Polls conducted at the time showed that all this publicity dramatically influenced the views of Americans about industrial wastes: Eighty percent favored prompt federal action to identify and clean up potentially hazardous abandoned waste sites.63 Congress responded quickly with the Superfund statute, which called for $1.6 billion in expenditures over five years.64 
The perceptual and attitudinal transformation that occurred between 1978 and 1980 has proved enduring. Since that period, Americans have consistently ranked waste sites among the country's top environmental problems. In a highly publicized 1987 study, the EPA found that Americans rank hazardous waste sitesfirst among all environmental problems-above pesticides, acid rain, indoor air pollution, radioactive waste, water pollution, exposure to work site chemicals, tap-water contamination, and thinning of the ozone layer, among many others.65 This preeminence was confirmed by public opinion polls in 1987 and 1988.66 To this date, moreover, American presidents and serious presidential candidates of both major parties invoke abandoned waste dumps as a leading environmental problem. Congress has continued to spend vast sums on clean-up campaigns. By 1994 it had allocated a total of $13.6 billion to the cause. 67 Yet it remains unproven that the contamination of Love Canal, assuming it occurred, ever posed a significant risk to anyone. Peer-reviewed follow-up studies conducted by the New York State Department of Health uncovered no abnormal health trends among Love Canal residents, and this finding was supported by later analyses by the American Medical Association, the National Research Council, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 63 Equally significant, no subsequent study discovered any link between the identified chromosome alterations and the contamination in question. An exhaustive 1982 study by the EPA, based on 6000 samples of soil, air, and groundwater from the evacuated area and other sampling regions, found "no evidence of environmental contamination" at Love Canal.69 And in the same year the Department of Health and Human Services found that the emergency zone was "as habitable as the control areas with which it was compared. '70 A recent analysis of the data goes much further. Looking beyond Love Canal, it suggests that "hazardous waste sites pose an almost negligible risk to human health when compared with the many more fundamental risks we face. '71 
Our challenge here is to explain the dogged persistence of calls to prevent "more Love Canals." In view of the billions spent on the Superfund program, the social significance of the analytical challenge should be clear. Had these resources been devoted to the prevention of other risks, there could have been major benefits as measured in, say, life-years saved. Approximately 400,000 Americans die each year as a result of tobacco use, 300,000 die from poor diet and insufficient exercise, and many thousands more die each year from other preventable causes.72 The scientific evidence is overwhelming that poor diet produces far more cancers than abandoned hazardous waste sites. Yet during the period of skyrocketing concern over Love Canal, poor diet and exercise received almost no attention as national problems, and cigarette smoking was addressed almost exclusively through SUPERFUND: ECONOMICS, SCIENCE, AND LA\V 8 (Richard L. Revesz & Richard B. Stewart eds., 1995). Congress authorized an additional $6.9 billion in 1986 and $5.1 billion more in 1990. See id. 
FACT VERSUS FEARS: A REVIEW OF THE GREATEST UNFOUNDED HEALTH SCARES OF RECENT TIIIEs 23 (3d ed. 1998) <http://wvw.acsh.org/publications/reports/factsfears.html>. 
No. EPA-600/4-82-030, 1 ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING AT LOVE CANAL at iv (1982)). 
RESULTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMIICAL TESTING BY EPA IN THE VICINITY OF LOVE CANALIMPLICATIONS FOR HUMAN HEALTH-FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING HABITABILITY (1982)). 

States, 270 JAMA 2207, 2208-12 (1993). public health warnings. Indeed, until quite recently governments devoted negligible resources to fighting these causes of death, with the exception of modest informational campaigns against smoking, which were undermined by generous subsidies to tobacco farmers. At much less than the cost of Superfund, tax incentives and informational campaigns to promote better diet and exercise could probably have saved tens ofthousands of lives per year. 
We do not mean to imply that choosing priorities is simply a technocratic matter, nor that informed democratic judgments should never depart from numerical criteria. The guiding principles of priority-setting should involve subtle qualitative considerations, which will be brought into our analysis in due course. Suffice it to say here that the priority accorded to abandoned waste dumps hardly reflects what one would call the informed judgment of the American citizenry. 
In the interest of reaching the theoretical core of our argument expeditiously, our next two examples of availability cascades are more compressed than the foregoing account of the Love Canal episode. A salient phenomenon in American environmental politics is the "pollutant of the month" syndrome. The essence of this syndrome is that expressed concerns about a particular substance fuel growing anxieties, which then generate an irresistible demand for regulation. These anxieties remain in the headlines until they are bumped off by a new perceived hazard.73 
In 1989, one such pollutant was Alar, a pesticide long used on apples. 74 About one percent of Alar is composed of UDMH, a carcinogen. Alar's manufacturer, the Uniroyal Company, embarked on a two-year study of its effects, reaching the half-point of the investigation in January 1989. 75 The preliminary results showed that in rats and mice exposed to moderate amounts of Alar, there is no change in the incidence of tumors.76 But they also indicated a greater incidence of tumors in rodents exposed to high levels of UDMH. On the basis of these tentative findings, the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) made a series of extrapolations, interpreting the results as implying that between 4700 and 6200 preschool children, or about one out of every 4200 exposed to Alar, will develop cancer by age six.77 A 
do not offer page references for every proposition, but most of the factual propositions can be found therein. See id.at 201-22. 
LEAPE, ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND POLICY 524 (2d ed. 1996). lawyer for the NRDC said, "IfEPA doesn't think that the most potent cancer causing chemical in our food supply is grounds enough to declare it an imminent hazard and remove it from food, well, I don't know what kind of risk it takes then to declare an imminent chemical hazard. 78 
The television show 60 Minutes publicized the allegation, presenting its report against a background consisting of a red apple overlaid with a skull and crossbones.79 Ed Bradley, the program's host, began the report as follows: "The most potent cancer-causing chemical in our food supply is a substance sprayed on apples to keep them on the trees longer and make them look better."80 The story received wide coverage in newspapers, magazines, talk shows, and television news programs. It also instigated a public outcry, complete with protests from many celebrities, including actress Meryl Streep, who founded an activist group called Mothers and Others for Pesticide Limits.81 The NRDC's self-conscious agenda was to create so many repetitions of [its] message that average American consumers (notjust the policy elite in Washington) could not avoid hearing it-from many different media outlets within a short time. The idea was for the 'story' to aacnhdiecvoensau mlifeer hoafbiittss.8o2wn, and continue for weeks and months to affect policy The EPA reviewed the evidence and interpretations, concluding that the risk was vastly exaggerated: one in 111,000 rather than one in 4200.83 However, by the time the EPA made its announcement, the demand for apples had plummeted. Apples and apple products had been removed from stores and widely banned from school lunchrooms. Many people were treating apples as a highly toxic substance that one must handle with great care, and only when absolutely necessary. Moreover, doctors and poisoncontrol centers were facing a deluge of calls from frightened parents. One caller asked "whether it was safer to pour apple juice down the drain or to take it to a toxic waste dump. '8 4 In desperation, the nation's apple growers asked Uniroyal to withdraw Alar from the market. And before the year was out, but after the EPA announcement, Uniroyal agreed to stop domestic sales of Alar, evidently to avoid the costs of contested cancellation proceedings. 85 The EPA itself joined the alarmist bandwagon by announcing that it would 
culturally very available text: the biblical story of the fall of Adam and Eve. This is speculation, to be sure, but many risk-related scares draw some of their intensity from links to pre-existing fears. seek revisions of pertinent laws and regulations to make it easier to ban chemicals suspected of being carcinogenic. 86 
defamation suits against the NRDC and 60 Minutes8.7 But the expenses associated with this suit constitute only a small fraction of the social costs generated by the hysteria over Aar's hazards. In Washington State alone, the harm to the apple industry included at least $125 million in losses in the key six-month period. 8 The United States Department of Agriculture put aside $15 million to buy some of the surplus apples. 89 For all these costs, it is not even clear that the withdrawal of Alar resulted in a net benefit to children's health. A regulatory strategy that makes apples more expensive will lower their consumption, producing adverse health effects that may swamp any benefits from eliminating Alar. These observations suggest that Alar's withdrawal may not have survived any form of cost-benefit analysis. In any case, the EPA's initial risk estimate has turned out to be too high. According to its subsequent analyses, only one in 250,000 children exposed to Alar will develop cancer-doubtless a nontrivial risk, but less than half the initial EPA figure, and lower than that of the NRDC by a factor of sixty. carcinogenicity by a special interest group was hyped by a news organization without the most simple checks on its reliability or documentation." 91 A United Nations panel, along with others who have investigated the data, found that even the EPA's revised figure is too high. Alar does not cause cancer in mice, it concluded, and it is not dangerous to people. 92 
The process that drove the Alar scare provides another example of an availability campaign launched by availability entrepreneurs. The following account puts it dramatically: 
Words fail on Alar. The most charitable interpretation is that an environmental group ... decided to take matters into its own hands by writing a report and orchestrating its release to the media in so forceful a manner as to compel governmental action. The syndrome its report played out is by now distressingly familiar: a few suggestive tests involving tiny quantities raised way above the actual amount by extreme assumptions about children's eating habits, expanded further by statistical manipulation, extrapolated against huge populations to create row-upon-row of child cancer victims.93 
Once Aar became identified as a threat to social welfare and, in particular, the lives of helpless children, it became risky to urge restraint in interpreting the figures. No official, and certainly no politician, wants to develop a reputation for softness on matters vital to children's health. Nor, in the face of reports of danger to children, is any official eager to tell worried parents that they should patiently wait for more scientific research. If some doubters and dissenters shade their views or mute their voices in response to such reservations, the relative content of the publicly available information will obviously get distorted. Specifically, information pointing to danger will become ever more available, raising its plausibility in the eyes of the many people who use availability as a criterion for evaluating the validity of such information. In the process, moreover, the burden of justifying one's beliefs will shift increasingly toward dissenters. Thus, as the Aar cascade took off, the proponents of banning Aar could increasingly take for granted that their safety concerns would be treated with respect. For their part, the opponents had to carry an increasingly heavy burden of being suspected of insensitivity to human suffering. 
With Alar off the market, apple growers were quick to find substitutes. These substitutes might well be equally effective against pests without having the minute adverse side-effects of Aar. But we have no scientific basis for ruling out the possibility of a serious mistake. The substitutes may someday be identified as serious hazards. In any case, even if future historians judge the Aar episode to have reached an acceptable or even happy ending, there are socially cheaper ways to bring about a substitution of industrial inputs. It should not be necessary to cause widespread panic or to disrupt production and consumption patterns for the sake of preventing a dubious or minor hazard. 
A-d 11999] availability cascades can produce a lot of good. For the reasons discussed above, however, the mere fact that vast numbers of citizens are calling for the alleviation of a perceived risk, or that they are demanding a particular risk reduction program, provides no guarantee that even they would benefit from having the government sheepishly fall in line. It does not even mean that they truly desire the measures they are championing. 
Many features of the prevailing system of checks and balances offer protection against availability cascades. For example, the bicameral legislature prevents cascades within one chamber from creating legislation on their own. Still, as matters now stand, the American government is imperfectly equipped to provide meaningful resistance against social pressures grounded in misinformation. When there is an upsurge of interest in addressing a particular risk, the government loses its ability to set sensible priorities, undertake long-range planning, and enforce intertemporal consistency. 224 It has been estimated that the American government could save an additional 60,000 lives per year at no additional cost or, alternatively, save the lives it currently does for as much as $31 billion less than it now spends.22 The reforms proposed in this Part would provide instruments for achieving such gains. 
The notion of institutional safeguards against availability cascades is far from foreign to American history. Parts of the FederalistPapers show an awareness of cascades and their effects on public discourse.226 Many of the founding institutions can be understood as instruments designed to reduce dangers associated with cascades. In addition to the bicameral legislature, such instruments include national representation, federalism, and the executive veto to reopen and temper legislative debates. Numerous post-founding innovations fulfil related functions. Among them are specialized legislative committees, an appropriations committee to oversee the whole budget, and conference committees to resolve differences between legislative chambers. Individually and collectively, these structures provide opportunities for improving the accuracy of information used in policymaking, refining prioritysetting, identifying trade-offs, promoting deliberation, and reaching reasonable compromises among competing judgments and interests. 
govemnment risk regulation could benefit from re-examination of how risks are assessed and managed). 
REGULATION: ACHIEVING MORE PROTECTION AT LESS COST 16 (1995) (citing Tammy 0. Tengs, Optimizing Societal Investments in Preventing Premature Death (1994) (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University)). 
may be found in BESSETTE, supranote 196. 
The measures proposed and defended below are meant to develop the existing system in the light of modem realities. One of our objectives is to strengthen the role of science in risk regulation-a role that several groups have tried to weaken.227 To this end, we seek to provide regulators with better insulation against sudden and intense mass calls for immediate action (partly to allow them to address significant risks that public opinion is ignoring). It bears repeating that people may legitimately find some risks less acceptable than others that are quantitatively identical. But these judgments should be made with reference to the best possible understanding of reality rather than mass hysteria. 
Our most general goal is the attainment of "comprehensive rationality" in risk regulation. All too often the government focuses on problems in isolation from related problems, and political forces hinder sensible prioritysetting. Through institutional arrangements that amount to precommitment strategies, 228 the making and implementation of laws can be shielded from myopic, ephemeral, or counterproductive social pressures. 
None of our proposals will be described in minute detail. Our intention is simply to outline certain basic institutional reforms. We begin by addressing a recent initiative designed to make it costly for availability entrepreneurs to launch cascades that generate scientifically unjustified mass anxiety. 
and certain postmodernist academics on the left. See ALAN SoKAL & JEAN BRICMONT, FASHIONABLE NONSENSE: POSTMODERN INTELLECTUALS' ABUSE OF SCIENCE (1998); RAYMOND A. EvE & FRANCIS B. HARROLD, THE CREATIONIST MOVEMENT IN MODERN AMERICA (1991); PAUL R. GROSS & NORMAN LEVITT, HIGHER SUPERSTITION: THE ACADEMIC LEFT AND ITS QUARRELS WITH SCIENCE (1994); James Moore, The Creationist Cosmos of ProtestantFundamentalism, in 42 FUNDAMENTALISMS AND SOCIETY: RECLAIMING THE SCIENCES, THE FAMILY, AND EDUCATION (Martin E. Marty & R. Scott Appleby eds., 1993); Steven Weinberg, Sokal's Hoax, N.Y. REv. BOOKS, August 8, 1996, at 11. The Sokal & Bricmont, Gross & Levitt, and Weinberg references focus on contemporary intellectual movements committed to demonstrating the senselessness of science. These movements received national attention in 1996 when Alan Sokal, a New York University physicist, tricked the post-modemist journal Social Text into publishing his gibberish-filled indictment of modem physics. See Alan D. Sokal, Transgressingthe Boundaries: Toward a Transformative Hermeneutics of Quantum Gravity, SOC. TEXT, Spring/Summer 1996, at 217. The editors of the journal accepted Sokal's article as serious scholarship, although he had deliberately packed it with nonsensical jargon and impenetrable ideas to demonstrate their'own incompetence and the absurdity of what passes as the "cultural studies" critique of science. See Alan Sokal, A Physicist Experiments with Cultural Studies, LINGUA FRANCA, May/June 1996, at 62. 
DEMOCRACY (1995). 
The Texas lawsuit that pitted beef producers against television talk show host Oprah Winfrey229 brought into sharp relief one possible measure against harmful availability cascades: civil actions to deter individuals and groups from instigating or aggravating such cascades in the hope of profiting from the ensuing panic. Conscious of the potential advantages, twelve states have enacted product disparagement laws.230 As one might expect, many observers consider such laws to be constitutionally unacceptable devices designed to placate powerful economic actors intent on suppressing legitimate doubts about the safety of their products. 231 But the underlying issues are more complicated. For one thing, it is unclear that all or most product disparagement laws violate the First Amendment. For another, their beneficiaries would hardly be limited to industries trying to block reports about the defects of their products. Just as ordinary libel law serves to discourage public falsehoods about individuals, product disparagement laws discourage false statements about products. In each case, the purpose is to prevent availability cascades from causing irreparable damage. 
In their current form, food disparagement laws apply to perishable foods whose producers and sellers could be ruined by a cascade-induced plunge in demand. As a general rule, the laws are narrowly drawn, allowing compensatory damages only for spreading known falsehoods. They do not cover negligent falsehoods, even reckless ones. Nor are they reasonably interpreted to cover hyperbole or humor. Thus the thirty-second Honda commercial that referred to the emus raised in Texas as "the pork of the future" did not violate any food disparagement law even though it temporarily lowered the demand for emu meat. And Oprah Winfrey was acquitted of the charges brought by beef producers, apparently for lack of evidence that she said anything she knew to be false.232 
When a product is "libeled," the news may spread rapidly, bringing harm to a wide range of people. The best (and constitutionally mandated) remedy for false speech, it is often said, is more speech. 2 3 Ordinarily this is true. Yet when an availability cascade is under way, the liberty to counter false charges will not necessarily provide a corrective, and this is what product disparagement laws and ordinary libel laws acknowledge. 
Indeed, predictable social forces may reinforce rather than dampen sensational charges. One such force involves the mass media. The typical newspaper, magazine, or television station incurs a large penalty whenever it falls behind its rivals in reporting "breaking news. ' 2 4 Because a good relative position in the media hierarchy translates into disproportionately large profit differentials, a media outlet that exercises caution in reporting a frightening story may find itself at a huge, possibly irreversible, competitive disadvantage. 235 Facing a prisoner's dilemma with respect to sensational stories, it has every reason to compete aggressively to report sensationalistic stories as rapidly as possible. Another social force that reinforces sensational changes consists of reputational pressures. Evolving reputational pressures can make it personally costly for individuals to defend a disparaged product. And the consequent individual reticence may contribute to the growth and spread of availability errors. 
To the extent that they reach only intentional falsehoods, the product defamation laws appear consistent with the body of libel law currently applied to government officials and well-known figures. Under New York Times Co. v. Sullivan,236 it is constitutionally legitimate for states to require compensation for libelous statements that are intentionally false or made with reckless disregard for the truth. The rationale here is that the reputational interests of individuals are sufficiently strong to overcome the relatively weak free speech interests. If states can prohibit intentional or reckless falsehoods about people, perhaps they can also prohibit intentional falsehoods about products. This logic thus makes product disparagement laws seem constitutional. 237 
concurring). 
189-97 (1995) (arguing that in cultural markets only the most popular works succeed, and that the resulting race to achieve quick success affects supply decisions). 

or even mere negligence ought to be enough for liability with respect to either persons or products. One might think that since availability cascades can do so much harm, their instigators should face the level of deterrence that comes from requiring compensation for all negligent falsehoods. But this would be a most controversial conclusion. The general relationship between libel law and freedom of speech raises conceptual and empirical issues that we cannot take up here. 
Such a view might be challenged on the ground that products are not people. Only people have feelings that can be hurt and social positions that can be damaged, so perhaps states cannot legitimately base their product disparagement laws on the exceptionally strong interests traditionally used to support the law of libel. There is indeed a difference. But product disparagement laws do not protect products as such. When citizens are frightened through false statements about products, it is people who are genuinely injured, sometimes severely. In fact, the victims may greatly outnumber those in a typical libel case; consider the multitudes of frightened parents and the many millions of dollars lost by apple growers as a result of the Alar episode.3 8 The shareholders of the relevant companies and their employees suffer, too, as do their customers; and the anxieties caused by the knowledge of consumption risks produce a wide range of ancillary social harms. As a case in point, frightened parents, who had fed their children apples falsely described as dangerously carcinogenic, unnecessarily lost sleep-a large if difficult to measure social loss-and they had to have their children tested medically. States have strong reasons, then, to permit the imposition of compensatory damages for intentional falsehoods about products. 
To identify certain advantages of product disparagement laws and to defend their constitutionality is not, of course, to prove that on balance they are beneficial or desirable. In principle, such laws could encourage frivolous rather than meritorious suits. Even more seriously, they could deter reports about genuine product hazards. Although it is highly desirable to allow broad-ranging debate about all potential risks, the mere possibility of a lawsuit may make knowledgeable people refrain from discussing real dangers, with the net result being more, not less, loss of life. The possibility of frivolous lawsuits might be attenuated by making plaintiffs liable for all court costs, including the attorneys' fees, in the event they lose. As for the risk of excessive deterrence, it can be reduced by maintaining a sharp line between the communication of intentional falsehoods and legitimate expressions of hyperbole, doubt, and concern. But each reservation constitutes an empirical claim to be tested by experience. We do not have a sufficient basis for knowing whether the existing laws are too broad. In the present state of knowledge, it appears at least as likely that product defamation laws would do more good than harm than the other way around. 
We now turn to the core institutions of the federal government. Congress is currently quite vulnerable to availability cascades, partly because its members feel compelled to respond to mass demands for legislation simply to keep their seats, and partly because they have incentives to serve as availability entrepreneurs who work in concert with their constituents to further parochial agendas. As an institution, Congress is poorly equipped to place risks in comparative perspective. Its committee system keeps Congress highly balkanized and also increases its susceptibility to short-term pressures. Because activities of senators and representatives are carefully scrutinized by directly affected lobbies, committee members are often reluctant to publicize information, make statements, or take positions that can be used against them at election time. As a case in point, they rarely make public, let alone endorse, the monetary values that potential or actual policies ascribe to statistical lives. Nor do they talk candidly about trading lives for money. Committee members thus encourage citizens to cling to the idea that even a statistical human life is priceless. One consequence is that when an availability cascade fuels massive demand for acting on a matter under the committee's purview, the members of the committee quickly yield, and legislative action follows without any attempt at coordination with existing policies.239 
A possible method for insulating Congress from such pressures is to create a risk regulation committee entrusted with compiling information about a wide range of risk levels and empowered to set priorities. This committee would have authority over both substantive statutes and the appropriations process. It would thus operate as a check on short-term pressures by putting particular concerns in a broader context. Its basic goal would be to rank risks, publicize misallocations, and initiate legislative corrections. In its ideal form, the committee would rely heavily on prevailing scientific knowledge. At the same time, it would recognize that risk judgments and preferences constitute legitimate considerations in the determination of priorities and selection of policies. Thus, its essential function would be to prevent myopic, unduly quick, and poorly reasoned responses, not to insulate risk regulation from evolving social values. Helping to slow down, limit, and possibly even prevent availability cascades, the committee's hearings would enable Congress to "strike when the iron is cold. 2 40 
Like any government body, the risk regulation committee would most certainly become the target of well-organized lobbies intent on molding policies to their own advantage.2 4 1 But it should be possible to dampen the in239. A counteracting factor is that the committee chairs, insofar as they consider their seats secure, have a long-term interest in maintaining consistency across policies. However, even where this condition is met, the chair may not be capable of blocking the demands of the membership. 
D. Tollison & Gordon Tullock eds., 1988). centives for rent-seeking by guaranteeing that risks are put in a comparative light. The very act of comparing risks and publicizing the obtained rankings would provide a measure of protection against well-organized special interests. If the social costs of accommodating a particular lobby's demands gain widespread recognition, counter-lobbying might neutralize this lobby's political effectiveness. 
Congress has debated a number of bills designed to require agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis.242 The use of cost-benefit analysis as the basis for regulatory decisions has been highly controversial, partly because of conceptual and empirical obstacles to quantifying either costs or benefits, 2 43 and partly because no agency is widely trusted to undertake a fair analysis.244 Although we cannot resolve these problems here, it is clear that availability cascades provide a new and distinct reason for some kind of costbenefit mandate, not as a way of obtaining an uncontroversial assessment of policy options, not as the foundation for every decision, and not because economic efficiency is the only legitimate ground for regulation, but as an instrument for producing relevant information and a common-sensical brake on measures that would do little good and possibly considerable harm. 
Wherever some salient event might cause a cascade in favor of speedy regulation, there are good reasons to support mechanisms that help identify and quantify actual risks, and also for putting "on screen" the various possible disadvantages of attempting to curb them.245 Cost-benefit analysis might therefore serve as a check on ill-advised availability campaigns. Consider, for example, the very different implications of cost-benefit analysis for a lead phasedown (amply justified) and for eliminating asbestos (a decidedly mixed picture). 246 An understanding of availability cascades certainly does not establish the usefulness of cost-benefit analysis; the proof would lie in its implementation. Yet such an understanding offers a new basis for requiring cost-benefit analysis as a means of widening the viewscreens of political actors and containing availability errors. 
Cost-Benefit State,in FREE MARKETS, supranote 211, at 348-83. 
Herman B. Leonard & Richard J. Zeckhauser, Cost-Benefit Analysis Applied to Risks: Its Philosophy and Legitimacy, in VALUES AT RISK, supranote 216, at 31. 

REGULATORY IMPACT (Richard D. Morgenstern ed., 1997). 

Other possible safeguards against harmful availability cascades would involve the executive branch, which is probably in the best position to analyze risks comprehensively. 247 Unlike the courts, the executive branch is capable of taking a bird's eye view of the entire regulatory system; and unlike Congress, it is already equipped with institutions designed to promote overall consistency. Obviously, measures adopted by the executive branch must be consistent with laws enacted by Congress; in principle, therefore, the legislature has the power to undermine any executive initiative to place regulations on more rational footing. Yet the executive branch exercises a powerful influence on public opinion, and it has considerable power to act on its own. 
The following are three complementary proposals, each of which can help prevent cascades driven by misperceptions. 
Several recent bills would require executive agencies to use "peer review" as a means of corroborating the evidence that underlies the regulations they institute.248 Under peer review, agency proposals are subject to scrutiny by informed outsiders. Many agencies have already experimented with this procedure. The argument developed in this article provides systematic reasons for expanding the ongoing experiments. 
The most critical function of peer review is to identify and correct misperceptions spread through availability cascades. While an availability cascade is in progress, and even after it has run its course, peer review can provide an important safeguard against policy responses that the facts do not justify. The Love Canal and Alar scares might have been contained at an early stage if the underlying claims had been subjected to peer review in a timely manner and the findings given wide publicity.2 49 
executive branch). 
limit, an availability cascade already under way. For the same reasons why nonscientists seek refuge in preference and knowledge falsification, scientists asked to review widely accepted data may be reluctant to raise questions if their identity is to become public knowledge. There are advantages, therefore, to providing the selected scientists anonymity. But even anonymity would not guarantee objectivity of the reviews. Scientists have biases of their own, and they may pursue personal agendas. Nor are they immune to cognitive biases. In certain contexts where predictability is particularly low, experts equipped with scientific models tend to display greater overconfidence than laypeople who understand how little they know. For an overview of this finding and many relevant references, see Matthew Rabin, Psychology and Economics, 36 J. ECON. LITERATuRE 11, 31-32 (1998). Another potential problem lies with the possibility of mistrust: For reasons unrelated 
Among the reasons why people turn to nonexperts for information on various risks is that they lack easy access to statistically accurate and scientifically up-to-date judgments. This handicap limits their capacity to compare risks and develop sound understandings of dangers associated with, for example, air travel, automobile driving, poor diet, electromagnetic fields, and infrequent exercise. To be sure, most such information may be found in publications shelved in any good library or bookstore. Alas, people seeking to educate themselves might have to read dozens of books to make the necessary comparisons. In addition, they would first have to identify the appropriate sources and learn how to standardize disparate pieces of information. There exist large potential gains, then, from making the most current and scientifically most credible information easily accessible to the widest possible audience. In the computer age, the Internet may serve as the requisite medium.2 50 
We propose the creation of a central Risk Information Site (RIS) on the World Wide Web. This site would list various risks and identify the probabilities, or range of probabilities, associated with each of them. The technology of the web allows the nesting of multiple levels of detail. The most elementary level ought to be extremely simple to follow-simple enough, perhaps, for a high-school student to check the latest scientific knowledge on, say, the risks associated with Alar or Love Canal; below this layer would lie progressively more sophisticated layers, each accessible at the click of a mouse. Where the scientific community is divided on a particular risk assessment, as it is on the thinning of the ozone layer, the RIS should make the substance of the controversy as clear as possible, allowing websurfers to review the opposing arguments. The proposed website could be designed and operated by a nongovernmental Risk Information Center (RIC), along the lines of Consumer Reports. It could even be a profit-oriented enterprise; after all, there exist profit-driven credit bureaus that enjoy an exemplary reputation because they have a stake in their maintenance. 2 1 Only if no nongovto the case at hand, nonscientists may lack trust in the scientific community. This possibility could be minimized by selecting reviewers from among members of the scientific community who are respected for their integrity. If the peer review process falls into disrepute, nonscientists will turn elsewhere for information, thus becoming more susceptible to availability errors. 
given the speed at which cascades often develop, the Internet offers obvious advantages to both information disseminators and information seekers at times when a frightening claim suddenly catches widespread attention. 
CreditInformation Sharing, 4 ECoN. & POt. 117, 121-23 (1992). See generally REPUTATION: STUDIES IN THE VOLUNTARY ELICITATION OF GOOD CONDUCT (Daniel B. Klein ed., 1997). These studies do not show that credit bureaus are infallible. Just as ConsumerReports makes mistakes, so do other information providers. The point remains that they provide generally very valuable information. ernmental entity is willing or able to undertake the task should the federal government take the lead, because a government-operated RIC would have a harder time rising above partisan politics and establishing its trustworthiness. 
Counteracting the irrational attitudes and counterproductive policy demands caused by cognitive biases and distortions of public discourse, an RIS would help individuals form their risk preferences and judgments more rationally than is currently possible.25 2 The RIS would also offer information on how other countries are dealing with particular risks, thus alerting people to possible over- or under-reactions. It might allow parties to a controversy to make their case as well as rebut their opponents. Had an RIS existed during the Love Canal episode, both Lois Marie Gibbs and her skeptics within the scientific world might have been given opportunities to post evidence supporting their respective cases as well as their reasons for doubting the opposing account. Equally important, the proposed RIS would feature systematic information on possible discrepancies between public and private opinion on ongoing controversies. To this end, it would post controlled surveys that give people anonymity along with ones that deliberately do not. These surveys would serve to identify hidden currents of opinion and unarticulated insights, thus strengthening individual resistance to the biases of public discourse and the social pressures stemming from public opinion. An even more ambitious enterprise would be to include information about the objectives of all groups with a stake in regulating particular risks. One could also publicize analyses of their political strategies. 25 3 
In a world in which highly trusted scientists quickly evaluate all perceived risks and post their findings in comprehensible form on a widely known website, availability errors of the kinds that motivated this article would be less likely to develop than they currently do. Were a news program to claim that apples carry a deadly poison, people could check the RIS to learn what is known about the identified risk. If scientific tests suggested an infinitesimal risk, fewer people would believe the claim, and no major cascade would follow. It is possible, of course, for credible tests to be nonexistent. In this event, the RIC, or possibly some other organization such as the one we will propose next, would immediately undertake new tests to evaluate the claim. If the claim proved groundless, a possibly costly cascade would be prevented without involving the courts. 
Obviously, even the most elaborate RIS cannot prevent every potentially destructive availability cascade. For one thing, just as some car buyers would rather seek guidance from their acquaintances than from Consumer erroneous information. 
"consciousness raising" with respect to threats to the environment, hospitals and insurance companies with incentives to downplay evidence of danger. Reports, many people would not consult the RIS. In addition, even highlyeducated people can be influenced by empirically baseless claims, and certain people have strong incentives to exploit this gullibility; witness the numerous promoters of accounts involving flying saucers and alien abductions, and the millions of Americans who take these accounts seriously. Nevertheless, an RIS could certainly help at the margin. Insofar as the RIS makes a difference, it would limit the need for speech-restricting measures such as the food disparagement laws discussed above. 
In 1981, President Reagan created a new agency, an Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) within the Office of Management and Budget, to oversee risk regulation in an effort to ensure coordination and rationality. 5 4 Since that time, the functions of OIRA have changed. Under Presidents Reagan and Bush, OIRA operated essentially as a "cost-benefit" monitor that intervened in an ad hoc way to force reconsideration of inefficient or excessive regulations 5 s President Clinton, who has taken steps of his own to "reinvent government"2 56 so as to ensure greater attention to results than to processes, has de-emphasized this particular function.25 7 
In view of the dangers of availability (and unavailability) cascades, OIRA should be reinvigorated and its powers extended and strengthened. This measure would serve to deter unreasonable regulations. Specifically, the OIRA should have, and be known to have, authority over both prioritysetting and cost-benefit balancing. It should be committed to mitigating the most unfortunate effects of availability cascades, not only by keeping small risks from consuming huge resources, but also by ensuring that major risks receive attention. Where experts working under OIRA lacked confidence in risk judgments spreading through a cascade, they would conduct fact-finding exercises. And, depending on the results, they would publicize any inaccuracies in popular beliefs. Likewise, where a scientific study suggested that a particular risk judgment should be revised, OIRA would examine the study's methodology, check whether its results can be replicated, and disseminate its findings. OIRA's mission should also include the dissemination of systematic information about risks, including changes in what scientists know about particular risks and the methods for controlling them. Finally, it should con254. See Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 § 2(c) (1981) (prohibiting regulatory action unless the benefits outweigh the costs to society). 
(discussing the role of OIRA in the Reagan and Bush Administrations). 
L. REV. 1, 95 (1995) (noting that, in the Clinton Administration, agencies are required to call for performance objectives rather than to specify the manner ofcompliance). duct systematic comparisons with other countries in the interest of finding cross-country differences that might provide clues to misperceptions or policy flaws at home. OIRA could constitute one of the information sources for the RIS discussed above. 
If it proves infeasible to redesign OIRA along the proposed lines, and its role remains very limited, one might establish an alternative institution to publicize the inconsistencies of the prevailing regulatory system and focus attention on the most serious risks. United States Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer has suggested assembling a multidisciplinary group of welltrained risk managers, which would be authorized to divert resources from small problems to large ones.25 8 Justice Breyer's suggestion is largely consistent with our discussion. A "Breyer Group" within the executive branch could undertake the types of analyses and educational activities we are proposing here. The group would have the authority to publicize its findings about the relative seriousness of risks, require agencies to seek consistency in setting their priorities, and recommend changes in statutes, regulations, and even appropriations. A Breyer Group might even be empowered to undertake certain resource reallocations on its own. Our difference from Justice Breyer, which is perhaps only one of emphasis, lies in our view that risk evaluation has nontechnical dimensions that may require democratically determined risk policies to diverge from the types of risk rankings currently fashionable in scholarly circles.25 9 
Courts, too, have a role to play in preventing excessive reactions to availability cascades. Most naturally, they can undertake judicial review of administrative actions alleged to be "arbitrary" or "capricious" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).2 60 The ban on arbitrary or capricious action is increasingly being understood as requiring agencies to produce plausible evidence that their actions produce "more good than harm. '261 This notion appears to embody a presumptive requirement that costs not be grossly disproportionate to benefits. 262 Thus, existing doc258. See BREYER, supranote 65, at 60-61. 
"'MoreGood ThanHarm A FirstPrincipleforEnvironmentalAgencies and Reviewing Courts, 20 ECOLOGY L.Q. 379 (1993). 
(1980) (noting that the Occupational Health and Safety Act of 1970 "was not designed to require employers to provide absolutely risk-free workplaces whenever it is technologically feasible to do so, so long as the cost is not great enough to destroy an entire industry"); Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201, 1224-29 (5th Cir. 1991) (striking down an EPA ban on asbestos in brake parts in part because the agency failed to consider evidence that the ban would cost more lives than 
trine authorizes courts to invalidate the most extreme and the most poorly conceived regulatory proposals, at least if they are not required by statutes. Courts can hardly be expected to identify availability cascades or to invalidate regulatory initiatives merely for being products of cascades. But if regulators are required to demonstrate that their policies would plausibly make things better rather than worse, taking account of all relevant variables, we will have a potentially valuable safeguard against harmful cascades. 
Ordinarily, the reach of the doctrine of "more good than harm" is limited. But in contexts in which an availability cascade produces a sudden outcry for costly action against an actually small but allegedly grave risk, this doctrine can provide courts considerable authority. At a minimum, it prohibits regulations that rest on unfounded perceptions about health risks.263 Courts might also use the doctrine as an interpretive principle in dealing with ambiguous statutes; specifically, the principle would allow agencies to exempt de minimis risks, and perhaps require them to do so, on analogy to the common law maxim that absurdity in interpretation will be avoided 64 The doctrine of more good than harm entails a requirement that agencies be permitted to engage in "health-health" analysis where they see fit, ensuring that regulations do not create health problems more serious than those they are intended to alleviate.26 Certain policy responses to availability cascades will be found to fail health-health analysis. 266 
Finally, the "more good than harm" doctrine entails a mandate that, under the APA, agencies undergoing arbitrariness review should make a plausible showing that a regulation's costs are not grossly disproportionate to its benefits. We have said that our analysis makes a cognitive case for costbenefit analysis as a safeguard against socially destructive availability cascades. If availability and unavailability cascades can divert attention from important questions, then a broader reason exists for thinking that some form of cost-benefit analysis can do some good.267 it saved); NRDC v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 1154-62 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (holding that the EPA was not precluded from considering cost in establishing omission standards for vinyl chloride). 
one of the grounds on which CorrosionProofFittings invalidated a regulation banning asbestos was that in many contexts the risk was trivial. See CorrosionProofFittings,947 F.2d at 1218-19. 
construction of the words of a statute be absurd, the act must be so construed as to avoid the absurdity."); Riggs v. Palmer, 22 N.E. 188, 189 (N.Y. 1889) (refusing to construe a probate law in a way that would benefit a murdering heir). 
223-41. 
RISK: TRADEOFFS IN PROTECTING HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT (John D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds., 1995). 
analysis that keeps the effects of regulation on screen. See also Albert L. Nichols, Lead in Gaso 
By way of summary, let us explore how the availability cascades discussed early in the article might have fared had the relevant institutional reforms been in place. The proposals that followed the terrorism-related concerns involving TWA 800268 are probably the easiest to reconsider in this light. Most would not have survived cost-benefit analysis. Studies probably would have shown that, in encouraging driving by raising the cost of flying, the proposals would not have enhanced overall safety and might well have harmed it.269 Our reforms would have had the same function as an earlier use of cost-benefit analysis, which tested a proposal to make young airplane passengers fly in their own child safety seats.270 In that case, cost-benefit analysis revealed that such a restriction would cost rather than save lives (by encouraging driving), and this finding helped defeat the proposal. 
The Alar case 271 could have been subjected to an analogous test. Peer review and cost-benefit analysis would have revealed the NRDC report to be vastly exaggerated, helping to alleviate the rapidly spreading fears. Perhaps by the time official investigations were completed and their findings publicized, the rapid cascade would already have forced apple growers to cease using Alar. However, government officials, relying on information from OIRA and the proposed Risk Information Center,2 72 could have provided more forceful reassurances than they actually did. In the Love Canal case, 273 a congressional risk oversight committee might well have restricted the size of Superfund. It could have shown that even if it is appropriate for the federal government to commit itself to cleaning abandoned hazardous waste dumps, devoting billions of taxpayer dollars to the cause was indefensible. 
The reforms we advocate would thus have protected society against legislative misallocations while offering the executive branch a greater role in priority-setting. The government would have been able to reallocate resources earmarked for abandoned hazardous waste dumps to more serious risks such as cancer and asthma. line, in ECONOMIC ANALYSES AT EPA, supra note 245, at 49 (demonstrating that cost-benefit analysis helped spur regulation of lead); James K. Hammitt, Stratospheric-OzoneDepletion, in ECONOMIC ANALYSES AT EPA, supra note 245, at 131 (asserting that cost-benefit analysis helped induce the regulation of chlorofluorocarbons). 

at Al. 

In this article, we have tried to substantiate the following claims: lack reliable or first-hand knowledge. In such contexts, they assess probabilities with the help of the availability heuristic. Insofar as this heuristic influences the information that individuals store, retrieve, and process, it interacts with all other judgmental heuristics and with all cognitive biases that distort theirjudgments. 
frequently amplified by socially shaped informational cues and reputational incentives. People often believe something because others appear to believe it; or they feign conviction to avoid reputational harm. 
discourse ordinarily feed on one another. Under the right conditions, they generate availability cascades that spread and worsen misperceptions. As a result, the perceived collective wisdom may bear little, if any, relation to reality. 
advance their causes, and they work to extend those already in progress. Acting selfishly or altruistically, they focus attention on isolated events, select information to support their preferred interpretations, and make anyone who questions their objectives appear ignorant, duped, or depraved. 
public opinion about the relative magnitudes of risks will exhibit multiple expressive equilibria. This implies the possibility of sudden shifts in public discourse on any given matter (as with the eruption of mass anxiety over toxic waste sites in the 1970s), inconsistencies across contexts (as with the huge attention paid to the dangers of Alar when more significant sources of risk, such as poor diet and insufficient exercise, received little attention), and discrepancies across countries at any given time (as with policies with respect to nuclear power, which is considered a much more serious threat in the United States than in Europe). 
analysis of legislation and regulation. An emphasis on interest-group pressures alone, or the availability heuristic standing by itself, leaves important gaps in understanding. 
create formidable political pressures in support of wasteful and counterproductive regulations. These pressures might be mitigated by equipping the political system with "circuit breakers" to slow availability cascades and encourage the reconsideration of the demands they spawn. Without removing the right to select risk policies democratically, all three branches of government should be enabled to resist demands driven by misinformation about risks and to seek consistency among risk policies. 
Our starting point has been that people often lack relevant knowledge, even with respect to matters of great importance to them, and even if their convictions are intensely held. On matters ranging from the health consequences of sugar and coffee consumption to the risks of automobile driving, nuclear power, global warming, asthma, and thinning of the ozone layer, each of us depends for information on what other people seem to know, even as others are relying at least partly on us. We have sought to show how the availability heuristic interacts with informational and reputational motivations to create pervasively held social judgments rooted in cascades. 
Because people routinely use the availability heuristic in trying to make sense of reality, there is a danger of widespread and persistent misperceptions about risks. To be sure, an availability cascade that reshapes public discourse may be socially beneficial; the transformation can draw overdue attention to neglected problems. But there is no guarantee that the effects will be beneficial; socially damaging availability errors cannot be ruled out. A major challenge for any democratic system is to institute safeguards against harmful cascades. We have suggested that a modest but potentially appropriate response is to create disincentives against efforts to instigate mass scares by propagating knowing falsehoods. We have also suggested, less modestly, that each of the three branches of American government should be reformed in order to create protections against the adverse effects of availability cascades. Our analysis indicates that peer review and costbenefit analysis should be encouraged as checks against misperceptions rooted in interdependent learning and preference falsification. 
Availability cascades are by no means new, but modem communications enable them to gather momentum and overwhelm governments far more rapidly than was possible in the past. Fortunately, the very technologies responsible for this transformation present new tools for lessening the potential dangers. Most promisingly, a trusted Risk Information Site on the World Wide Web could make the latest information on a wide variety of hazards instantly available to anyone with access to a computer. This site would educate people not only on the magnitudes and characteristics of particular risks but also on discrepancies between private and public opinion about relevant controversies. 
A broader educational mission would be to disseminate information about the mechanics and implications of availability cascades. Insofar as people appreciate the mechanisms discussed here, they will know that public opinion can be both misinformed and deceptive. As Alexis de Tocqueville recognized, the notion that the majority is not necessarily right collides with one of the building blocks of modem democracy: the principle of majority 
A VA1LABILITY CASCADES rule.274 To ascribe moral authority to numbers is to instruct individuals that if they are outnumbered they are likely to be wrong and deserving of criticism. It is also to signal to the majority that it has a moral right to intimidate dissenters. As compared with people socialized to believe in the virtues of majority rule, those who understand the mechanics and consequences of availability cascades will be more resistant to their informational and reputational signals. 
Availability cascades can arise with respect to any issue on which large numbers of people have limited knowledge. Consider the controversy over reforming social welfare programs. Most Americans are uninformed about the details of these programs; few people know the percentage of welfare recipients who live in cities and how long beneficiaries generally remain on welfare. Whatever the merits of tightening welfare eligibility requirements, activists on all sides of the controversy help shape public discourse both by disseminating biased information and by vilifying their opponents. President Reagan, a master at using modem technologies to exploit people's use of the availability heuristic, played a leading role in reorienting public discourse on welfare, above all through sharp anecdotes that made honest taxpayers consider the system unfair; one such anecdote was the tale of the chauffeurdriven "welfare queen" who makes a fortune without working.27 5 President Reagan also succeeded in painting the supporters of welfare as "tax-andspend liberals" uninterested in promoting a sense of personal responsibility.276 
The debate preceding the Gulf War of 1991 provides another instructive example from national politics. People on both sides of the debate recognized that their cause would benefit by framing the issue appropriately and exploiting the availability heuristic. Pro-interventionists sought to raise the availability of images of the Korean War, which is widely believed to have inhibited the spread of communism; anti-interventionists reminded Americans of the Vietnam War, generally remembered as a death trap born out of miscalculation, ignorance, and self-serving exaggeration of the stakes involved.277 
Reeve & Francis Bowen eds. & trans., 1945) (1835). 
(referring to Reagan's repeated use of anecdotes about "welfare queens"). 
RACE, RIGHTS, AND TAXES ON AMERICAN POLITICS 198-214 (1992) (analyzing Reagan's masterful use of coded language to further his party's social agenda); Robert A. Rosenblatt, Reagan Opens FightAgainst DemocraticBudget Plans: Warns That Any Tax Measure 'That Makes It Into Oval Office Won't Make It OutAlive,' L.A. TIMES, June 23, 1987, at 13 (describing Reagan's campaign to make Congress look like a squanderer of money). 

The explosion of federal and state legislation to combat "hate crimes" offers another instructive example. This legislative campaign is being spearheaded by availability entrepreneurs who publicize major crimes against gays and ethnic minorities to paint a picture of a virulent "epidemic" of such crimes and to signal that the campaign's opponents show insensitivity to a horrible social problem.278 Their campaign for hate crimes legislation went into high gear in mid-1998 after a racially-motivated murder in Jasper, Texas. 279 Proponents argued that this murder confirms the persistence of racial violence and the need for extraordinary measures to combat the problem. Opponents of such legislation sought to use the same tragedy to demonstrate the lack of a need for special legislation. Jasper united in condemnation of the crime, they noted, and the police quickly caught the suspects. 280 
Salient news sometimes becomes the focus of availability campaigns designed to achieve political outcomes that would otherwise be unattainable. A coalition of celebrities used Princess Diana's death during a high-speed escape from tabloid journalists to make a case for stronger protections against invasions of their privacy. The leading availability entrepreneurs of this episode were the Screen Actors Guild and Senator Diane Feinstein; they tried to capitalize on the sympathy that this tragic death evoked by publicizing the dark side of tabloid journalism and vilifying tabloid journalists in order to catalyze an availability cascade in favor of new restrictions on media activities.2 1 
There are also groups that work to prevent potentially salient events capable of producing availability cascades inimical to their legislative agendas. In 1998, a group of Greek-Americans organized a campaign that induced a famous actor to give up the lead role in a high-budget film about the life of Mustafa Kemal Atatfirk, the founder of modem Turkey. 2 2 Even though the period when Atatfirk held Turkey's presidency is remembered as the golden age of modem Turkish-Greek relations, the campaigners, who condemned Atatiirk for actions they perceived as evil, feared the film would depict him favorably. 2 3 They also feared that a reverential portrayal in a major Hollywood production would improve popular feelings toward Turkey, which they considered a threat to Greek interests.2 4 One of their justifications was that the probable transformation of public opinion would alter the political bal278. See generallyJAMES B. JACOBS & KIMBERLY POTTER, HATE CRIMES 29-44 (1998). TIMES, June 10, 1998, at A16. 
Picks DeathSentence in FatalDraggingofBlackMan, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 26, 1999, at Al. 
Leader,N.Y. TIMES, July 16, 1998, at El. 
ance in Washington with regard to laws and policies of interest to the two mother countries and their ethnic communities in the United States.28S Another was that the film would influence legislative battles raging in many state and local governments over guidelines for teaching history.2 86 
Availability cascades are relevant not only to routine legislative struggles but also to the making and exercise of constitutional law. Consider first the matter of constitutional design. The rules for constitution-making and constitution-amending 2 7 provide safeguards against bad cascades. In particular, they call for extended deliberation to prevent rushed, myopic, or misinformed judgments. Proposed amendments succeed only by surviving a complex process of "peer review" by many people in various institutional settings.288 Like the rules that govern constitutional design, the checks and balances of the Constitution are designed to counteract the potentially destructive social forces that we have highlighted here.2 9 So understood, the prevailing constitutional limits to rapid decisionmaking hardly constitute undemocratic obstacles to implementation of the popular will. On the contrary, they are instruments to improve the workings of democracy in the light of the inescapable cognitive limitations of individual citizens and their susceptibility to social pressures. 2 0 
The courts are not immune to the social mechanisms examined in this article. Judges are subject to the availability heuristic, vulnerable to informational biases, and responsive to reputational incentives. All this leaves them open to the influences of availability cascades.291 Occasionally, a single legal decision-for example, Dred Scott v. Sandford,292 Plessy v. Ferguson,293 Lochner v. New York,294 Brown v. BoardofEducation,29s Roe v. 
that knowledge about a period of Turkish-Greek rapprochment would cool current intercommunal tensions. See id. It is significant that both proponents and opponents of the campaign rest their cases on expectations concerning the consequences of altering the availability of information about Atatilrk. 
campaigns over the interpretation of history, see DAVID LOivENTHAL, POSSESSED BY THE PAST: THE HERITAGE CRUSADE AND THE SPOILS OF HISTORY (1996). 

to amend the Constitution). 
politics). 
constraints on majorities facilitate democracy). 
andJudicialDecisionMaking, 23 J. ECON. BEHAV. & ORG. judicial decisionmaking). 
Wade296-comes to signal how an entire area of law should be understood. By virtue of the salience it acquires, it conveys a relatively simple moral or institutional lesson. For precisely this reason, individuals with strong views on a possible, pending, or actual legal decision try to show that it is, or could become, "another Lochner,.... another Brown," or "another Roe." Social struggles over the meaning of great legal cases should be understood in this light. 
Brown was exceedingly controversial in the late 1950s and early 1960s, 297 but its defenders put in motion an availability cascade that completed its course around 1980.298 Since that time, to say that Brown was misguided, or even to question its merits, has been to risk serious reputational damage, even ostracism from legal circles. Part of Brown's significance lies in its demonstrated power to trigger subsidiary availability cascades, such as those that have made discrimination on the basis of sex and alienage seem "like" racial segregation. 299 
The evolution of the American legal community's understanding of Roe v. Wade offers an example of concurrent and competing local availability cascades. In principle, Roe may be treated as either "another Brown" or "another Lochner." Through the mutually reinforcing reputational and informational mechanisms discussed here, large segments of the legal community have come to perceive it as "another Lochner." Within these circles, a defense of Roe triggers reputational sanctions. These circles co-exist with others, within which one incurs reputational punishments for challenging rather than defending Roe. Within each of these rival camps, perceptual interdependencies are clearly at work. Their members consider Roe right or wrong partly, if not largely, on the basis of what their co-members generally seem to believe. 00 As with Brown, the social forces at work have spillover effects in other areas. Roe's controversial status may have initiated a powerful availability cascade that predisposes judges not to extend constitutional protections to new rights claimed to be part of constitutionally protected privacy or liberty. It may even have helped make the Supreme Court less inclined to 
HARV. L. REV. 1 (1959). 
the Supreme Court. As a result of these changes, litigants became more cautious in attempting to seek social engineering through constitutional law and, hence, less likely to claim that their case should be regarded as "another Brown." 
TUSHNET, CONSTITUTIONAL LAw 710,743 (3d ed. 1996). 
processes highlighted here are not mutually exclusive. treat the "right" to physician-assisted suicide as a constitutional right, lest the judgment create "another Roe."30' 
Availability cascades can help or hinder the tasks of governance by shaping social norms and determining compliance levels. Behavioral research shows that changes in the availability of information about compliance with a prevailing norm often influence the extent to which it is followed. For instance, taxpayers are far more likely to comply with the prevailing tax laws if they believe that most people fulfil their tax obligations than if they think that noncompliance is widespread. 30 2 Another example is the problem of drinking on college campuses. Students who "binge drink" tend to overestimate the number of binge drinkers; when informed of the actual numbers, they are less likely to continue this self-destructive and socially harmful behavior.30 3 The tax evasion and binge drinking examples suggest that undesirable behaviors may be curbed simply by controlling the information available to the relevant actors, or alternatively, correcting the availability errors that contribute to the conduct. Each of these cases also shows that the availability of information about compliance levels affects behavior through two channels: by signaling what is socially acceptable and by providing clues as to one's own interests. Laws that have produced compliance with little or no enforcement, such as those that relegate smoking to designated areas and require people to clean up after their dog, have much to do with the informational and reputational mechanisms discussed above.3 °4 
Our arguments here constitute a challenge to both the economic analysis of law and branches of cognitive psychology that are beginning to influence legal scholarship.30 5 With few exceptions, economists have ignored critical interdependencies that govern people's preferences, choices, and beliefs; even the public choice school, which focuses on the sources of legislation, typically neglects the interdependencies at the heart of our argument here. Yet, as we have emphasized, there is no inherent conflict between the rational actor framework and the mechanisms that this article has high301. See Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997) (holding that assistance in committing suicide is not an interest protected by the Due Process Clause); Vacco v. Quill, 521 U.S. 793 (1997) (holding that a state's prohibiting assisting suicide does not violate the Equal Protection Clause). 
Norms Among Peers:Exploring Causes, Consequences,and Implications of PreventionPrograms, in DESIGNING ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG PREVENTION PROGRAMS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 177206 (U.S. Dep't ofEduc. ed., 1997). 
Without Enforcement, in SMOKING POLICY: LAW, POLITICS, AND CULTURE 69 (Robert L. Rabin & Stephen D. Sugarman eds., 1993); Robert Cooter, NormativeFailureTheory ofLaw, 82 CORNELL L. REV. 947 (1997). 
lighted.30 6 Indeed, certain economists, along with legal scholars interested in economics, have derived valuable insights by recognizing that utilitymaximizing individuals are also social beings who care about status and look to others for knowledge. 30 7 For their part, cognitive psychologists have made large contributions to our understanding of information-processing mechanisms. But they have done so without examining how these cognitive mechanisms interact with the social construction, communication, and suppression of knowledge; and this tendency has carried over to the areas of legal scholarship that make use of cognitive psychology. 308 

139237 (1996); TYLER COWEN, FAUSTIAN BARGAINS: MODERN CULTURE AND THE ECONOMICS OF FAME (working title) (forthcoming 2000); ROBERT H. FRANK, CHOOSING THE RIGHT POND: HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND THE QUEST FOR STATUS (1985); KURAN, supra note 5; SCHELLING, supra note 4; Lessig, supranote 13; McAdams, supra note 13. 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://about.jstor.org/terms JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
Oxford University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to American Law and Economics Review 
This content downloaded from 132.174.255.223 on Wed, 27 Jul 2016 13:55:42 UTC 
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms Behavioral Law and Economics: A Progress Report 
The last decade has seen an outpouring of work in "behavioral law and economics;" in the last few years, the outpouring has become a flood.1 This should not be surprising. Cognitive psychology and behavioral economics have played a role in the work of many economists, including, to name just a few examples, George Akerlof (1991), Kenneth Arrow (1986), Colin Camerer (1990), Robert Frank (1999), Timur Kuran (1995), 
(1997) Thaler for comments on this paper, for many helpful discussions, and for permission to draw on our joint work; they should be given full credit for the use of our joint work here, and no blame for mistakes on my part. I have tried to give credit to specific places where I have drawn on Jolis et al., but the discussion there has had a more pervasive influence than the particular citations suggest. I am also grateful to Daniel Kahneman and David Schkade for helpful discussions, to Brian Lehman for excellent research assistance and helpful comments, and to Jill Hasday, Saul Levmore, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and an anonymous reviewer for valuable comments on a previous draft. Many of the topics discussed here are treated in detail in the papers in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed., forthcoming, Cambridge University Press, 1999). 
Send correspondence to: Cass R. Sunstein, University of Chicago Law School, 111 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637; Fax (773) 702-0730; E-mail: csunstei@ midway. uchicago.edu. 
al. (1993); Korobkin (1998a); Kelman (1996); Langevoort (1997); Jolis, Thaler (1998) McCaffery et al. (1995); Jolis (1996); Issacharoff (1996). A valuable symposium is the "Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law," 51 Vanderbilt Law Review 1499 (1988). For an instructive literature review, overlapping in some ways with that presented here, see Langevoort (1998). ©1999 American Law and Economics Association Matthew Rabin (1994), and Richard increasing influence on economics, behavioral approaches were bound to affect economic analysis of law as well.2 The purpose of this essay is to provide a survey and also a progress report - more particularly, to outline the organizing themes of behavioral law and economics, to see how it departs from standard law and economics, and to suggest some problems, questions, and directions for the future.3 
The essay comes in five sections. Section 1 discusses the phenomenon of "constructed" preferences, a phenomenon that lies at the heart of disagreements between conventional and behavioral law and economics; an important example involves "judgment reversals." Section 1 also deals with fairness-related behavior, myopia, and bounded rationality. Section 2 explores fairness and in particular the phenomenon of reciprocity. This phenomenon is exemplified by the fact that people are sometimes willing to sacrifice their economic self-interest both to benefit those who have been fair to them and to harm those who have been unfair to them. Section 3 deals with mental accounting, a mechanism by which people attempt to overcome their tendency to myopia. Section 4, the longest section, explores a number of problems in bounded rationality. These include loss aversion, a finding of prospect theory with special importance for law, including both contract and tort; biases in judgment; heuristics; and possible differences between "decision utility" and "experience utility," differences that suggest that people often do not maximize their own utility. 
Through these various discussions I hope to show how behavioral economics might help to inform predictions about the effects of law and also judgments about what the law ought to be doing. Often behavioral law and economics suggests that the conventional approach misses a great deal. A default rule, for example, may affect underlying preferences in the law of employment and elsewhere (see Isacharoff, 1996; Korobkin, 1997); the set of alternatives placed before a jury or judge may affect outcomes in surprising ways; even if their expected value is the same (see Kelman et al., 1997); a reliably imposed, lenient punishment should have far more de2. Most recent issues of the American Economic Review , the Quarterly Journal of Economics , and the Economic Review contain one of more article involving behavioral economics. 
Rabin (1998) and Conlisk (1996). terrent value than an infrequently imposed, severe punishment Sunstein, and Thaler, 1998) arbitrariness, because of "anchoring" effects and the pervasive problem of "scaling without a modulus" cases will not settle because of the presence of spite, which can incline people to sacrifice their own material self-interest in order to impose costs on others (see Farns worth, 1999); because of mental accounting, and contrary to the conventional wisdom, a redistributive tort rule may be more effective than a redistributive tax (see Jolis, 1998). 
Of course, any large collection of anomalies and effects raises obvious questions about whether behavioral economics, or behavioral law and economics, can make predictions at all, or whether it is relegated instead to offering merely plausible ex post descriptions of law-related events. Section 5 thus discusses problems for the enterprise of behavioral economics and some areas for future inquiry. It lays special stress on the need for parsimony, the discipline imposed by markets, and the possibility of "debiasing." 
and values are constructed, rather than simply elicited, by social situations read off one master list; they are actually constructed during the elicitation process options and suggest alternative heuristics, which give rise to inconsistent responses" the possibility or the value of identifying utility functions in order to analyze the consequences of law. It is instead the foundation for a set of claims, empirical in character, about how certain contexts will push judgment and decision in predictable directions. 
"preference menu" from which they make selections at the moment of choice; preferences can be a product of procedure, description, and context at the time of choice. Moreover, it is possible to identify the influence of different procedures, descriptions, and contexts. "Alternative descriptions of the same choice problems lead to systematically different preferences; strategically equivalent elicitation procedures give rise to different choices; and the preference between x and y often depends on the choice set within which they are embedded" goal of behavioral economics is to link specified features of context with identifiable outcomes - showing, for example, that a choice set of a specified type X will produce outcome A, whereas in an otherwise identical situation, a choice set of some type Y will produce outcome B. A basic goal of behavioral law and economics is to link a better understanding of human behavior with a better set of predictions about the sources and effects of law. 
Behavioral economics has special relevance to law, for the legal system is pervasively in the business of constructing procedures, descriptions, and contexts for choice. Most obviously, the legal system creates procedures, descriptions, and contexts in the course of litigated cases. For example, the alternatives selected to be placed before a jury or judge may matter a great deal; liability or conviction on some count A may very much depend on the nature of counts B, C, and D. A judge or jury may choose A, and not B, when C is the only alternative; but when D is introduced, a judge or jury may choose B instead. This outcome is predicted by the phenomenon of extremeness aversion (discussed below), even though, on conventional assumptions, the introduction of some unchosen alternative ought not to affect choices. From this prediction we know a great deal more than we otherwise would; it should be possible to learn a great deal more. Eventually, observers may well be able to make robust predictions about the effects, on juries, of the menu of possible alternatives placed before them. In this respect the preferences and values of judges and juries can be constructed, not elicited, by the legal system. 
where special problems may arise; the plaintiff's demand, for example, may serve as an "anchor" for the jury's choice, and different demands can produce different outcomes demand of $100,000 may produce a much higher award than a demand of $20,000, even if the case is otherwise identical, simply because the $100,000 becomes the starting point from which adjustments are made. Similar points hold outside of the courtroom. The legal system's original allocation of entitlements, and the structures created for exchange (or nonexchange) by law, may well affect people's preferences and values (see Korobkin, 1998a). People who are originally given an entitlement say, to be fired only for cause, or to be free from certain occupational hazards - are likely to value the right more than if it were originally given to someone else. The point much bears on the selection of default rules in contract law; contrary to the Coase theorem, different default rules may lead to dramatically different outcomes, even if transactions costs are minimal. Thus, law can construct rather than elicit preferences internally, by affecting what goes on in court, and externally, by affecting what happens in ordinary transactions, market and nonmarket. 
Behavioral economists have devoted a good deal of attention to "preference reversals," which occur when people change their choices with different descriptions of options that, on conventional grounds, should be regarded as identical (Thaler, 1992, p. 79). Building on earlier work, Tversky and Thaler find, for example, that people may choose an option A over option B, but also conclude that option B is worth more than option A when the two are valued separately.4 Their example involves the choice between two highway safety programs designed to reduce the 600 annual fatalities in a hypothetical Middle Eastern country. Program A would reduce the number of fatalities to 570, at an annual cost of $12 million. Program B would reduce the number of fatalities to 500, at an annual cost of $55 million. When asked which program they would choose, about twothirds of respondents favor program B. When given the same information about the two programs, except the cost of Program B, and then asked to state the cost that would make the two programs equally attractive, more than 90% offer amounts under $55 million. These answers suggest that the same people prefer Program B, thus producing a preference reversal. Tversky and Thaler conclude by invoking the baseball umpire who says, with respect to balls and strikes, "They ain't nothing till I call them"; they find that preference is "a constructive, context-dependent process." chance of winning a small prize over a low chance to win a bigger prize. Thus, people would choose a 7/8 chance to win $6 over a 1/8 chance to win $60. But when asked to state the lowest price for which they would trade the gamble if they owned it, people place a higher price on the lower chance-higher payoff bet. See Lichtenstein and Slovic (1971). 
The question remains whether and how these findings are relevant to law. Related research by Kahneman, Ritov, and Schkade (1999) has found "valuation reversals" in two contexts of special importance to the legal system: contingent valuation and punitive damage awards. The punitive damage cases involved, respectively, financial harm and personal injury. When the cases were viewed in isolation, people were willing to support higher awards for the financial harm plaintiffs, partly because of the relatively higher compensatory award in those cases. (The compensatory award thus worked as an "anchor"; see below.) But when the two cases were considered together, about three-quarters of people assessed larger awards for the personal injury case, resulting in a dramatic reversal in median awards. In short, the financial injury judgments plummeted when the two cases were seen together. In cases without anchors, changes were also observed, as the median awards for the financial cases decreased, whereas the median awards for the personal injury cases increased (Kahneman et al., 1999). Similar reversals of judgment were observed not only for dollars but also for ratings, on a bounded numerical scale, of punitive intent. Related findings were observed for contingent valuation problems, where it is found that people's judgments are quite different if cases are studied together rather than separately. More particularly, people's willingness to pay to protect coral reefs is quite high when this issue is investigated in isolation; it is lower when the coral reef problem is examined together with the problem of skin cancer among the elderly (Kahneman, Ritov, and Schkade, 1999). When the problems are taken together, willingness to pay to protect against skin cancer increases, whereas willingness to pay to protect coral reefs falls, sometimes producing valuation reversals. 
Kahneman and his coauthors believe that in many settings, dollar responses to public questions express "attitudes" rather than "preferences" and also that attitudes have distinctive properties, including a tendency to valuation reversals and judgment reversals. If true, this claim has important implications for many legal contexts, including not only jury judgments in general but also criminal sentencing and expenditures in the regulatory state. A possible implication is that judgments of cases and problems in isolation - and isolation is typical of the legal system - will lead to many problems. Isolated judgments may produce global or systematic irrationality, as jurors (and perhaps judges and representatives) reach conclusions that do not cohere with other judgments, simply because cases are examined in isolation. In any case the constructed nature of judgments about dollars, and the potential for "judgment reversals," bears much further study. 
fairness-related behavior, myopia, and bounded rationality. categories are analyzed in depth under the rubric of "three bounds" - bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest - in an essay by Thaler [1996] and an article by Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler [1998], and I draw heavily on that analysis here.) taken to demonstrate that people are "irrational" or that their behavior is unpredictable and arbitrary. Thaler's term "quasi-rational" is a more helpful description of real world agents. The notion of "quasi-rationality" should be taken to suggest departures from standard economic assumptions, but departures that are systematic and predictable, and thus a legitimate basis for predicting human behavior.5 Among the consequences for law is an appreciation of why government intervention may not be necessary to solve collective action problems; an understanding of the important and pervasive phenomenon of "compliance without enforcement" (relevant, for example, to nonsmoking policy); a better understanding of information-forcing default rules in the context of employment law; a sense of how informational campaigns might actually achieve their goals; and a rejection of the sometimes-dogmatic antipaternalism of conventional law and economics. I present the underlying mechanisms very briefly here; readers interested in more details, and responses to counterarguments, might consult Goldstein and Hogarth (1997), Arkes and Hammond (1986), and Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky (1982). Fairness. The first point has to do with the ingredients of most people's utility functions. Most people care, some of the time, about being fair and about being treated fairly, and they will sacrifice their material self-interest with prospect theory rather than expected utility theory. See Kagel, Battalio, and Green (1995). in order to promote these goals.6 In response to perceived antisocial behavior, people sometimes sacrifice their own economic interest in order to impose punishment. Cooperation sometimes exists even without legal constraints on uncooperative behavior, and spitefulness can produce serious problems, as in vengeful behavior before and during litigation (consider a bad divorce). 
in behavioral economics, the content of "fairness" depends on existing social norms and in particular on the reference point Thaler, 1998, pp. 1511-12; Thaler, 1991) point, as in an increase in the price of snow shovels after a snowstorm, is likely to trigger a judgment of unfairness. Thaler suggests, in a set of arguments with many implications for law, that interindustry wage differentials are partly a product of "perceived equity in setting wages" (Thaler, 1992, p. 49). The basic point here is that predictions and prescriptions will sometimes go wrong if they disregard the effects of fairness-related judgments in producing social outcomes. Moreover, the demand for law often reflects not only or even mostly interest-group pressure, but widespread fairness judgments 1016) 
and Shefrin have emphasized, people - in their capacity as "doers" rather than "planners" - overemphasize the short term and care less about the future than conventional theory would predict Myopia helps account for impulsive behavior and for people's inability, some of the time, to stop smoking or drinking, to spend wisely, or to save money over time. Sometimes people take steps to overcome their own myopia. Conventional analysis might explain the underlying phenomena by reference to tastes; perhaps people have strong preferences for early consumption and simply discount the future.7 In many settings, the conventional and behavioral accounts will offer similar predictions. But some anomalies - in particular, precommitment strategies, practices of mental (1998). The difference lies in the suggestion that sometimes people will act fairly even if no one is observing. 
accounting, and different effects of punishments with the same expected value - seem hard to explain without introducing behavioral factors Thaler, 1991, pp. 77-90) help explain cooling-off periods and compulsory savings programs and also insofar as they help make sense, on normative grounds, of apparently paternalistic regulation. 
Bounded rationality. The idea of bounded rationality includes several different points. The first involves the kinds of cognitive errors that can come from biases in judgment and from efforts to economize on decision costs ("heuristics")- Biases fall in various categories; they include hindsight bias, optimistic bias, and extremeness aversion. Efforts to economize on decision costs are responsible for rules of thumb , or heuristics. Rules of thumb - as in the process of deciding on appropriate numbers (for many things, including real estate prices or pain-and-suffering awards) by choosing an "anchor" and then making adjustments - reduce the costs of making decisions, but they may not be fully rational if people could make far fewer errors by acting as good Bayesians. 
A second form of bounded rationality comes from framing effects. People's reaction to a choice may depend on how it is described; hence identical, but differently worded, problems can elicit quite different responses. Consider clients deciding whether to settle or to go to trial. If they are told that, of 100 litigants, 90 who go to trial win, they may be far more likely to go to trial than if they are told that of 100 litigants, 10 who go to trial lose (cf. Redelmeier, Rozin, and Kahneman, 1993). 
Some aspects of bounded rationality are modelled by prospect theory , which is intended as a more accurate description of behavior than expected utility theory. For purposes of law, the first key feature of prospect theory, departing from expected utility theory, is that people are loss averse , that is, they dislike losses more than they like corresponding gains (a topic taken up below). It follows that the value function is less steep for losses than for gains. The second key finding is that people care a great deal about certainty (thus people would prefer a reduction of risk from 0.1 to 0.0 to a reduction of 0.3 to 0.1). The value function identified by prospect theory is defined over some reference point, which appears natural but can be manipulated (a topic also discussed below). The value function is also concave for losses and convex for gains, a shape based on the finding that the difference between 0 and 100 appears greater than the difference between 1,000 and 1,100, no matter what the sign of the magnitudes. An important implication is that people are risk seeking for losses (they would choose an 80% chance to lose $4,000 over a certain loss of $3,000) and risk averse for gains (they would prefer a certain gain of $3,000 over an 80% chance to gain $4,500). 
A recent survey collects a wide range of real world practices or analogies tending to support prospect theory; many of them are relevant to law (see Camerer, forthcoming). Drawing on that survey (and the studies cited there), consider the following examples: 
• There is a longstanding puzzle about the reason for the "equity premium," by which investors sacrifice a great deal by their choices of bonds as compared to stocks; stocks have a much higher average return. The equity premium seems best explained by the fact that people are not averse to variable returns but are (consistently with prospect theory) especially averse to losses in a given year (see Benartzi and Thaler, 1995). 
• Prospect theory predicts that, since people dislike incurring losses, investors will be willing to hold onto stocks that have lost value (compared to purchase price) and will be eager to sell stocks that have risen in value. This result has been confirmed by a careful field study (see Odean, forthcoming). 
• Pennsylvania and New Jersey offered the same basic insurance packages, including an inexpensive one without a right to sue and a more expensive one with a right to sue. In Pennsylvania, the default option was the less costly one; in New Jersey, the default option was the more expensive one. Consistently with loss aversion, a majority selected the default option in both states. 
• If consumers are loss averse, they will dislike price increases more than they like the gain from price cuts, and the amount by which they will reduce purchases when prices rise will be greater than the amount by which they will increase purchases when prices fall. Studies have shown this asymmetry in price elasticities for both eggs and orange juice. 
Self-interest, with Special Reference to Kindness and Spite 
sense that they are focused on their own welfare rather than that of others and in the sense that material welfare is what most concerns them. For some people some of the time, this is certainly true, and it is a useful simplifying assumption; for many projects in the economic analysis of law, it is unexceptionable. But people also want to be treated fairly, and they may be willing to punish people who treat them unfairly, even at the expense of their material self-interest. People may also want to act fairly, and, perhaps even more important, they want to be seen to act fairly, especially but not only among nonstrangers. For purposes of understanding law, what is especially important is that people may sacrifice their economic self-interest in order to be, or to appear, fair. As Robert Axelrod showed more than a decade ago, reciprocal fairness - or kindness, understood as a willingness to sacrifice material self-interest - can be quite important (see Axelrod, 1984). People may meet kindness with kindness and unkindness with spite.8 It follows that rather than being homo economicus , people may be homo reciprocans and unpublished study; Fehr and Schmidt, unpublished study) that people respond kindly to gifts and retaliate when mistreated, even at the expense of their material self-interest.9 Those interested in behavioral law and economics have only begun to explore the implications of this phenomenon for law. 
Consider, for example, the ultimatum game.10 The people who run the game give some money, on a provisional basis, to the first of two players. The first player is instructed to offer some part of the money to 
arguments. An early discussion of kindness and retaliation in the labor market is Akerlof (1982). 
discussion, see Slonim and Roth (1998), which found a slight decline with very high stakes, but offers still far above what conventional analysis would predict. the second player. If the second player accepts that amount, he can keep what is offered, and the first player gets to keep the rest. But if the second player rejects the offer, neither player gets anything. Both players are informed that these are the rules. No bargaining is allowed. Using standard assumptions about rationality, self-interest, and choice, economists predict that the first player should offer a penny and the second player should accept. But this is not what happens. Offers usually average between 30% and 40% of the total. Offers of less than 20% are often rejected. Often there is a 50-50 division. These results generally cut across the level of the stakes (in poor countries, the game has been played for several months in wages, with no difference in results) and also across diverse cultures (see Thaler, 1992). 
The results of the ultimatum game are highly suggestive. Perhaps people will not violate norms of fairness, even when doing so is in their economic self-interest, at least if the norm violations would be public.11 There are several reasons why they might fail to violate such norms: anticipated spite (note the behavior of the responders in the ultimate game); internalized norms; or adverse reputational effects.12 Some people may exhibit a form of "inequity aversion," in the sense that they will sacrifice material payoffs in order to produce more equitable outcomes.13 Rabin (1993) has developed a formal model designed to show the role of fairness in individual judgments. He shows that people may sacrifice material self-interest to help people who have been kind; that they may sacrifice their material self-interest to publish unkind people; and that these motivations have a smaller effect if the material consequences of sacrificing becomes larger. 
As emphasized by Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler (1998, p. 1511), of special importance to fairness-related behavior is the selection of a reference 1 1 . An especially striking set of experimental outcomes can be found in Fehr and Tougareva (unpublished study). 
to allocate it as he wishes; here there is a some tendency toward sharing the proceeds, though it is far less pronounced than in the ultimate game; note also that sharing decreases with anonymity (see Bohnet and Frey, 1999; Kagel and Roth, 1994, pp. 298-302). 
number of inequity-averse people can help produce what the authors call cooperative, competitive, and noncooperative outcomes. 
events - for example, a snowstorm - are likely to be perceived as unfair, insofar as they represent a departure from the status quo, which provides the relevant reference point Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler, 1998, pp. 1510-15) depends on what it is (perceived as) a deviation from, and the perception may be manipulable by participants in markets or in law. 
helps explain why in close-knit communities legal intervention may not be required to solve collective action problems, and indeed law may not much matter, as people organize their affairs via norms rather than law (see Ellickson, 1991). Norms of reciprocity may well develop because people have the ability to impose social sanctions on those who do not comply with those norms, thus creating a self-enforcing system of reciprocity. In the same vein, experimental work shows a high degree of cooperation in prisoners' dilemma situations, especially when people are speaking with one another.14 Experimental work also shows a large role for reciprocal altruism in labor markets possible general conclusion is that legal intervention is not always necessary to solve prisoners' dilemmas. Social norms may well do the work of law, producing cooperation where materially self-interested agents would fail to do so. The agents who populate behavioral economics are, in this important respect, less likely to need government help than are the agents who populate conventional economics. 
Some experimental work suggests too that markets may not work the way they are supposed to, because people's judgments of fairness operate to discipline and constrain market behavior. It appears, for example, that people would like to punish companies that violate perceived fairness, even when they are acting rationally, as, for example, by increasing the price of snow shovels after a snowstorm (see Kahneman, Knetsch, and relation between some behavioral research and the growing and apparently independent interest in regulation via social norms. See Ellickson (1991). I believe that ultimately these two lines of inquiry will merge into a unitary field of inquiry. Thaler, 1986b).15 Such increases are widely perceived as unfair. Departures from the reference point that is relevant for fairness judgments - the presnowstorm price - are strongly disapproved. This point may help explain the existence of otherwise puzzling legal barriers to self-interested behavior. Here there is much room for future work. Do companies always raise prices when circumstances create short-term scarcity? Are there, in fact, social constraints on price increases for snow shovels after a snowstorm, or for umbrellas during a rainstorm? Do these seemingly small examples bear on the setting of wages and on interindustry wage differentials (see Thaler, 1992, pp. 36-49)? It may well be that contracting parties are reluctant to take advantage of the misfortunes of another, partly because of social constraints on self-interested behavior; thus, the idea of the "efficient breach" may misdescribe contracting reality, especially when reputational interests are involved. Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler suggest the possibility that fairness judgments help account for the content of law, by outlawing unfair departures from a reference point (1998, pp. 1510-16). 
A particular finding of the ultimatum game is that people are sometimes willing to sacrifice their economic self-interest in other to punish wrongdoers. Indeed, there are familiar circumstances in which a gain to another person is a loss to an agent (consider a bad divorce), and this point - the starting point for an economic analysis of spite - may bear on the prospects for settlement. Suggestive data have been gathered by Ward Farnsworth, indicating that bargaining does not occur in part because of spite (see Farnsworth 1999). Investigating approximately twenty nuisance cases in which injunctive relief was sought and either granted or denied after full litigation before a judge, Farns worth found no case in which the parties tried to contract around the judge's order. Farnsworth's interviews suggested a behavioral explanation. The victorious parties felt specially entitled to the right that they won, and they did not want to confer any benefit on the party they had bested, even if the benefit might turn out to be mutual. 
law students do not share this widespread fairness judgment. See Houston and Sunstein, (forthcoming 1999). It would be interesting to know if this is a law student effect or a University of Chicago Law School effect. 
Behavioral work involving reciprocity bears on the effects of financial incentives. Usually it is assumed that people will do less of some activity X if they are forced to pay for doing it. But in an intriguing real-world study, it has been shown that this is not the case (see Gneezy and Rustichini, forthcoming). The introduction of small fines for lateness in picking up children at school actually produced more, not less, in the way of lateness. The behavioral explanation would be that when no fine is in place, parents do not wish to impose on teachers, perhaps for reputational reasons, perhaps for reasons of conscience. Parents will rarely be late, and even more rarely very late, because the reputational and psychic cost of doing so is high (if teachers will not be paid in the event of lateness). Or a system of reciprocal altruism may be in place: Teachers agree to spend a little extra time at work, and parents agree to do what they can to arrive on time, so as to minimize the burden. But when a fine is introduced, parents believe that they can "buy" the extra labor, and hence the cost (reputational and psychic) associated with lateness is reduced or removed. Hence, there is more lateness; the introduction of a fine actually reduces the costs of lateness. It would be valuable to see under what circumstances this result could be replicated. (If the economic cost of lateness is quite high, one would not expect to see the fine resulting in more lateness.) 
economists is that money is "fungible." Indeed, if anything is fungible, money is. But the assumption appears to be false, at least some of the time. As Thaler suggests, many people act as if their money resides in compartments Thaler, 1991, pp. 25-47) result in mental accounts through which losses and gains, including losses and gains in simple monetary terms, are not fungible with each other. To some extent, mental accounting can be viewed as a response to, and an example of, myopia. Frequently mental accounting works as a method by which people can overcome their own impulsiveness or tendency to overlook the long term. 
A glance at ordinary practice shows that people often organize decisions in terms of separate budgets and accounts, and they often segment these accounts. Some money is for retirement; some is for vacation; some is for college tuition; some is for mortgage or rental payments. Mental accounting is an important aspect of financial self-control; it can be understood as a kind of precommi tment strategy.16 
What are the implications of mental accounting for law and policy? There appears to be a demand for publicly created mental accounts, perhaps as a self-control strategy, as, for example, with Social Security and other programs with an apparent paternalistic dimension. One reason for mental accounting is to help with possible problems of self-control, and people may enlist law in this endeavor. If so, it is hard to object to the resulting enactments as "paternalistic." The better view would be that they reflect a form of autopaternalism. Some statutes that appear to prevent people from making choices as they wish may be best understood as responsive to the widespread desire to have separate mental accounts. Of course, there are private mechanisms for accomplishing this goal; lawyers will not understand those mechanisms well unless they see that money itself is not fungible. 
The practice of mental accounting suggests that that government may be able to create certain mental accounts by creative policy making. If government wants to encourage savings, for example, it may seek to give distinctive labels to certain accounts, so as to discourage people from dipping into those accounts too readily. This idea suggests the possibility of restructuring social security, not by abolishing any effort to promote savings for old age but by facilitating the creation of specified private accounts, perhaps accompanied by penalties for current use. 
The practice of mental accounting also suggests that redistributive legal rules may be more effective than they seem (see Jolis, 1998). Jolis suggests that, although taxes operate "as a direct charge against incomes," the costs of redistributive rules "may be viewed as expenditures out of income . . . and heightened expenditures out of income may produce fewer or gambling house who subsequently differentiate between "house money" (i.e., winnings) and "their" money. Continuing to play with the money won and losing (with almost certain probability) does not appear to involve the same type of "waste" as playing with and losing the same amount of money that had been obtained in another way (see Dawes, 1998). 
Behavioral Law and Economics: A Progress Report 131 work disincentives than direct charges against income" (1998, p. 1670). If this is so, those who receive money (from tort law or taxation) and those who give money (from tort law or taxation) may respond differently, depending on whether tort law or taxation is responsible. Those who are taxed may face a stronger work disincentive than those who are faced with a redistributive legal rule. 
Most of behavioral work involving mental accounting deals with money, but the phenomenon is far broader. In the moral domain, for example, there is reason to think that people engage in a form of accounting as well (see Kuran, 1998), treating actions of which they are ashamed, or proud, as falling in distinct compartments and possibly as requiring a kind of compensation from future acts in the same compartment. Someone who has acted uncharitably toward a student or a friend might, for example, act quite generously to another student or friend, so as to even out the account. This effect can be felt at the social level as well, as the demand for law reflects a desire to produce sensible accounts (by, for example, going slow on clean water legislation after having gone quickly on clean air legislation). Of course, much more work would be necessary to turn these speculations into something more systematic. 
discount rates, it may be necessary to rethink conventional economic analysis of the criminal law 153841) on the short term, a system of reliable but relatively lenient punishments may have far more deterrent power than a system of infrequently enforced but stringent punishments. And for young people who greatly discount the future, an increase in punishment from, say, twenty years to twentyfive or thirty years may have little effect at all on the level of criminal activity. 
A great deal of work in behavioral law and economics emphasizes a key finding of prospect theory (see Kahneman and Tversky, 1979): in many contexts, people are averse to losses (Thaler, 1992, pp. 70-74). People are more displeased with losses than they are pleased with equivalent gains roughly speaking, twice as displeased. Contrary to conventional economic theory, out-of-pocket costs can loom much larger than opportunity costs. 
Loss aversion has many implications for positive and prescriptive analysis of law, and it therefore deserves separate treatment here. Consider the following: 
noticed that loss aversion suggests that the Coase theorem is in one respect quite wrong Thaler, 1998) transactions costs are zero, the allocation of the initial entitlement will not matter, in the sense that it will not affect the ultimate state of the world, which will come from voluntary bargaining. The theorem can lead to inaccurate predictions because the allocation of the legal entitlement may well matter to the ultimate outcome. This is because those who are initially allocated an entitlement are likely to value it more than those without the legal entitlement. 
chocolate bars; the initial allocation of the right much affects the ultimate outcome (see Thaler, 1992, pp. 63-78). The legal entitlement creates an endowment effect is, a greater valuation stemming from the mere fact of endowment. In experimental research, for example, an endowment effect has been shown for default rules in the law of contract. The parties' understanding of the default rule much affected their ultimate outcome, and different default rules produced different outcomes (see Korobkin, 1998a). As noted, a natural experiment in the real world, involving choice of insurance policies, pro17. Loss aversion does not suggest that the Coase theorem is wrong insofar as it suggests that when transactions costs are zero, the result will be efficient regardless of who gets the initial entitlement; it suggests only that even when transactions costs are the zero, the allocation of the initial entitlement can affect the ultimate outcome. Different results can both be efficient. Note also that conventional analysis predicts one circumstance under which the result under zero transaction cost bargaining will differ with the initial assignment of rights: wealth effects. When there are only two people in a desert, and they are stranded, the initial allocation will be final, regardless of transaction costs (see Richard Posner 1998, p. 56). The contribution of behavioral law and economics is to show that the initial assignment may matter even when wealth effects are small or zero. 
duced a similar result (see Camerer, forthcoming); in both cases citizens could change from the default policy, but in both cases, the default option tended to stick. There is a great deal of evidence that prospect theory captures real-world behavior (see Camerer, forthcoming). 
workers allocated a (waivable) right to be discharged only for cause may well value that right far more than they would be if employers were allocated a (waivable) right to discharge employees at will. The ultimate result of the bargain may be quite different depending on the initial allocation of the entitlement (see Issacharoff 1996). Thus, breathers of air may well value their (tradable) right to be free from air pollution far more than they would if polluters had been given a (tradable) right to emit polluting substances into the air. Especially large endowment effects have been shown in the environmental area, for reasons that remain ill-understood 
• Loss aversion raises serious questions about the tort system. Should damages measure the amount that would restore an injured party to the status quo ante, or should they reflect the amount that an injured party would demand to be subject to the injury before the fact? An intriguing experiment by McCaffery, Kahneman, and Spitzer (1995) suggests that people serving as jurors believe that the amount that would be demanded preinjury is far greater than the amount that would restore the status quo ante. The legal system appears generally to see the compensation question as the latter one, though it does not seem to have made this choice in any systematic way. 
tort law. When should courts award injunctions, and when should they award damages? The answer may be affected by an understanding of the circumstances in which people would demand a great deal - perhaps a lot more than market value - to part with their good. It has been suggested that the legal system shows an awareness of loss aversion insofar as it awards specific performance for certain losses Jourden, 1998) recognizes that a loss will be valued differently from an equivalent gain (see Cohen and Knetsch, 1992). And in an experimental setting, an endowment effect was shown for goods protected by a property rule, but not for goods protected by a liability rule, in a way that has important iming of choice matters; the introduction of (unchosen, apparently irrelevant) alternatives into the frame can alter the outcome. 
Extremeness aversion suggests that a simple axiom of conventional economic theory - involving the irrelevance of added, unchosen alternatives - is wrong. It also has consequences for legal advocacy and judgment as well as for predictions about the effects of law. How can a preferred option best be framed as the "compromise" choice? When should a lawyer argue in the alternative, and what kinds of alternative arguments are most effective? Other things being equal, juries and judges may well try to choose a compromise solution, and what "codes" as the compromise solution depends on what alternatives are made available. And in elections, medical interventions, and policy making, compromise effects may matter a great deal, as people tend to choose the approach that seems to fall between the extremes. 
be optimistic about themselves. Even factually informed people, aware of aggregate data, tend to think that risks are less likely to materialize for themselves than for others. Thus, for example, more than 90% of drivers think that they are safer than other drivers and less likely to be involved in serious accidents have an exaggerated sense of the likelihood that they will continue to be in business; in experiments and in the real world, entry into markets seems affected by excessive optimism (see Camerer and Lovallo, 1999). People also believe that they are peculiarly unlikely to get divorced (see Baker and Emery, 1993). There is systematic overconfidence in risk judgments, as the vast majority of people believe that they are less likely than other people to be subject to infection from AIDS, heart attacks, asthma, and many other health risks their own practices, gay men appear systematically to underestimate the chance that they will get AIDS, even though they do not lack information about AIDS risks in general (see Bauman and Siegel, 1987). One of the most depressing findings in cognitive psychology is that only one group of people have an accurate sense of their own capacities and of what other people think of them: the chronically depressed 3940) 
94% of college professors rate themselves as better than their average colleagues at their jobs (see Baumeister, 1998). 
facts may not produce the anticipated changes in behavior. If the goal is to induce less in the way of drug use or drunk driving, government should attend to the problem that people will exaggerate the safety of their own behavior; hence the slogan, "drive defensively; watch out for the other guy" had a high degree of behavioral ingenuity. On the normative side, those interested in behavioral law and economics have noticed that unrealistic optimism creates a distinctive problem for conventional objections to paternalism in law people tend to believe that they are relatively free from risks, they may lack accurate information even if they know statistical facts. A great deal of further work remains to be done on this problem. Unrealistic optimism may well be counteracted by markets and market-like forces, though even here there is contrary evidence (see Langevoort, 1997). And optimistic bias may help explain why so many people enter "winner-take-all" markets those in which the fortunate few do enormously better than most - even when the probability of success is quite low and the discounted value of the investment is also low (see Frank and Cook, 1995). Legal intervention, perhaps in the form of information, perhaps in the form of corrective taxes, may be necessary to supply a corrective. 
Self-Serving Bias and Settlements . We have seen that people sometimes care about fairness, but their judgments about fairness are systematically self-serving. In any random couple, it is highly likely that addition of answers to the question, "What percentage of the domestic work do you do?" will produce a number greater than 100%. The point bears on the otherwise largely hard-to-explain phenomenon of bargaining impasses (see Babcock and Loewenstein, 1997). Why do some cases fail to settle? Why does the legal system spend so much on dispute settlement? 
As suggested by Jolis et al., part of the answer lies in the fact that self-serving bias - a belief that one deserves more than other people tend to think - affects both parties to a negotiation, and this makes agreement very difficult.20 Babcock, Wang, and Loewenstein (1996) have studied the consequences of self-serving bias for negotiation impasse in public school teacher contract negotiations in Pennsylvania. They show that selfserving bias, in the form of fairness judgments about what communities are "comparable," help account for impasse and strikes. Experimental studies reach a similar conclusion, as students, including law students, reach quite disparate judgments about what would be fair after they have been assigned to one or another side in a tort dispute (see Babcock et al., 1995; Loewenstein et al., 1993). Thus, there were large self-serving biases in assessments of the judge's award. The subjects acting as the plaintiffs guessed an average $14,527 higher than the defendants, and the plaintiffs' fair settlement values averaged $17,709 higher than those of the defendants. 
Hindsight Bias and Legal Mistakes. According to a familiar cliché, hindsight has 20-20 vision. The cliché has important truth, one with considerable relevance to law (see Rachlinski, 1998). People often think, in hindsight, that things that happened were inevitable, or nearly so. Of course, the fact that something happened provides some information about the risky behavior. But people tend to believe that something was nearly inevitable if it actually happened, even if this is quite false. The resulting "hindsight bias" can much distort legal judgment if, for example, juries end up thinking that an accident that occurred would inevitably have occurred. Judgments about whether someone was negligent may well be affected by this bias; if a bad outcome occurred, juries are likely to believe that it was inevitable. For decision makers prone to hindsight bias, the line between strict liability and negligence may be quite thin. 
It is possible that many rules in the law are attuned to hindsight bias. An extensive study by Rachlinski (1998) finds a number of illustrations, as in patent law, where courts are asked to assess whether an invention was "nonobvious" by examining the time of invention, with certain factors designed to ensure that present judgments about what is "obvious" do not interfere with the judgment. To take another example, the "business judgment" rule in corporate law prevents legal authorities from secondguessing managerial decisions in contexts in which the second-guessing may be systematically biased. Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler (1998, pp. 152731) suggest that an understanding of hindsight bias might show that legal rules should be changed in cases involving alleged negligence, in order 
to counteract the judgment that because an unfortunate event happened, it was bound to happen. 
Loss aversion and extremeness aversion suggest possible "framing" effects. A change can be framed as a loss or a gain, and whether an option looks extreme depends on the comparison set, which can be manipulated. Cognitive psychologists, above all Kahneman and Tversky, have shown many such framing effects. An especially important one involves drawing the subject's attention to good outcomes or bad outcomes. Thus, if people are told, "of 100 people who have this operation, 90 are alive five years later," they will respond far more favorably than if they are told, "of 100 people who have this operation, 10 are dead five years later." The point bears on government information campaigns and also on legal ethics. It would be easy for a lawyer to draw attention to the percentage of victories or losses (even if the lawyer has aggregate data), and it may matter a great deal which the lawyer chooses. 
Behavioral economists and cognitive psychologists have uncovered a wide array of heuristic devices that people use to simplify their tasks. Heuristics are not biases, and often they are good, because they economize on decision costs; but they can lead to several mistakes. The major implications have to do with the demand for law (fueled, often, by the availability heuristic), the nature of legal reasoning (often conducted by reference to precedent), and the setting of damage awards (much affected by anchoring, and prone to the distinctive problems that come from "scaling without a modulus"). 
Availability, with a Note on Social Influences , Dupes , Freeloaders , and Cascades. People tend to think that events are more likely if an example is readily called to mind or "available" (see Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). If pervasive, the availability heuristic will produce systematic errors. For example, assessments of risk will be pervasively biased, in the sense that people will think that some risks (of a nuclear accident, for example) are high, whereas others (of a stroke, for example) are relatively low. There is evidence that people's judgments about risk levels are much affected by the availability heuristic (see Baron, 1994). The availability heuristic appears to affect the demand for law, especially in the area of risk regulation; Noll and Krier (1990) and Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler (1998, pp. 1518-21) have discussed this point in considerable detail. 
Of course, the availability heuristic operates in an emphatically social environment, and social influences may "amplify" the effects of the heuristic, in a way that helps account for much behavior, including that behavior that produces the supply of and demand for law (see Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). People often think what (they think) other people think. Sometimes they do what (they think) others do. Partly this is because when a person lacks much personal information, he will sensibly rely on the information of others (see Hirshleifer, 1995). If you do not know whether pesticides cause cancer, or whether hazardous waste dumps are a serious social problem, you may as well follow what other people seem to think. And partly this is because of reputational influences. If most people think that hazardous waste dumps are a serious social problem, or that laws should ban hate crimes, you might go along with them so that they do not think that you are ignorant, malevolent, or callous.21 
For the most part, an emphasis on informational and reputational influences is entirely consistent with conventional economics, though it has implications that have not been sufficiently exploited. An analyst attuned to informational and reputational influences might predict, for example, that people are more likely to vote if they think that most people are voting; that tax compliance is more likely if people think that most people comply; that college students are more likely to drink heavily, or to use unlawful drugs, if they think that this is what most college students are doing; and that teenagers in poor neighborhoods are more likely to join gangs if they think that most teenagers are gang members.22 Behavioral economics adds two points. The first is an understanding of how the availability heuristic interacts with these influences; sometimes a salient event or anecdote can interact with informational and reputational forces so as to create cascade effects (see Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). In addition, behavioral economics emphasizes the role of reciprocity in producing these effects. People do not want to be either dupes or freeloaders, and hence 
they are most likely to contribute to some social goal if they believe that others are doing so as well. 
They help explain the supply of, and the demand for, government regulation. "Availability cascades" help drive law and policy in both fortunate and unfortunate directions. They can eliminate public torpor by drawing attention to problems that, although serious, have long been overlooked. On the other hand, they can produce public concern or outrage about problems that have little claim to the public fisc. An important task for the legal system is therefore how to promote better priority setting. Anchoring , with Special Reference to Damage Awards. Often people make judgments about appropriate numbers, including probabilities, on the basis of an initial value, or "anchor," for which they make insufficient adjustments (see Kahneman and Tversky, 1979). When people lack information, this may be the best that they can do. The problem is that the initial value may have an arbitrary or irrational source. When this is so, the assessment may go badly wrong. Jury judgments about damage awards, for example, are likely to be based on an anchor; this can produce a high level of arbitrariness. There is considerable experimental evidence to this effect; in particular, the plaintiff's demand makes a great deal of difference, in a process of "the more you ask for, the more you get" Chapman and Bornstein, 1996) 
If the plaintiff's demand influences jury awards, it is possible that the legal system should take corrective steps by, for example, allowing appellate courts to exercise greater control in the interest of preventing unjustified unequal treatment, or by preventing the jury from hearing demands that are legally unacceptable, for constitutional or other reasons. It is quite possible that an unlawfully high demand from the plaintiff will greatly inflate the resulting award, and even if that award is itself within legal limits, there is something troublesome about allowing such a demand to be its "anchor" or basic source. A great deal of work remains to be done on the real-world effects of anchors when juries and judges are dealing with dollar amounts. 
Case-Based Decisions and Decision Costs. Legal reasoning is pervasively analogical in character; judges often reason by reference to past cases. Conventional economics offers some explanations; analogical reasoning, or at least respect for the past, can increase predictability and at the same time reduce decision costs for judges. But conventional approaches have yet to explain why reasoning "by analogy" is so pervasive.23 
Behavioral law and economics provides some insight into why this might be so. If decision costs are put to one side, expected utility theory is demanding, simply because it is difficult to calculate the expected costs and benefits of alternatives. People often simplify their burdens by reasoning from past cases and by taking small, reversible steps. Economists have offered an account, behavioral in spirit but independent of law, of an alternative to expected utility theory: case-based decision theory (see Gilboa and Schmeidler, 1995). The account should be counted as a genuine (though apparently inadvertent) contribution to jurisprudence. Those who reason from past cases can reduce the burdens of thinking problems through from the ground up, and in a way that may minimize the sum of error costs and decision costs. An understanding of behavioral economics may in this sense illuminate some important aspects of legal reasoning. 
Without A Modulus" 
of some kind and then to translate those judgments into dollar amounts. How does this translation take place? Can it be done well? Behavior evidence suggests that, in many contexts, normative judgments of a sort are both predictable and nonarbitrary 1998) damages, for example, people come up with relatively uniform judgments on a bounded numerical scale. At least it can be said that the judgment of any group of twelve people is a good predictor of the judgments of other groups of twelve people Similar findings have been made for environmental amenities in the context of contingent valuation But the act of mapping those normative judgments onto an unbounded dollar scale produces considerable "noise" and arbitrariness. When people are asked how much a defendant should be punished for reckless conduct 
and the decision of any particular group of twelve people cannot well predict the judgments of other groups of twelve people Kahneman, and Schkade, 1998) deliberating juries, where the relevant effects are extremely pronounced.24 
Insofar as this problem infects the award of damages, conventional economists need not be troubled, but many economists are enthusiastic about the process of contingent valuation, where similar problems have been shown to arise. When people are asked how much they are willing to pay to protect 2,000 birds, or 200 birds, the same kind of arbitrariness has been found (see Kahneman and Ritov, 1994). The apparent reason is that people have great trouble "scaling without a modulus," that is, they are not in a good position to generate predictable dollar amounts when they are not given a modulus, or standard, to compare with the case at hand. The problem of scaling without a modulus occurs in many areas in which juries (and judges) are asked to generate dollar amounts. It appears in areas not involving dollars as well. Consider, for example, the Americans with Disabilities Act, which makes it necessary to decide whether a suggested accommodation is "reasonable" and whether it creates an "undue hardship." There is great deal of variability in the law, not least because it is extremely hard to decide whether a particular accommodation is reasonable, or a particular hardship undue, without a modulus to cabin the inquiry. (Cost-benefit analysis would work as well.) Or consider the question of whether an occupational hazard creates a "significant risk" within the meaning of judicial interpretations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act. Without some kind of modulus, the bare idea of "significance" is a recipe for arbitrariness. 
variable and unreliable measures. Thus, the award of damages for libel, sexual harassment, and pain and suffering are infected by severe difficulties, as is the award of punitive damages in general. An understanding of those difficulties may well lead to concrete reform proposals. Perhaps the "mapping" can occur by a legislative or regulatory body that decides, in advance, on how a normative judgment made by a bounded numerical by Schkade, Sunstein, and Kahneman (forthcoming). scale can be translated into dollars. From the theoretical point of view, the most ambitious work on these topics suggests that, in some settings, it is best to assume that people have "attitudes" rather than preferences and that attitudes have a distinctive structure and distinctive propensities Kahneman, Schkade, and Sunstein, 1998) propensities of attitudes is toward a kind of "judgment reversal," as when, for example, two cases are seen one way in isolation (with injury A eliciting a higher punitive damage award than injury B, or harm A producing a higher contingent valuation than harm B), but a quite different way when the two cases are seen together (as the number for B becomes higher than the number for A) (see Kahneman, Ritov, and Schkade, 1999). 4.6. Decision Utility and Experience Utility, with General Notes on Paternalism 
In conventional economics, it is often assumed that the utility of experience is best measured by the anticipated utility shown by people's decisions. But a good deal of recent research (see Kahneman, 1996; Loewenstein and Schkade, forthcoming) shows that there may well be systematic differences between the utility expected at the time of decision and the utility actually experienced as a result of decision. People's judgments about their experience at the time of decision can be mistaken; they may have a hard time assessing what the experience will actually be like. 
and experience utility. We can infer from the phenomenon of loss aversion that people value goods more when they own them than when they do not. This "endowment effect" has been observed in many settings Thaler, 1991, pp. 167-86) unable to predict the endowment effect, and thus unable to predict their own tastes (see Loewenstein and Adler, 1995; Loewenstein and Schkade, forthcoming). Behaviorally informed analysts have argued that this point bears on when and whether to take workers' waivers of their legal rights as sufficiently informed (see Issacharoff, 1996). This finding is paralleled by many studies showing that people do not accurately predict the consequences of certain major events, such as winning the lottery or becoming paraplegic. (Winning the lottery produces much lower hedonic gains than expected, and people adjust to becoming paraplegic much more easily than expected [see Loewenstein and Schkade, forthcoming].) 
An especially important example of inaccurate anticipated utility comes from a study dealing with HIV testing. People are quite terrified of their reaction if they find that they are HIV positive; they predict a high degree of panic and depression. But evidence suggests that people are able to adapt fairly well to the bad news, and their panic and depression are far less severe than they feared (see Sieff, Dawes, and Loewenstein, forthcoming). Pessimistic expectations about how they would react to a positive result might therefore lead people to "undertest"; people are likely to be especially averse to undergoing a process of which they are very fearful. It might follow that regulatory approaches - education, persuasion, financial incentives, conceivably coercion - would make a good deal of sense. 
Some economists have urged that people have adequate information about the risks of smoking and that additional regulation is therefore inappropriate (see Viscusi, 1993). Perhaps most people do know many of the basic "facts." But a study of high school students suggests a problem. About one-third of adolescent smokers believed that there was no risk from smoking a pack of cigarettes daily for the first few years after starting to smoke. Young people who smoked believed that they were personally less at risk from smoking. And 85% of high school teenagers who smoked occasionally believed that they would not be smoking in five years, whereas only 58% had actually quit after five years, and 37% had increased their consumption. About 32% of those who smoked one pack daily believed that they would quit in five years, but only 13% did in fact (see Slovic, 1998). 
When people's decisions mispredict their experience, a common argument against paternalism - to the effect that ordinary people choose what will promote their welfare - is no longer plausible. Frank (1999), for example, has argued that people often make purchases with the (false) thought that these purchases will make them happier; the fact of the systematic misjudgment makes him argue for a progressive consumption tax, which will lead people in more productive directions. The question is whether it will ultimately be possible to be systematic about issues of this kind - to know, with some precision, when people's decisions will produce bad experiences. 
From what has been said thus far, it would be possible to think that behavioral law and economics leads to general sympathy for paternalism. If people make mistakes about probabilities, because of various biases and heuristics, should the law not help them? And if people mispredict their own experience, is there not a great deal of room for paternalistic assistance, even or especially if we care about utility? But behavioral law and economics offers ambiguous answers to these questions, and certainly no full-blown defense of paternalism. To be sure, people's "revealed preferences" may not promote their well-being, and people are prone to make mistakes. But government is subject to similar errors. Indeed, the demand for law may produce the same kinds of problems that we find at the individual level, and it is even possible that those problems will be amplified by social influences and interest-group mobilization (see Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). The cognitive errors made by ordinary people do seem to be replicated in statutory and administrative law (see Viscusi, 1992, p. 149). 
basis for paternalism than for anti-antipaternalism, or in other words for a pragmatic and empirical, rather than a dogmatic and a priori, inquiry into whether government should disrupt individual choices and Thaler, 1998, pp. 1541-44) institutional arrangements that might insulate government from some of the unfortunate effects of cognitive and motivational errors. One of the chief advantages of bureaucracy, at least in principle, is that it can ensure that judgments will be based on facts rather than intuitions, in such a way as to reduce the problems introduced by biases and heuristics (see Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). 
Behavioral law and economics remains in its early stages, and an enormous amount remains to be done. For example, it is important to know the circumstances in which people act quasi-rationally or instead rationally. Perhaps markets, or market-like institutions, can lead people in the direction of rationality. There is also a question whether behavioral law and economics might not be too unruly to count as a "theory" at all; perhaps it is simply a collection of effects. Finally, it is important to know what strategies might be used to "debias" agents, or to help them to overcome cognitive and motivational limitations. 
A possible objection to behavioral law and economics is that it is not a theory at all but an unruly collection of phenomena and effects, often based on ad hoc or unreliable evidence, and in any event lacking predictive power. If behavioral law and economics points to a long list of heuristics, and an equally long list of biases, and a complicated utility function, isn't it doomed to ex post accounts? Isn't it better to work with the simpler tools of conventional economics, just because of their simplicity? 25 
Probably the best brief conclusion is that it is unproductive to see a general struggle between economic analysis of law and behavioral law and economics. The question is what kinds of assumptions produce good predictions about the effects of law, and this will vary with context. Sometimes the simple assumptions of conventional analysis work entirely well; sometimes it is necessary to introduce complications by, for example, saying a bit more about what is counted in the utility function (such as a desire to be treated fairly, and a willingness to punish those who act unfairly), or incorporating bounded rationality (in the form, for example, of optimistic bias or anchoring). 
Parsimonious assumptions have helped to identify the effects of (to take just a few examples) rent control; increases in the cost of labor (through the minimum wage, occupational safety and health, and related legislation); statutes forbidding discrimination on the basis of age, race, and sex; legal controls on new (as opposed to old) pollution sources; and much more. In some settings, a great deal can be learned with the conventional tools, and it is not necessary to introduce further complications. For example, it is far from clear that behavioral economics can add much to analysis of the effects of the minimum wage.26 
Jolis, Sunstein, and Thaler (1998, pp. 1487-89) suggest, however, that conventional economics sometimes achieves parsimony at the expense of predictive power, which is absent when predictions are false or when no predictions are offered at all. Behavioral law and economics promises to and Thaler (1998, pp. 1487-89); here, as elsewhere, Jolis and Thaler should not be blamed for errors. 
of an increase in the minimum wage might have a more-than-expected effect on the supply of labor, because of information-processing issues. be an improvement when it offers better predictions, even if with less parsimonious tools. 
provide a unitary theory of behavior. By itself, however, the notion of "rationality" (the centerpiece of traditional analysis) provides no unitary theory. The term is quite ambiguous, at least until it is specified. In conventional economic analysis of law, it is sometimes unclear whether the term means that people respond to incentives; that their decisions promote their welfare; that they are self-interested; that they choose the best means to achieving their goals, whatever their goals are; that they are consistent; that they behave in accordance with expected utility theory; that they are in some sense optimizers. Behavioral research has raised serious questions about most of these, at least as an empirical matter 
For many uses of rationality in law, the crucial task is to specify what counts as a cost and a benefit for the relevant agents. Is it a puzzle that people vote? That they vote in snowstorms? That they use drugs in college? That they use drugs more if they think most of their friends use drugs? That they engage in unprotected sex? That they engage in more, or less, unprotected sex when the risk of HIV infection increases? These are questions about the content of the relevant utility function; without knowing what people count as costs and benefits, the idea of responsiveness to incentives is empty.27 
These puzzles cannot be evaluated in the abstract. In many areas relevant to law, it is not necessary to worry a great deal about the content of people's utility functions or about quasi-rationality; as I have noted, conventional theory has enjoyed important successes. Whether it is sufficient depends on the particular prediction and what the evidence shows. The point here is that sometimes the theory leads to false predictions and sometimes (when the underlying notions are not specified and disciplined) to no predictions. 
(as many economists think) if many people vote. If it is a paradox, so much the worse for the rationality assumption; if it is not a paradox, what does the assumption predict? Does it merely predict that people will respond to changes in conditions - for example, fewer people will vote when it is snowing? If so, the prediction is not bad, but surely it would be possible to say, after an unusually large vote amidst the storm, that more people voted simply because voting seemed expecially valiant in those circumstances (so much for predictions based on this form of rationality)" (1998, p. 1489). 
But none of this supports behavioral economics. And it is true that in its current state, behavioral economics is not a unitary theory, and partly because of the sheer number of biases and heuristics, there are contexts in which it is unable to make firm ex ante predictions. Might a lossaverse person succumb to unrealistic optimism and engage in some kind of otherwise inexplicable gamble? And do we know what to predict when unrealistic optimism and loss aversion point in different directions? 
From the standpoint of positive theory, problems are certainly caused by the sheer number of the effects that make up behavioral economics. Some social theorists believe that, in the social sciences, the search for lawlike generalizations is futile and that it is possible only to come up with "mechanisms," which do not permit reliable predictions.28 It may well be that some of behavioral law and economics will consist of ex post descriptions of outcomes rather than genuine predictions. Analysis of this kind is hardly worthless. And if this pessimistic view is not justified, the only solution is to acquire more information, and to go back and forth between data and theory, so as to see whether it is possible to know the circumstances in which one or another effect is more likely to be at work. A great deal remains to be done, not least in predicting conduct when more than one effect is likely to be at work. 
But even for the moment, those interested in behavioral law and economics do not lack predictions. For example, they will predict that, other things being equal, the incidence of some cooperative activity (voting, recycling, not smoking, not abusing drugs) is likely to increase when it is perceived that most people are contributing. There is strong evidence to this effect (see Perkins, 1997, pp. 177-206). They will also predict that highly publicized incidents will have an extremely large effect on the public demand for regulation. There is strong evidence to this effect as well (see Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). They will predict, finally, that losses from the status quo will register as more important than equivalent gains and that this will affect individual reactions to law and also the demand for law. There is also evidence that this is true (see Section 3 above).29 chap. 1). 
Kahneman, Ritov, and Schkade (1999). 
A second objection has to do with the domain of behavioral law and economics. Might it not be the case that markets, for example, will turn quasi-rational agents into fully rational agents? Work on the endowment effect has shown that there is no such effects for tokens. The point suggests that where goods are fully fungible - as in ordinary markets? - the endowment effect may be irrelevant. It is also clear that markets will tend to counteract some of the tendencies that we have discussed. It might seem, for example, that people who are unrealistically optimistic, or who are readily manipulated, will not do well in managing large companies. 
In some circumstances, market forces are indeed strong enough to make behavioral economics irrelevant for predictive purposes. Then the question becomes whether it is possible to identify those circumstances. This is a large question, and we lack authoritative answers. When there are repeated decisions, and when people have an opportunity to learn, the conventional approach is more likely to be successful. But this statement leaves many questions unanswered, and, as I have suggested, behavioral economics has a role to play in markets and market-like settings as well. A great deal of work remains to be done on this topic. 
A final question involves the extent to which education or other debiasing strategies can counteract cognitive and motivational distortions so as to eliminate some of the effects described above. Is it possible for those involved in law to push people toward greater rationality, in the process, perhaps, lengthening human lives? What institutions work best at reducing the effects of biases? Would a broader understanding of behavioral economics produce learning and thus make it less necessary to use behavioral economics? 
There is some work on these questions. Unfortunately, the relevant work tends to show that quasi-rationality is robust and that it is hard to do much about it. Even experts are susceptible to most of the effects discussed here (see Baron, 1994). With respect to self-serving bias, it does not do much good to ask people to read and consider both sides of an argument; once people know what side they are on, their views seem entrenched, and a reading of competing views seems only to strengthen their convictions (in a form of "confirmatory bias"). The only intervention 
Behavioral Law and Economics: A Progress Report 151 that seems to work is to require people to make their own arguments for the other side (see Babcock, Loewenstein, and Issacharoff, 1993). The good news is that some of these effects, such as a taste for fairness, should not be characterized as distortions; on the contrary, such tastes may help solve prisoners' dilemmas, and it is striking to see that economics majors are less likely to adhere to fairness norms that produce solutions (see Frank, 1993). (Perhaps economics majors, and law students immersed in conventional economics, need to be "debiased"!) 
If debiasing generally does not work, we might think that social forces, market and nonmarket, might press individuals and institutions in the direction of metadecisions, or second-order decisions, that will make it more likely that things will go well. We might expect, for example, boundedly rational agents to come up with institutions that will overcome their own bounded rationality. They might, for example, make a second-order decision in favor of rules, so as to reduce the errors produced with on-the-spot decisions (see Sunstein and Ullmann-Margalit, 1999). We might expect social institutions to help counteract some of the relevant problems; certainly an evolutionary account would so suggest. 
There is some affirmative evidence here. For example, the legal system contains mechanisms to reduce the problems associated with hindsight bias (see Rachlinski, 1998). It also appears responsive to the difference between out-of-pocket costs and opportunity costs (Cohen and Knetsch, 1992). Many legal institutions might be investigated in an effort to see whether and how they overcome some of the difficulties discussed here. Such an investigation might even reveal an implicit understanding of behavioral economics on the part of those involved in the legal system. 
Behavioral law and economics is obviously flourishing; but it remains, in its early stages, perhaps not so different from that of conventional law and economics in, say, 1971. No treatise organizes the field, and a great deal of further research remains to be done, theoretical and empirical. For example, there is no systematic work on the relationship between damage awards and the various ingredients of cases involving libel, sexual harassment, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. There is only preliminary work on the role of "anchors" in awards by juries and judges. Nor is there much work on the relationship between legal rules and reciprocity and on the important question whether and how legal rules might solve prisoner's dilemmas without requiring large levels of public enforcement activity. Under what circumstances does a legal provision (for example, one that bans smoking or requires recycling) become self-enforcing? We lack much information about whether and how legal rules change preferences themselves; this is a promising area for both experimental and empirical work. Nor do we know a great deal about the effects of social institutions in overcoming cognitive and motivational limitations. 
There can be no question that human beings care about fairness, that they can be myopic, and that they exhibit bounded rationality. The questions for the future are whether an understanding of the underlying phenomena can lead to better predictions about the effects of law, more reliable prescriptions about how law might promote social goals, and more refined judgments about when the legal system should respect or reject individual choices. Akerlof, George. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange," 97 Quarterly Journal of Economics 543-69. 
University Press. 
1-19. 
Arkes, Hal, and Kenneth Hammond. 1996. Judgment and Decision Making: An 
Interdisciplinary Reader. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Arrow, Kenneth. 1986. "Rationality of Self and Others in an Economic System," 59 Journal of Business S385-99. 
Axelrod, Robert M. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic. Babcock, Linda, and George Loewenstein. 1997. "Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of Self-Serving Biases," 11 Journal of Economic Perspectives 
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, and Samuel Issacharoff. 1993. "Creating 
Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants," 23 Law and Social Inquiry 913-25. Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff, and Colin Camerer. Review 1337-43. 
Babcock, Linda, Xianghong Wang, and George Loewenstein. 1996. "Choosing the Wrong Pond: Social Comparisons in Negotiations that Reflect a Self-Serving Bias," 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 1-19. 
Baker, Lynn, and Robert Emery. 1993. "When Every Relationship Is Above Average: Perceptions and Expectations of Divorce at Time of Marriage," 17 Law and Human Behavior 439-50. 
Baron, Jonathan. 1994. Thinking and Deciding. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Bauman, Laurie, and Karolyn Siegel. 1987. "Misperception among Gay Men of the Risk for AIDS Associated with Their Sexual Behavior," 17 Journal of Applied Social Psychology 329-50. 
Baumeister, Roy F. 1998. "The Self," in Daniel T. Gilbert et al., eds., 1. The 
Handbook of Social Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. Becker, Gary. 1997. Accounting for Tastes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler. 1995. "Myopic Loss Aversion and the 
Equity Premium Puzzle," 110 Quarterly Journal of Economics 73-92. Bohnet, Iris, and Bruno Frey. 1999. "Social Distance and Other-Regarding Behavior in Dictator Games," 89 American Economics Review 335-39. 
Camerer, Colin. 1990. "Behavioral Game Theory," in Robin Hogarth, ed., Insight in Decision Making. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
in Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, eds., Choices, Values, and Frames. Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo. 1999. "Overconfidence and Excess Entry: An 
Experimental Approach," 89 American Economics Review 306-18. Chapman, Gretchen, and Brian Bornstein. 1996. "The More You Ask For, The 
More You Get," 10 Applied Cognitive Psychology 519-40. 
Cohen, David, and Jack Knetsch. 1992. "Judicial Choice and Disparities between 
Measures of Economic Values," 30 Osgoode Hall Law Journal 737-70. Conlisk, John. 1996. "Why Bounded Rationality?" 34 Journal of Economic Literature 669-700. 
Dawes, Robyn M. 1998. "Behavioral Decision Making and Judgment," in Daniel T. Gilbert et al., eds., 1 The Handbook of Social Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Ellickson, Robert. 1991. Order without Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Elster, Jon. 1998. Rationality and the Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Farnsworth, Ward. 1999. "Do Parties to Nuisance Suits Bargain after Judgments?" 6 University of Chicago Law Review 373-436. 
Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gachter. 1998. "How Effective Are Trust- and ReciprocityBased Incentives," in Avner Ben-Ner and Louis Putterman, eds., Economics, Values, and Organization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Frank, Robert. 1993. "Does Studying Economics Inhibit Cooperation?" 7 Journal of Economics Perspectives 159-71. Frank, Robert, and Phillip Cook. 1995. The Winner-Take -All Society. New York: 
Free Press. 
Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler. 1995. "Case-Based Decision Theory" 110 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 605-39. 
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. Forthcoming. "A Fine Is a Price," Journal of 
Legal Studies. 
Goldstein, William, and Robin Hogarth. 1997. Research on Judgment and Decisionmaking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gregory, Robin, Sarah Lichtenstein, and Donald MacGregor. 1993. "The Role of Past States in Determining Reference Points for Policy Decisions," 55 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 195-206. 
Hirshleifer, David. 1995. "The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades," in Mariano Tammasi and Kathryn Ierulli, eds., The New Economics of Human Behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hoffman, Elizabeth, and Matthew Spitzer. 1993. "Willingness to Pay vs. Willingness to Accept: Legal and Economic Implications," 71 Washington University Law Quarterly 59-1 14. 
Houston, Christopher, and Cass R. Sunstein. 1999. "Risk Allocation among Law 
Students," Journal of Legal Education (forthcoming). 
Issacharoff, Samuel. 1996. "Contracting for Employment: The Limited Return of the Common Law," 74 Texas Law Review 1783-1812. 
Jolis, Christine. 1996. "Hands Tying and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act," 74 Texas Law Review 1813-46. 
51 Vanderbilt Law Review 1653-77. 
Jolis, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard H. Thaler. 1998. "A Behavioral 
Approach to Law and Economics," 50 Stanford Law Review 1471-1550. Kagel, John H., Raymond C. Battalio, and Leonard Green. 1995. Economic Choice Theory: An Experimental Analysis of Animal Behavior. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kagel, John, and Alvin Roth, eds. 1994. Handbook of Experimental Economics. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Kahneman, Daniel. 1996. "New Challenges to the Rationality Assumption, m Kenneth J. Arrow, Enrico Colombatto, Mark Perlman, and Christian Schmidt, eds., The Rational Foundations of Economic Behavior. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986a. "Fairness and the 
Assumptions of Economics," 59 Journal of Business S285-324. 
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986b. "Fairness as a Constraint on Profit-Seeking: Entitlements in the Market," 76 American Economics Review 728-41. 
Kahneman, Daniel, and liana Ritov. 1994. "Determinants of Stated Willingness to 
Pay for Public Goods," 9 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5-30. 
Kahneman, Daniel, liana Ritov, and David Schkade. 1999. "Economic Preferences or Attitude Expressions? An Analysis of Dollar Responses to Public Issues," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty (forthcoming). 
Kahneman, Daniel, David Schkade, liana Ritov, and Cass R. Sunstein. 1999. Reversals of Judgment: The Effect of Cross-Category Comparisons on lntendedly Absolute Scales (unpublished manuscript). 
Kahneman, Daniel, David Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein. 1998. "Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages," 16 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 49-86. 
Kahneman, Daniel, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tverskey, eds. 1982. Judgment under 
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of 
Decision Under Risk," 47 Econometrica 263-92. 
Kelman, Mark, Yuval Rottenstreich, and Amos Tversky. 1996. "Context 
Dependence in Legal Decisionmaking," 25 Journal of Legal Studies 287-318. Korobkin, Russell. 1998a. "Inertia and Preference in Contract Negotiation," 51 Vanderbilt Law Review 1583-1651. 
Law Review 608-87. 
Kuran, Timur. 1995. Private Truths, Public Lies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Organization," in Avner Ben-Ner and Louis Putterman, eds., Economics , Values and Organizations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kuran, Timur, and Cass R. Sunstein. 1999. "Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation," 51 Stanford Law Review 1 131-92. 
Langevoort, Donald. 1997. "Organized Illusions: A Behavioral Theory of Why Corporations Mislead Stock Market Investors (And Cause Other Social Harms)," 146 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 101-72. 
Lichtenstein, Sarah, and Paul Slovic. 1971. "Reversals of Preference between Bids and Choices in Gambling Decisions," 89 Journal of Experimental Psychology 46-55. 
Loewenstein, George, and Daniel Adler. 1995. "A Bias in the Prediction of Tastes," 105 Economic Journal 929-37. 
Loewenstein, George, Samuel Issacharoff, Colin Camerer, and Linda Babcock. Journal of Legal Studies 135-59. 
Loewenstein, George, and Nachum Sicherman. 1991. "Do Workers Prefer Increasing Wage Profiles," 9 Journal of Labor Economics 67-84. Loewenstein, George and David Schkade. Forthcoming. "Wouldn't It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings," in E. Diener, N. Schwartz, and D. Kahneman, eds., Hedonic Psychology: Scientific Approaches to Enjoyment, Suffering, and Well- Being, New York: Sage. 
McCaffery, Edward J., Daniel Kahneman, and Matthew Spitzer. 1995. "Framing the Jury: Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and Suffering Awards," 81 Virginia Law Review 1341-1420. 
Noll, Roger G., and James E. Krier. 1990. "Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation," 19 Journal of Legal Studies 747-79. Odean, Terranee. 1998. "Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?" 53 
Journal of Finance 1775-98. 
Perkins, H. Wesley. 1997. "College Student Misperceptions of Alcohol and Other Drug Norms among Peers: Exploring Causes, Consequences, and Implications for Prevention Programs," in Designing Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention Programs in Higher Education: Bringing Theory into Practice. 
Posner, Eric A. 1998. "Symbols, Signals, and Social Norms in Politics and the 
Law," 27 Journal of Legal Studies 765-98. 
Posner, Richard A. 1990. The Problems of Jurisprudence. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Rabin, Matthew. 1993. "Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics," 83 American Economics Review 1281-1302. nomic Behavior and Organization 1 77-94. 
1 1-46. 
Rachlinski, Jeffrey J. 1996. "Gains, Losses, and the Psychology of Litigation," 70 Southern California Law Review 113-85. 
Rachlinski, Jeffrey, and Forest Jourden. 1998. "Remedies and the Psychology of 
Ownership," 51 Vanderbilt Law Review 1541-82. 
Redelmeier, Donald A., Paul Rozin, and Daniel Kahneman. 1993. "Understanding 
Patients' Decisions," 270 Journal of the American Medical Association 72-76. Schkade, David, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman. Forthcoming. "Are Juries More Erratic than Individuals?" Columbia Law Review. 
Sieff, Elaine M., Robyn M. Dawes, and George Loewenstein. Forthcoming. "Anticipated versus Actual Reaction to HIV Test Results," American Journal of Psychology. 
Slonim, Robert, and Alvin Roth. 1998. "Learning in High Stakes Ultimatum Games," 66 Econometrica 569-96. 
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1992. Fatal Tradeoffs. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 85 
(2D SERIES) COGNITION AND COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
Cass R. Sunstein The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=186669 
Cass R. Sunstein* “The American people have no doubt that more people die from coal dust than from nuclear reactions, but they fear the prospect of a nuclear reactor more than they do the empirical data that would suggest that more people die from coal dust, having coal-fired burners. They also know that more lives would be saved if we took that 25 percent we spend in the intensive care units in the last few months of the elderly’s lives, more children would be saved. But part of our culture is that we have concluded as a culture that we are going to rightly, or wrongly, we are going to spend the money, costing more lives, on the elderly. . . . I think it’s incredibly presumptuous and elitist for political scientists to conclude that the American people’s cultural values in fact are not ones that lend themselves to a cost-benefit analysis and presume that they would change their cultural values if in fact they were aware of the cost-benefit analysis.”1 Joseph Biden 
Many people have argued for cost-benefit analysis on economic grounds.2 On their view, a primary goal of regulation is to promote economic efficiency, and cost-benefit analysis is admirably well-suited to that goal. Arguments of this kind have met with sharp criticism from those who reject the efficiency criterion3 or who believe that in practice, cost-benefit analysis is likely to produce a kind of regulatory paralysis.4 
In this essay I offer support for cost-benefit analysis, not from the standpoint of conventional economics, but on grounds associated with cognitive psychology and behavioral economics. My basic suggestion is that cost-benefit analysis is best defended as a means of overcoming predictable problems in individual and social cognition. Most of these problems might be collected under the general heading of selective attention. Cost-benefit analysis should be understood as a method for putting “on screen” important social facts that might otherwise escape private and public attention. Thus understood, cost-benefit analysis is a * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School. I am grateful to Matthew Adler, Jill Hasday, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for helpful comments on a previous draft; special thanks to Eric Posner for many helpful discussions. Brian Lehman and Brooke May provided excellent research assistance and valuable comments and criticisms. 1 Confirmation Hearings for Stephen G. Breyer, to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 103d Cong., 2d Sess. 42 (July 14, 1994) (Miller Reporting transcript). way of ensuring better priority-setting and of overcoming predictable obstacles to desirable regulation, whatever may be our criteria for deciding the hardest questions about that topic. 
Of course much of the controversy over cost-benefit analysis stems from the difficulty of specifying, with particularity, what that form of analysis entails. None of the cognitive points made here supports any particular understanding of cost-benefit analysis. Certainly I do not mean to embrace the controversial and indeed implausible proposition that all regulatory decisions should be made by aggregating private willingness to pay, as if economic efficiency is or should be the goal of all regulation.5 I will attempt instead to provide an understanding of cost-benefit analysis that is agnostic on large issues of the right and the good, and that can attract support from people with diverse theoretical commitments, or with uncertainty about the appropriate theoretical commitments.6 In this sense I attempt to produce an incompletely theorized agreement on a certain form of costbenefit analysis—an agreement on a form of cost-benefit analysis to which many different people, with diverse and competing views, should be willing to subscribe. This is partly an attempt to respond to the most natural objection to my principal claim here, an objection that would stress the possibility that cognitive problems would reappear in the values that end up being associated with various states of affairs. 
The paper is organized as follows. In sections I, II, and III, I seek to defend the general idea of cost-benefit analysis, not as embodying any sectarian conception of value, but as a way of overcoming predictable problems in understanding risks to life and health at both the individual and social levels. In section IV, I briefly attempt to specify what cost-benefit analysis might be understood to entail. My goal is to show how this method, conceived in a particular way, might attract support from people with varying conceptions of the good and the right, including, for example, neoclassical economists and those who are quite skeptical about some normative claims in neoclassical economics, and including those who do and who do not take private preferences, and willingness to pay, as the proper foundation for regulatory policy. In other 5 See Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L.J. (forthcoming 1999); Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice ch. 9 (1997); Amartya Sen, The Discipline of Cost-Benefit Analysis, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000) ; Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). See, in particular, Amartya Sen, Rationality and Social Choice, 85 Am. Eon. Rev. 1, 17 (1995) (“There are plenty of social choice problems in all this, but in analyzing them, we have to go beyond looking only for the best reflection of given individual preferences, or the most acceptable procedures for choices based on those preferences.”) (emphasis in original). 6 See Adler & Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, supra note, which is in the same general spirit as this essay, and from which I have learned a great deal. See also Amartya Sen, The Discipline of Cost-Benefit Analysis, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000), which seems to me in the same basic family. words, I try to show how a certain understanding of cost-benefit analysis might contain considerable appeal precisely because it overcomes problems in individual cognition, and do so without taking a stand on controversial issues about the ultimate goals of regulation and law. 
Let us begin with two simple tables. It is well known that there is a great deal of variability in national expenditures per life saved. Consider the following, which has come to define many discussions of these problems7: 7 Based on data from Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year 1992 Pt 2, 370 Tbl C-2 (GPO 1991). Regulation Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance (TCAS) Systems Hazard Communication Standard Side-Impact Standards for Trucks, Buses, and MPVs (Proposed) Grain Dust Explosion Prevention Standards Rear Lap/Shoulder Belts for Autos Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines Benzine NESHAP (Original: Fugitive Emissions) Ethylene Dibromide Drinking Water Standard Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Benzene Occupational Exposure Limit Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) Arsenic Emission Standards for Glass Plants Ethylene Oxide Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Hazardous Waste Listing for Petroleum Refining Sludge Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Inactive Sites) Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Active Sites) Acrylonitrile Occupational Exposure Limit Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit Lockout/Tagout Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit Asbestos Ban Diethylstilbestrol (DES) Cattlefeed Ban Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Waste Operations) 1,2 Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st 3rd) Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Standards (Proposed) Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving Chemicals 
This table should be taken with many grains of salt.8 It does not contain nearly all of the benefits from regulation, including those that fall short of mortalities averted (including illnesses averted, benefits for animals, and aesthetic and recreational gains). An adequate cost-benefit analysis would certainly take those benefits into account. We will shortly see that the table depends on many contentious assumptions, above all involving the appropriate discount rate; modest changes in the discount rate can greatly reduce the expenditures and the disparities. But at the very least, the table creates a presumption that the current system of regulation suffers from serious misallocation of resources. It also suggests that with better allocations, we could obtain large gains. Indeed, a recent study finds that it would be possible to save the same number of lives that we now save with tens of billions of dollars left over—and that better priority-setting could save 60,000 lives, and 636,000 lifeyears, annually at the same price.9 
What is the source of the misallocations? Interest-group power undoubtedly plays a substantial role, as well-organized groups are able to obtain measures in their interest or to fend off measures that would harm them, and as poorly organized ones typically fail. Indeed, cost-benefit analysis might be defended partly as a corrective to interest-group power, operating as it might as a kind of technocratic check on measures that would do little good or even produce net harm (and also on measures that do much less good than they should).10 But officials are of course responsive not only to interest groups but also to general public pressures, and thus part of the answer must lie in the distinctive judgments of ordinary people, who do not assess risks through a well-informed cost-benefit lens. Indeed, divergences between expert and lay assessments of risks have been demonstrated in many places. Consider this comparison.11 10 Of course it is possible that the content of the cost-benefit test will reflect interest-group power. 11 See Stephen G. Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation 21 (1993). Public 
The EPA itself has found that EPA policies are responsive not to expert judgments, but to lay assessments of risks.12 Indeed, EPA policies track ordinary judgments extremely well. 
If we put together these two tables, we can suggest a general hypothesis. The government currently allocates its limited resources poorly, and it does so partly because it is responsive to ordinary judgments about the magnitude of risks. A government that could insulate itself from misinformed judgments could save tens of thousands of lives and tens of billions of dollars annually. Let us attempt to be more specific about the cognitive problems that help account for current problems. 
For the moment, I attempt no controversial specification of cost-benefit analysis and understand the term broadly to refer to a regulatory method that calls for regulators to identify, and make relevant for purposes of decision, the good effects and the bad effects of regulation, and to quantify those as much as possible in terms of both dollar equivalents and life-years saved, hospital admissions prevented, workdays gained, and so forth. Let us also assume that cost-benefit analysis, thus understood, can accommodate distributional factors, by, for example, giving distributional weights to certain adverse effects, or by assuming uniform numbers for various goods (such as increased longevity) so as to ensure that they do not vary in accordance with wealth. 
It is obvious that people, including government officials, often lack riskrelated information; they may not know the nature of the health risks at issue, nor may they know the adverse consequences of risk reduction. By itself this point argues for cost-benefit analysis, simply as a means of producing the relevant information. The public demand for regulation is often be based on misunderstandings of facts.13 But put this obvious point to one side. Why, exactly, might people’s judgments about risk and risk regulation go badly wrong?14 There are six points here. 
The first problem is purely cognitive: the use of the availability heuristic in thinking about risks.15 It is well-established that people tend to think that events are more probable if they can recall an incident of its occurrence.16 Consider, for example, the fact that people typically think that more words, on any given page, will end with the letters “ing,” than have “n” as the second-to-last letter (though a moment’s reflection shows that this is not possible).17 With respect to risks, 13 A colorful discussion is Barry Glassner, The Culture of Fear: Why Americans are Afraid of the Wrong Things (1999). 14 Some of these problems may infect market behavior as well, and when this is so there is a problem with using private willingness to pay as the basis for regulation, since private willingness to pay will (by hypothesis) be based on a misunderstanding of the facts. But markets contain some safeguards against these errors, through the budget constraint and opportunities for learning, and in any case the form of cost-benefit analysis that I support would not rest on mistaken factual judgments, as discussed in more detail below. 15 See Roger G. Noll & James E. Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud. 747, 749-760 (1990). 16 See Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3, 11 (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky eds., 1982) (describing the availability heuristic). 17 Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment, 90 Psychol. Rev. 293, 295 (1983). judgments are typically affected by the availability heuristic, so that people overestimate the number of deaths from highly publicized events (motor vehicle accidents, tornadoes, floods, botulism), but underestimate the number from less publicized sources (stroke, heart disease, stomach cancer).18 Similarly, much of the concern with nuclear power undoubtedly stems from its association with memorable events, including Hiroshima, Chernobyl, and Three-Mile Island. 
To the extent that people lack information, or base their judgments on mental short-cuts that produce errors,19 a highly responsive government is likely to blunder. Cost-benefit analysis is a natural corrective, above all because it focuses attention on the actual effects of regulation, including, in some cases, the existence of surprisingly small benefits from regulatory controls. To this extent cost-benefit analysis should not be taken as undemocratic, but, on the contrary, should be seen as a means of fortifying (properly specified) democratic goals, by ensuring that government decisions are responsive to well-informed public judgments. 
The availability heuristic does not, of course, operate in a social vacuum. It interacts with emphatically social processes, and in particular with informational and reputational forces.20 When one person says, through words or deeds, that something is or is not dangerous, he creates an informational externality.21 A signal by some person A will provide relevant data to others. When there is little private information, such a signal may initiate an informational cascade, with significant consequences for private and public behavior, and with possibly distorting effects on regulatory policy.22 
Imagine, for example, that A says that abandoned hazardous waste sites are dangerous, or that A initiates protest activity because such a site is located nearby. B, otherwise skeptical or in equipoise, may go along with A; C, otherwise an agnostic, may be convinced that if A and B share the relevant belief, the belief 18 Jonathan Baron, Thinking and Deciding 218 (2d ed. 1994). 19 Other heuristics are likely to be at work, such as the representativeness heuristic, but availability is the most important source of distorted public judgments. See generally Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic & Amos Tversky eds., 1982). 20 I draw in this section on Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 683 (1999). 21 See Andrew Caplin & John Leahy, Miracle on Sixth Avenue: Information Externalities and Search, 108 Econ. J. 60 (1998). 22 See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 683, 720 (1999). must be true; and it will take a confident D to resist the shared judgments of A, B, and C. The result of this set of influences can be social cascades, as hundreds, thousands, or millions of people come to accept a certain belief simply because of what they think other people believe.23 There is nothing fanciful to the idea. Cascade effects help account for the existence of widespread public concern about abandoned hazardous waste dumps (a relatively trivial environmental hazard), and in more recent years, they spurred grossly excessive public fears of the pesticide Alar, of risks from plane crashes, and of dangers of shootings in schools in the aftermath of the murders in Littleton, Colorado. Such effects recently helped produce massive dislocations in beef production in Europe in connection with “mad cow disease”; they are currently giving rise to growing European fear of genetic engineering of food. 
On the reputational side, cognitive effects may be amplified as well.24 If many people are alarmed about some risk, you may not voice your doubts about whether the alarm is merited, simply in order not to seem obtuse, cruel, or indifferent. And if many people believe that a certain risk is trivial, you may not disagree through words or deeds, lest you appear cowardly or confused. The result of these forces can be cascade effects, mediated by the availability heuristic. Such effects can produce a public demand for regulation even though the relevant risks are trivial. At the same time, there may be little or no demand for regulation of risks that are, in fact, quite large in magnitude. Self-interested private groups can exploit these forces, often by using the availability heuristic. Consider the fact that European companies have tried to play up fears of genetically engineered food as a way of fending off American competition. 
Cost-benefit analysis has a natural role here. If it is made relevant to decision, it can counteract cascade effects induced by informational and reputational forces, especially when the availability heuristic is at work. The effect of cost-benefit analysis is to subject a public demand for regulation to a kind of technocratic scrutiny, to ensure that the demand is not rooted in myth, and to ensure as well that government is regulating risks even when the public demand (because insufficiently informed) is low. And here too there is no democratic problem with the inquiry into consequences. If people’s concern is fueled by informational forces having little reliability, and if people express concern even though they are not fearful, a governmental effort to “cool” popular reactions is hardly inconsistent with democratic ideals. Similarly, there is 23 See David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathyrn Ierulli eds., 1995). nothing undemocratic about a governmental effort to divert resources to serious problems that have not been beneficiaries of cascade effects. 
Why are people so concerned about the risks of nuclear power, when experts tend to believe that the risks are quite low—lower, in fact, than the risks from competing energy sources, such as coal-fired power plants, which produce relatively little public objection? Why do they believe that small risks from pesticides should be regulated, even if comparatively small risks from X-rays are quite tolerable? 
Suggestive answers come from research suggesting that for many activities that pose small risks but that nonetheless receive public concern, people perceive low benefits as well as high risks.25 For example, nuclear power itself is seen as a low-benefit, high-risk activity. Similar findings appear for some activities that are in fact relatively high-risk: a judgment of “low risk” accompanies a judgment of “high benefits.” The very fact that they are known to have high benefits skews judgment in their favor, and hence makes people understate the costs as well. 
The obvious conclusion is that sometimes people favor regulation of some risks because the underlying activities are not seen to have compensating benefits.26 Thus for some activities, tradeoffs are not perceived at all. Dangers are effectively on-screen, but benefits are off-screen. Note that this is not because such activities do not, in fact, have compensating benefits. It is because of a kind of perceptual illusion. 
An important factor here is loss aversion. People tend to be loss averse, which means that a loss from the status quo is seen as more undesirable than a gain is seen as desirable.27 In the context of risk regulation, the consequence is that any newly introduced risk, or any aggravation of existing risks, is seen as a serious problem, even if the accompanying benefits (a gain from the status quo and hence perceived as less salient and less important) are considerable.28 Thus when 25 The fact that nuclear power, and application of pesticides, produce benefits as well as risks may not “register” on the lay viewscreen, and this may help produce a “high risk” judgment. See Ali Siddiq Alhakami and Paul Slovic, A Psychological Study of the Inverse Relationship Between Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit, 14 Risk Analysis 1085, 1088 (1994). 26 See Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (1996), for a detailed discussion of how this point bears on the different risk judgments of experts and lay people. 27 See Richard H. Thaler, The Psychology of Choice and the Assumptions of Economics, in Quasi Rational Economics 137, 143 (Richard H. Thaler ed., 1991) (arguing that “losses loom larger than gains”); Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler, Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. Pol. Econ. 1325, 1328 (1990); Colin Camerer, Individual Decision Making, in John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, eds, The Handbook of Experimental Economics 665-670 (1995). 28 For some policy implications of loss aversion, see Jack L. Knetsch, Reference States, Fairness, and Choice a new risk adds danger, people may focus on the danger itself, and not on the benefits that accompany the danger. And an important problem here is that in many cases where dangers are on-screen and benefits off-screen, the magnitude of the danger is actually quite low. Cost-benefit analysis can be a corrective here, by placing the various effects on-screen. 
Often people focus on small pieces of complex problems, and causal changes are hard to trace. Consider an analogy. The German psychologist Dietrich Dorner has done some illuminating computer experiments designed to see whether people can engage in successful social engineering.29 Participants are asked to solve problems faced by the inhabitants of some region of the world. Through the magic of the computer, many policy initiatives are available to solve the relevant problems (improved care of cattle, childhood immunization, drilling more wells). But most of the participants produce eventual calamities, because they do not see the complex, system-wide effects of particular interventions. Only the rare participant can see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions on the system. 
Often regulation has similar systemic effects. A decision to regulate nuclear power may, for example, increase the demand for coal-fired power plants, with harmful environmental consequences.30 A decision to impose fuel economy standards on new cars may cause a “downsizing” of the fleet, and in that way increase risks to life. A decision to ban asbestos may cause manufacturers to use less safe substitutes. Regulation of tropospheric ozone may control the health dangers of ozone, but ozone has various benefits as well, including protection against cataracts and skin cancer; hence regulation of ozone may cause health problems equal to those that it reduces.31 Indeed, regulation of ozone will of Measure to Value Environmental Changes, in Environment, Ethics, and Behavior: The Psychology of Environmental Valuation and Degradation 52, 64-65 (Max H. Bazerman, David M. Messick, Ann E. Tenbrunsel & Kimberly A. Wade-Benzoni eds., 1997). 29 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure: Why Things Go Wrong and What We Can Do to Make Them Right (1996). 30 See Stephen Breyer, Vermont Yankee and the Court’s Role in the Nuclear Energy Controversy, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1833, 1835-90 (1978). See generally Peter Huber, Electricity and the Environment: In Search of Regulatory Authority, 100 Harv. L. Rev. 1002 (1987). 31 See Randall Lutter & Christopher Wolz, UV-B Screening by Tropospheric Ozone: Implications for the NAAQS, 31 Envtl. Sci. & Tech. 142A, 144A (1997) (estimating that the EPA’s new ozone NAAQS could cause 25 to 50 more melanoma skin cancer deaths and increase the number of cataract cases by 13,000 to 28,000 each year). See also Ralph L. Keeney & Kenneth Green, Estimating Fatalities Induced by Economic Impacts of EPA’s Ozone and Particulate Standards 8 (Reason Public Policy Institute, Policy Study No. 225, June 1997) (calculating that if attainment of the new standards costs $10 billion annually, a number well within EPA’s estimated cost range, it will contribute to 2,200 premature deaths annually). On the general increase electricity prices, and because higher electricity prices will deprive poor people of air conditioning or lead them to use it less, such regulation may literally kill people.32 
These are simply a few examples of situations in which a government agency is inevitably making “health-health tradeoffs” in light of the systemic effects of one-shot interventions. Indeed, any regulation that imposes high costs will, by virtue of that fact, produce some risks to life and health, since “richer is safer.”33 A virtue of cost-benefit analysis is that it tends to overcome people’s tendency to focus on parts of problems, by requiring them to look globally at the consequences of apparently isolated actions. 
A set of data now suggests that people are subject to “alarmist bias.”34 The mere existence of discussions of new risks can aggravate concern, even when the discussions take the form of assurances that the risk level is relatively low. And when presented with information suggesting that a risk may range from A (low) to Z (high), the high risk number is especially salient, and it appears to have a disproportionate effect on behavior. 
A recent paper by George Loewenstein et al. suggests that risk-related concerns are often based on “feelings” rather than judgments.35 Thus risk-related objections can be a product not so much of thinking as of intense emotions, often produced by extremely vivid images of what might go wrong. This point is supported by evidence that reported feelings of worry are sometimes sensitive not to the probability of the bad outcome, but only to the severity of the bad outcome.36 Vivid mental pictures of widespread death or catastrophe can drive a demand for risk regulation. Consider, for example, the motivations of those who press for regulation of airplane safety in the aftermath of an airplane crash, even though such regulation may increase travel risks on balance (by driving up the phenomenon, see John D. Graham and Jonathan Baert Wiener, Risk Versus Risk (1995). 32 See C. Boyden Gray, The Clean Air Act Under Regulatory Reform, 11 Tulane Envt’l L.J. 235 (1998). 33 John D. Graham, Bei-Hung Chang, & John S. Evans, Poorer Is Riskier, 12 Risk Analysis 333, 333-35 (1992); Frank B. Cross, When Environmental Regulations Kill: The Role of Health-Health Analysis, 22 Ecol. L. Q. 729 (1995); Ralph L. Keeney, Mortality Risks Induced by the Costs of Regulations, 8 J. Risk & Uncertainty 95 (1994); Aaron Wildavsky, Richer is Safer, 60 Pub. Interest 23 (1980); Aaron Wildavsky, Searching for Safety 59-75 (1988). 34 See W. Kip Viscusi, Alarmist Decisions with Divergent Risk Information, 107 Econ. J.1657, 1657-58 (1997) (studying situations under which “[n]ew information about risks may generate alarmist actions that are not commensurate with the magnitude of the risks”). 35 See Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K. & Welch, E. S., Risk as Feelings (unpublished draft 5/4/99). price of flying and causing a shift to driving, a more dangerous form of transportation).37 
It is important to be careful with the relevant categories here. There is no sharp distinction between “cognition” and “emotion.”38 Emotions are generally the products of beliefs, and hence an emotional reaction to risk—terror, for example—is generally mediated by judgments.39 But this is not always true; sometimes the operation of the brain allows intense emotional reactions with minimal cognitive activity.40 In any case the judgments that fuel emotions may be unreliable. We need not venture into controversial territory in order to urge not that emotions are free of cognition, but that some risks seem to produce extremely sharp, largely visceral reactions. These reactions are sometimes largely impervious to argument. Indeed, experience with “mass panics” has shown exactly this structure, as assurances based on statistical evidence have little effect in the face of vivid images of what might go wrong.41 Some fears even appear to have a genetic foundation; consider, as a possible example, fear of snakes, which appears in people who have no reason to think that snakes are dangerous. 
The role of cost-benefit analysis is straightforward here. Just as the Senate was designed to have a “cooling effect” on the passions of the House of Representatives, so cost-benefit analysis might ensure that policy is driven not by hysteria or alarm, but by a full appreciation of the effects of relevant risks and their control. If the hysteria survives an investigation of consequences, then the hysteria is fully rational, and an immediate and intensive regulatory response is entirely appropriate. 
Nor is cost-benefit analysis, in this setting, only a check on unwarranted regulation. It can and should serve as a spur to regulation as well. If risks do not produce visceral reactions, partly because the underlying activities do not yield vivid mental images, cost-benefit analysis can show that they nonetheless warrant regulatory control. The elimination of lead in gasoline is a case in point.42 37 See Robert W. Hahn, The Economics of Airline Safety and Security: An Analysis of the White House Commission’s Recommendations, 20 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 791 (1997). 38 See Dan M. Kahan & Martha C. Nussbaum, Two Conceptions of Emotion in the Criminal Law, 96 Colum. L. Rev 269 (1996); Jon Elster, Alchemies of the Mind (1999). 39 See Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of Thought (forthcoming); Elster, supra note. 40 See Loewenstein et al., supra. 41 See the discussion of Love Canal in Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 683, 691-98 (1999). 42 See Economic Analyses at EPA: Assessing Regulatory Impact (Richard D. Morgenstern ed., 1997). 
Suppose that you are asked to say, without reference to any other problem, how much you would be willing to pay to protect certain threats to coral reefs. Now suppose that you are asked to say, without reference to any other problem. how much you would pay to protect against skin cancer among the elderly. Suppose, finally, that you are asked to say how much you would be willing to pay to protect certain threats to coral reefs and how much you would be willing to pay to protect against skin cancer among the elderly. Empirical evidence suggests that people’s answers to questions, taken in isolation, are very different from their answer to questions when they are asked to engage in cross-category comparisons.43 It appears that when people assess problems in isolation, they do so by reference to other problems in the same basic category—and that this intuitive process is dramatically altered when people are explicitly told to assess problems from other categories as well. The result of assessing individual problems, taken in isolation, is to produce what people would themselves consider a form of incoherence. 
The forms of regulatory spending shown in Table I undoubtedly reflect, in part, the kinds of irrationality that follow from judgments that are made without close reference to other problems from different categories. Incoherence is the natural result of the relevant cognitive processes. The argument for a form of cost-benefit analysis is straightforward: It operates as a built-in corrective to some of the distortions that come from taking problems in isolation. The point applies to “contingent valuation” assessments; but it operates more broadly with respect to expenditure decisions that otherwise risk incoherence, simply by virtue of the fact that they operate without looking at other problems, including those from other categories. 
The cognitive argument for cost-benefit analysis, thus understood, is now in place. It is true but obvious to say that people lack information and that their lack of information can lead to an inadequate or excessive demand for regulation, or a form of “paranoia and neglect.”44 What is less obvious is that predictable features of cognition will lead to a demand for regulation that is unlikely to be based on the facts. When people ask for regulation because of fears fueled by availability cascades, and when the benefits from the risk-producing activity are not 43 See Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, Iliana Ritov, & Cass R.Sunstein, Reversals of Judgment: The Effect of Cross-Category Comparisons on Intendedly Absolute Responses (unpublished manuscript 1999). 44 See John D. Graham, Making Sense of Risk: An Agenda for Congress, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved: Getting Better Results from Regulation 183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). registering, it would be highly desirable to create cost-benefit filters on their requests. When interest-groups exploit cognitive mechanisms to create unwarranted fear or diminish concern with serious problems, it is desirable to have institutional safeguards. When people fail to ask for regulation for related reasons, it would be desirable to create a mechanism by which government might nonetheless act if the consequences of action would be desirable. Here too cost-benefit balancing might be desirable, as in fact it has proved to be in connection not only with the phase-out of lead but also with the Reagan Administration’s decision to phase-out CFC’s, motivated by a cost-benefit analysis suggesting that the phase-out would do far more good than harm.45 
A caveat: It is entirely possible that the public demand for regulation will result from something other than cognitive errors, even if the relevant risk seems low as a statistical matter. People may think, for example, that it is especially important to protect poor children from a certain risk in a geographically isolated area, and they may be willing to devote an unusually large amount to ensure that protection. What seems to be a cognitive error may turn out, on reflection, to be a judgment of value, and a judgment that can survive reflection. I will return to this point. For the moment note two simple points. Whether an error is involved is an empirical question, subject, at least in principle, to empirical testing. And nothing in cost-benefit analysis would prevent people from devoting resources to projects that they consider worthy, even if the risk is relatively low as a statistical matter. 
I have not yet discussed what cost-benefit analysis might specifically entail, and there are potentially serious controversies here. But it will be best to discuss that question after dealing with some direct objections. 
The argument made thus far, cautious though it may seem, runs into three obvious objections. The first involves democratic considerations; the second points to the limitations of quantification; the third involves the possibility that ordinary people’s judgments are based not on cognitive limitations, but on a kind of “rival rationality.” 45 See Economic Analysis at EPA, supra note 33. See also Richard Elliot Benedick, Ozone Diplomacy: New Directions in Safeguarding the Planet 63 (1991) (Reagan administration supported aggressive regulation largely because cost-benefit analysis from the Council of Economic Advisers demonstrated that “despite the scientific and economic uncertainties, the monetary benefits of preventing future deaths from skin cancer far outweighed costs of CFC controls as estimated either by industry or by EPA”). 
The first objection, populist in character, is captured by the opening quotation from Senator Biden. The objection would be that in a democracy, government properly responds to the social “demand” for law. Government does not legitimately reject that demand on the ground that cost-benefit analysis suggests that it should not act. On this view, a democratic government should be accountable. Any approach that uses efficiency, or technocratically-driven judgments, as a brake on accountability is fatally undemocratic. 
The problem with this objection is that it rests on a controversial and even unacceptable conception of democracy, one that sees responsiveness to citizens’ demands, whatever their factual basis, as the foundation of political legitimacy. If those demands are uninformed, it is perfectly appropriate for government to resist them. Indeed, it is far from clear that reasonable citizens want, or would want, their government to respond to their uninformed demand. The analysis thus far suggests that the relevant demands are, in fact, uninformed or unreflective. If this is so, they should be subject to deliberative constraints of the sort exemplified by cost-benefit analysis. After that analysis has been generated, and public officials have taken it into account, democratic safeguards continue to be available, and electoral sanctions can be brought to bear against those who have violated the public will. The simple point is that if, once informed if the cost-benefit tradeoff, people continue to seek some particular regulation, then democratic considerations require government to restrict their choice.46 At the very least, cost-benefit analysis should be an ingredient in the analysis, showing people that the consequences of various approaches might be different from what they seem. 
I have noted that the cost-benefit chart described above raised many questions. Those questions might be made into a thoroughgoing challenge to cost-benefit analysis. In an extensive discussion, Lisa Heinzerling has attempted to do precisely that.47 Heinzerling argues that many of the values depend on controversial judgments of value, and that the table itself masks those judgments. Her first point is that the table includes many regulations that were in fact rejected. Some of them were not issued on the ground that their benefits would exceed their costs. The table is also underinclusive, for many regulations have been issued that impose dramatically lower costs than many of those included on the table. But by itself this is no indictment of cost-benefit analysis. Indeed, it 46 At least assuming the decisions involve nothing peculiar or invidious, such as racial animus. provides support for cost-benefit analysis insofar as it suggests that the tool has resulted in a rejection of undesirable regulations. 
But Heinzerling goes further. She contends that many of these numbers depend on controversial judgments about how to discount future benefits. Above all, the charts depend on a 10% discount rate, whereas the agencies tended to use a lower discount rate, or not to discount at all. Heinzerling also suggests that the charts depend on downward adjustment of the agency’s estimates of risk. Her own estimates result in the following risk table, adjusted for inflation. 
This table may be more accurate than Table I; certainly there are problems with any approach that assumes a 10% discount rate. But even if Heinzerling’s table is better, it offers an ironic lesson, serving largely to confirm the point that current regulatory policy suffers from poor priority-setting. The disparities here are not as dramatic, and they certainly do not establish pervasive overregulation; but they do support the view that resources are being misallocated. 
Heinzerling does not, however, conclude that this revised table is the appropriate basis for evaluating regulatory policy. Her aim is not to come up with a better table from which to reassess government behavior. On the contrary, she takes her argument to be a basis for rejecting cost-benefit analysis altogether. dreaded too—consider the extremely unpleasant idea of dying in an airplane crash. But the dread here stems from some factor (perhaps terror) different from and much shorter than the extended period of suffering that precedes some deaths. Thus it might be concluded that dreaded deaths deserve special attention in accordance with the degree of suffering that precedes them. A special problem with cancer deaths is that at least some of the time, people like to have upwardsloping utility. It is particularly bad to be in a situation in which things will constantly get worse.60 With cancer deaths, the slope goes downward fairly consistently until the point of death. 
People seem to perceive voluntarily incurred risks as less troublesome than involuntarily incurred risks. Consider diverse public reactions to airplane crashes and automobile crashes. Or consider the fact that tobacco is by far the largest source of preventable deaths in the United States. Why do we not devote much more of our regulatory effort to reducing smoking? The reason seems to lie in a judgment that smoking is a voluntary activity and hence the resulting deaths are less troublesome than other sorts of deaths. Here—it might be said—people have voluntarily assumed the relevant risks. a. Puzzles: high cost of avoidance rather than involuntariness? 
It is tempting to think that the apparent lay preference for according greater weight to “involuntary” risks to life requires significant qualification of the criterion of lives or life-years saved. But a simple reference to voluntariness, if taken to suggest something special about “lay rationality,” raises many puzzles. The most important problem is that it is not simple to know when a risk is voluntarily incurred. “Voluntariness” may be entirely absent in the case of an unforeseeable collision with an asteroid; but voluntariness is not, in the cases under consideration, an all-or-nothing matter. Instead it is a matter of degree. Return to the conventional thought that airplane crashes are “involuntary” and automobile crashes more “voluntary.” Certainly it would be possible to see the risks from air travel as voluntarily run; people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they do fly, they pay a certain amount for a certain package, including risks of various sorts. The same is true of automobile safety—and it is not in any way less true, however disparately the two kinds of risks may “seem.” Perhaps people are responding to the perceived fact that they have no control over the pilot’s behavior, whereas they have considerable control over automobile safety since they are themselves drivers. But airlines respond to 60 See George Loewenstein & Nachom Sicherman, Do Workers Prefer Increasing Wage Profiles?, 9 J. Lab. Econ. 67, 71-75 (1991); George Loewenstein & Drazen Prelec, Negative Time Preference, 81 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 347, 347 (1991). market forces, including the market for safety, and many people injured in automobile accidents are not at fault, and thus along the dimension of voluntariness this is hardly a crisp distinction. The difference between the two risks is hardly so categorical as to justify an assessment that they fall on poles of some voluntariness-involuntariness divide. Indeed, it is not clear even what is meant by the suggestion that one is voluntary and the other is not. Something else appears to underlie that suggestion. b. Three cases 
To shed some light on the issue, let us consider three classes of cases. First, consider the question whether workers exposed to cancer risks are voluntarily or involuntarily so exposed. If workers do not know about such risks—if they lack relevant information—we seem to have an easy case of involuntariness. Thus it makes sense to say that risks are run involuntarily when the people running them do not know about them. Lack of adequate information provides a legitimate case for a judgment of involuntary exposure to risk. But of course information itself can be obtained at some cost, pecuniary or otherwise. We are thus dealing, in cases of this kind, with high costs of risk avoidance, in the distinctive form of high costs of acquiring relevant information. 
Second, suppose that people who are exposed to a certain risk are aware of the risk, but are not in an actual or potential contractual relation with the riskproducer. Many victims of pollution are in this position; recall that in surveys air pollution is a particular source of public concern., People in Los Angeles may well know that they face high levels of smog. Are they exposed involuntarily? If we conclude that they are, we may mean that a risk is incurred involuntarily when and in the sense that it is typically very expensive for people to avoid it— and when someone else can reduce the risks more cheaply. Here a claim that the risk is faced “involuntarily” may mean that those who “run” the risk can reduce it only at very high cost, at least compared to those who “produce” the risk. (The quotation marks are necessary for obvious Coasian reasons.) Or it is possible that we mean that on nonutilitarian grounds, the people exposed to the risk have a moral entitlement to be free from it, at least if they have not explicitly sold it. 
But turn now to a third class of cases, involving a wage package or contract that does include compensation for the relevant risks. Assuming that point, we might want to distinguish between two different possibilities. In a case of a highlevel scientist, knowledgeable about relevant risks and involved in work that he finds rewarding, people may well conclude that we have an instance of voluntariness. (In the same category can be found the case of an astronaut.) But people might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not like his work at all (cf. Anderson, 1993). What distinguishes the two cases? If knowledge is present, or if the compensation package includes payment for the relevant risk, it is not clear how the two differ. The underlying judgment must be that the compensation is inadequate, perhaps because background inequality has produced a wage package that seems unfair even if voluntarily chosen by the parties. 
From this discussion it seems reasonable to speculate that any judgment that a risk is run “involuntarily” is probably based on 1) a lack of knowledge of the risk, or, more accurately, high costs of obtaining information about the risk, 2) a belief that information to one side, it would be very costly for people to avoid the risk, or 3) a belief that the risk is unaccompanied by compensating benefits, notwithstanding their belief that the contract is in some sense worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of 3); what might be at work is a judgment that background inequalities are producing the relevant bargain (not by itself a good reason to disrupt the deal), or perhaps a belief that workers are competing to their collective detriment, and an agreement not to compete would be in their best interests. On this view, the question whether a risk is run voluntarily or not is often not a categorical one but instead a question of degree, associated with information cost, risk-reduction cost, and the existence or not of accompanying benefits. Of course there are interesting background questions about why and when a risk “codes” as voluntary or involuntary; undoubtedly the answer depends a great deal on heuristic devices and selective attention. c. The purpose for which the risk is incurred and problems of responsibility and blame 
Death-risks may seem “voluntarily” run when people do not approve of the purpose for which people run the relevant risks, and involuntarily run when people think that the purpose for which the risk is run is laudable. It is predictable that people will not want to pour enormous taxpayer resources into lowering the risks associated with sky-diving, even if the dollars/life-years saved ratio is quite good. By contrast, it is doubtful that people think that it is wrong to spend enormous resources on the prevention of death from childbirth or being a police officer, even though the decision to have a child is (with appropriate qualifications) voluntary, and so too with the decision to become a police officer. People may think that when the appeal or purpose of the activity is associated with its very riskiness, resources should not be devoted to risk-reduction. At least this is plausible when the risk is an independent good or part of the benefit of the activity. And it is easy to imagine a belief that some activities—unsafe sex, cigarette smoking—are like the sky-diving case, perhaps because the risk is sometimes part of the benefit, perhaps because the risks are not incurred for a purpose that observers find worthy or valuable. 
It might seem that this consideration—the purpose for which the risk is incurred—overlaps with or is even identical to the question whether there are high costs of risk-avoidance. When the costs are low, as in sky-diving, the purpose might seem inadequate. But on reflection the two ideas are hardly the same. It may well be that failing to sky-dive, or sky-diving with some safetyincreasing technology, imposes high costs on sky-divers. There seems to be an objective judgment, not necessarily connected with subjective costs, in the claim that some risks are voluntary, or deserve less attention, because they are run for inadequate purposes. 
Relatedly, airplane accidents may seem different from automobile accidents not because the former are less voluntary, and not because of diverse costs of risk avoidance, but because the victims of airplane accidents are less blameworthy than the victims of automobile accidents, in the sense that the death is not a product of their own negligence or misconduct. In the case of an airplane disaster, weather conditions, mechanical failure, or pilot error are likely causes; in the case of an automobile accident, it is more likely (though not of course certain) that the victim could have avoided death through more careful driving. The point is crude, since many victims of automobile accidents are not drivers, and many drivers in accidents do not behave negligently. But the perceived difference, in a significant number of cases, may underlie an apparent judgment of “voluntariness” that is really a judgment about responsibility and blameworthiness. In any case judgments are likely to be affected, and distorted, by the fact that drivers seem to be risk optimists—with 90% ranking themselves as safer than the average driver and less likely to be involved in an accident.61 This is another place—illusions of control and risk optimism—where cognitive psychology argues in favor of cost-benefit analysis. d. Underlying questions and assumption of risk 
We might therefore conclude that whether a risk qualifies as involuntary raises many of the questions raised by the question whether government should regulate the market at all. A risk might be characterized as involuntarily run because affected people lack relevant information; because the transactions costs of bargaining are high; because the risks should be seen to amount to externalities; because collective action problems make market outcomes unsatisfactory since (for example) workers are in a prisoner’s dilemma best solved through law; or because some motivational or cognitive defect makes successful solutions through markets unlikely. These of course are among the conventional grounds for regulation in the first instance. When a risk seems voluntary, and not worthy of substantial regulatory resources, the term “voluntary” is serving as a placeholder for an argument that there is no sufficient ground for government action, because the accompanying benefits are high or 61 See Shelley E. Taylor, Positive Illusions 10 (1994). the risk-reduction costs are low, and because market arrangements take adequate account of these facts. 
ground that the relevant people have already received compensation? We might imagine a death-risk to be incurred voluntarily when an informed person decided to incur it in light of its costs and benefits. Suppose, for example, that someone purchases a small car with fewer safety features, or decides to become a boxer, an astronaut, or a police officer in a dangerous neighborhood. If a death results from such a choice, it might seem that the chooser has no legitimate ground for complaint; there has been ex ante compensation for the risk. But even in such cases, it is not clear that government lacks a role. If government can reduce a serious risk at low cost, and thus eliminate deaths, it should do so even if there was ex ante compensation for the relevant risk. There is a general point here. Sometimes observers confuse two quite different questions: (1) Should people be banned from running a certain risk, when they have run that risk voluntarily? ( people have run that risk voluntarily? A negative answer to question (1) does not answer question ( 
From this point we should conclude that a lay judgment that a risk is “voluntary” should not be decisive. A better understanding of what factors underlie and support that judgment should be used for purposes of regulatory policy. The basic criterion of decently livable life years might, then, be adjusted upward when those at risk lack relevant information or when the costs of riskavoidance are especially high—or downward when those at risk have the information and when the costs of risk-avoidance are low. 
The psychological evidence suggests, thought it does not squarely identify, an important and relevant fact: Some deaths produce unusually high externalities, in the sense that they generate widespread losses, including those stemming from empathy and fear, in a way that leads to predictable pecuniary and nonpecuniary costs. Consider, for example, the death of the President of the United States, a death that imposes a wide range of costs and that taxpayers invest significant resources to prevent. Part of the reason for allocating those resources is undoubtedly the greater risk that the President will be murdered; but the external costs associated with his death are undoubtedly important too. A parallel can be found in the relatively large level of resources devoted to prevent the assassination of many important public officials. But the point is hardly limited to the highest public officials. An airplane hijacking or crash, partly because it is likely to be well-publicized, may produce large externalities in the form of empathy and fear. It may even deter air travel by making people unusually frightened of air travel, simply because of heuristic devices (availability) and other predictable factors that make people’s probability assessments go awry. This fear may be damaging because it is itself a utility loss and because it may lead people to use less safe methods of transportation, such as automobiles. Or an airplane crash might be especially disturbing because the sudden loss of dozens or hundreds of people seems so unusually and senselessly tragic, in a way that produces large empathetic reactions, or because it signals the further possibility of random, apparently inexplicable events in which large numbers of people die. 
Some catastrophes are especially disturbing because they appear to produce pointless and especially unnatural deaths. A recent airplane crash in Israel, killing over seventy soldiers, is an example, producing an extended period of national mourning—stemming from the youth of those who were killed, the fact that they were serving their country, and the highly unusual character of the accident, apparently stemming from preventable human error. These considerations suggest that special attention might justifiably be devoted to air safety in the time following a crash even if the relevant precautions do not cause a significant drop in deaths. The same idea may justify special safeguards of nuclear reactors. Even a minor and harmless accident may produce a kind of day-to-day fearfulness that properly places a role in an official calculus, at least if educative efforts cannot work against public fears to the extent that they are irrational or based on error-producing heuristic. 
Special public concern about catastrophic events may thus reflect a judgment that certain kinds of deaths have ancillary effects, well beyond the deaths themselves. Consider in this regard the “Buffalo Creek Syndrome,” documented several times in the aftermath of major disasters. Nearly two years after the collapse of a dam that left 120 dead and 4000 homeless, psychiatric researchers continued to find significant psychological and sociological changes; survivors were characterized by a loss of direction and energy, other disabling character changes, and a loss of communality.62 One evaluator attributed this loss of direction specifically to “the loss of traditional bonds of kinship and neighborliness.”63 The non-linearity of lay evaluations of risk in the context of potential disasters may thus reflect a high premium on avoiding the distinctive kinds of losses distinctly associated with catastrophes. If so, differences between 62 Daniel Fiorino, Technical and Democratic Values in Risk Analysis, 9 Risk Analysis 293 (1989). 63 Daniel Fiorino, Technical and Democratic Values in Risk Analysis, 9 Risk Analysis 293, 295 (1989). See also J.D. Robinson, M.D. Higgins, & P.K. Bolyard, Assessing Environmental Impacts on Health: A Role for Behavioral Science, 4 Envir. Impact Assessment Rev. 41 (1983). lay and expert assessments rest on genuine value differences (four times as many deaths may be much more than four times as bad) rather than on factual errors in cognitive processes of ordinary people. 
These various points raise a number of questions. We do not yet have a full understanding of the basis for special public concern with catastrophes. Moreover, the argument for devoting special resources to deaths with externalities is strongest when the externalities do not reflect irrationality or cannot be reduced through other means. For example, some of the fear that follows certain widely reported deaths is based on confusion or ignorance about actual probabilities; if it is possible to dispel the confusion, the fear should dissipate as well. Here the question is whether government can legitimately spend extra resources to avert the harms associated with irrational public attitudes. Perhaps information-based strategies would be preferable to allocating additional resources to deaths whose occurrence produces widespread panic. On the other hand, there are undoubtedly instances in which information is ineffective, and there are also cases in which high externalities, in the form of special fear, are not a product of factual ignorance. In such cases government is justified in giving additional resources to death-prevention. 
Some risks might be, or be thought to be, inequitably distributed, above all because the victims are disproportionately members of socially disadvantaged groups. Certain deaths might, for example, be concentrated among poor people, African-Americans, or homosexuals. Consider the risk of lead paint poisoning suffered by inner city children, or the risk of AIDS, faced disproportionately by African-Americans as well as homosexuals. Citizens or elected representatives may think that inequitably distributed risks of death deserve special attention from government. Here the relevant deaths are bad not because each one is especially bad to experience, but because there is social concern about the fact that a certain cause of death falls disproportionately on members of certain social groups. 
When such social concern exists, and when it is not objectionable on constitutional or other grounds, it is entirely legitimate for officials to respond.64 Thus regulators should be permitted to use a uniform number per life or lifeyears saved; this is itself a (modest) redistributive strategy, because wealthy people (simply because they are wealthy) are willing to pay more to reduce risks than nonwealthy people. Regulators might also be permitted to give distributional 64 It is inadequate to response that potential compensation could be made to losers in the context of efficient programs; if the compensation is only potential, the concern remains. weights to risks whose distributional incidence is especially troublesome.65 These weights might take a technical form (through adding numbers to the ones that would otherwise be used) or appear via the official judgment about how to proceed after the cost-benefit analysis has been supplied (through deciding in favor of a strategy not strictly suggested by the numbers). The distributional concern supports special efforts to control AIDS; environmental risks like asthma, which are concentrated among inner city children; and perhaps the spread of diseases whose incidence is concentrated among women. My minimal claim is that if there is a public judgment in favor of according a distributional weight to a certain death-reduction policy, and if that judgment is not unconstitutional or otherwise illegitimate, policy makers should not be barred from respecting that judgment. 
I conclude that there is no “rival rationality,” and that people are willing to depart from the “lives saved” criterion for reasons that cast a clearer light on what it is that they are attempting to maximize. More particularly: a. People are willing to pay a premium to avoid deaths that involve a high degree of pain and suffering. At least presumptively, this desire, or judgment, should be respected by government regulators; the presumption might be rebutted if, for example, the “premium” seems so high as to suggest that some kind of irrationality is at work. 
b. People are willing to devote more resources to protect children. This judgment may depend on a belief that children are typically more vulnerable to risk, in the sense that they cannot protect themselves, or on a belief that more life-years are at stake when children are in jeopardy. In either case, this judgment too deserves respect. 
c. People are willing to pay a premium to avert catastrophes. This may depend on a belief that catastrophes have “ripple effects” that outrun lives actually lost. A plane crash killing 100 people may be worse than 100 deaths from poor diet, if the consequence of the former is to create pervasive fear and anxiety. A shooting in a high school may warrant special attention, keeping lives saved constant, if only in order to ensure that students and parents are not constantly fearful about the safety of schools. These “ripple effects” qualify as social costs and at first 65 See the critical comments about willingness to pay in Amartya Sen, The Discipline of Cost-Benefit Analysis, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000), and in Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). glance seem to deserve special attention. The major qualification is that it may be possible to address them directly, rather than to cater (pander?) to them. Suppose, for example, that education can assure the public that flying is generally quite safe. If information can accomplish this end, it is better to provide it than to engage in regulation that is costly and that has no purpose other than to reassure. 
d. People are willing to devote more resources to protect against dangers when the costs of risk avoidance are high. Perhaps people do not have information about certain risks, and perhaps information is costly to obtain. Perhaps third parties are in danger, and perhaps it is costly for them to avoid the danger. This point may involve fairness; it may involve efficiency. It involves fairness if people believe that those who bear high costs from risk avoidance should not, in principle, have to bear those costs. If this is the underlying belief, then it may follow that those who can easily avoid the cost of some risk should, in principle, do exactly that. The point involves efficiency if the judgment is that the best means of reducing aggregate costs (public as well as private) is to regulate the entity that is imposing the relevant risk. 
e. People may believe that it is especially important to protect vulnerable or traditionally disadvantaged groups against certain risks. If, for example, AIDS is concentrated among African-Americans and homosexuals, there may be a special reason to devote resources to its prevention, even if quantitatively identical risks receive less attention. 
These various points suggest that there is no “rival rationality.” The question is whether people believe that some dangers deserve more attention than (quantitatively identical) others, and if so, whether that belief can survive critical scrutiny. But these points also suggest that it is wrong to think that policy should follow the judgments of experts focussed on the single question of “lives at stake.”66 This is not the social maxim and for reflective citizens. Such citizens have a different view about what their government ought to be doing. That different view does not embody any exotic conception of rationality. 66 This is the apparent recommendation in Margolis, supra note, though I am not sure that Margolis would agree with what I am suggesting here. 
III. An Incompletely Theorized Agreement on Cost-Benefit Analysis? 
Thus far I have suggested that cost-benefit analysis is a sensible approach to cognitive problems faced by ordinary people in the assessment of risk. I have also suggested that there is no democratic objection to using cost-benefit analysis as an ingredient in decisions, even a crucial ingredient, and that cost-benefit analysis can be understood in a way that responds to reasonable concerns about quantification and about the idea that the only thing to be maximized is total lives saved (or, somewhat better, life-years saved). 
But none of this deals with the general question how cost-benefit analysis should be understood. In the least contentious formulation—the formulation that I have used here—cost-benefit analysis is simply a form of open-ended consequentialism, an invitation to identify the advantages and disadvantages of regulation,67 an invitation that does not say anything about appropriate weights. The virtue of this formulation is that it is uncontentious; the vice is that it is vacuous. People can agree with it, but it does not mean anything. In its most contentious formulation, cost-benefit analysis depends on asking people how much they are “willing to pay” for various goods, and making decisions depend on the resulting numbers.68 Problems with this approach lie in a possible lack of private information; its possible distributional unfairness (since willingness to pay depends on ability to pay); potential differences between private willingness to pay and public aspirations69; and collective action problems of various sorts that might draw into doubt the privately-expressed amounts.70 It will be worthwhile to spell out these points in a bit more detail. 
“Willingness to pay” is a simple way to capture people’s valuations, and for this reason it has practical advantages. Indeed, it is a good place to start, especially in the absence of anything better. But it also suffers from several problems. First, willingness to pay may be a product of cognitive and motivational distortions of various kinds. Willingness to pay judgments may be insufficiently informed or reflective with respect to both facts and values. For 67 See Amartya Sen, The Discipline of Cost-Benefit Analysis, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000); compare the notion of cost-benefit analysis as a decision procedure in Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L.J. (forthcoming 1999). 68 See Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (5th ed. 1998). 69 See Daphna Lewinson-Zamir, Consumer Preferences, Citizen Preferences, and the Provision of Public Goods, 108 Yale L.J. 377 (1999); Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice ch. 2 (1997). 70 See Daphna Lewinson-Zamir, Consumer Preferences, Citizen Preferences, and the Provision of Public Goods, 108 Yale L.J. 377 (1999); Amartya Sen, Environmental Evaluation and Social Choice: Contingent Valuation and the Market Analogy, 46 Japanese Econ. Rev. 23, 29 (1995). example, people may overstate the risks from various hazards that receive disproportionate media attention. If this is so, it seems odd to base government policy on those judgments. 
It is also possible that people will be willing to pay little to avoid some bad X simply because they are used to it and their preferences have adapted accordingly.71 For example, people may not care about scenic areas simply because they have not been exposed to them. Preferences based on lack of information or adaptation to deprivation are hardly a good basis for regulatory policy. They need not be taken as given and translated into law. In any case private preferences may be a product of social norms over which individuals have little control, by which they live, but which they would like to change if they could. If people are willing to pay little to avoid some risk (for example, of smoking) because of prevailing norms that they would wish changed, willingness to pay is unjustified as a basis for policy, since the norm could be changed through collective action.72 
Second, willingness to pay is imperfectly correlated with utility—at best the first is a proxy for the second—and the two should not be confused in principle. One problem is that poor people are willing to pay less than wealthy people simply by virtue of being poor, and their willingness to pay for something (eg, a reduced mortality risk) is crudely connected with the utility that they would gain from it. In the face of disparities in wealth, willingness to pay should not be identified with expected utility or with the value actually placed on the good in question.73 Third, there is a purely distributive concern.74 Because poor people have less money than wealthy people, they are willing to pay less for equivalent goods (such as reduced risks to life). The result of the use of willingness to pay would be to produce greater expenditures to protect wealthy people than poor people, a controversial result to say the least.75 Fourth, the willingness to pay criterion will produce losers as well as winners, and many of the losers will go uncompensated; it is scant comfort to say that they could be 71 See Sen, supra; Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (1983). 72 See Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice ch. 2 (1997). 73 This seems to me a mistake in Viscusi’s illuminating discussion, W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). 74 This is a standard point in economic discussions of cost-benefit analysis, though it is ignored in many discussions by economic analysts of law. See, e.g., Richard Tresch, Public Finance: A Normative Theory 541 (1981): “In our opinion the distributive question is the single most important issue in all of cost-benefit analysis.” Tresch discusses how distributional considerations might be incorporated. See also A. Allan Schmid, Benefit-Cost Analysis 157-190 (1989), with a discussion of distributive weights at pp. 170-72. 75 At least unless poor people are compensated for any losses via side payments. compensated with side payments or a system of optimal taxation. Hence an attempt to defend cost-benefit analysis by reference to the efficiency criterion, as measured by private willingness to pay, runs into great difficulties, at least unless steps are taken to ensure against distributional bias.76 
Fifth, and finally, there may be differences between the choices people make as consumers and the choices that they make as citizens, and it is not clear that the former should be preferred. The context of citizenship may evoke otherregarding or altruistic values, or preferences, that are not reflected in private choices. This is partly because aggregating private willingness to pay can replicate various collective action problems faced in the private domain; people may be willing to pay more simply because they know that other people are contributing as well.77 If this is so, it makes no sense to base policy on private willingness to pay, where the collective action problem arises. 
In any case we might think that government policy should be based on the reasons given for one or another outcome, and the fact that people are “willing to pay” a lot or a little for some outcome tells us too little about whether good reasons exist. Before discussion, for example, people may be willing to pay a fair bit to discriminate on the basis of sex, and they may be willing to pay little to protect large populations of animals that are at risk. These judgments may change as a result of reason-giving in the public domain. In other words, government is a place for exchanging reasons for one or another course or action. It is not simply a maximizing machine, taking private willingness to pay as the foundation, whatever the source or the grounds of pre-discussion preferences. 
A particular problem here is that people may not want to spend a great deal to protect (for example) environmental amenities because they seek to protect their (relative) financial position.78 A regulatory program supported by all might maintain relative position, which may be what people care about. Current willingness to pay numbers do not take account of this possibility. There is thus good reason for an empirical speculation here, one that suggests that current 76 There are some complexities here. Of course markets are ordinarily based on willingness to pay, and poor people are willing to pay less for safety, simply because they have less. Poor people are willing to pay less, as a class and other things equal, for safer cars, safer neighborhoods, and so forth. The aggregated willingness to pay approach simply generalizes this phenomenon; there is nothing unusual about it. Thus a system that assigns uniform values to life embeds a kind of subsidy, or redistribution, to people with relatively less resources or, more precisely, to people with less willingness to pay. A system of uniform values might be thought sufficient to correct any distributional bias in cost-benefits analysis. 77 See Robert H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for Status (Oxford University Press) (1985); Lewinsohn-Zamir, supra; Amartya Sen, supra; Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice (1997). 78 See Frank, supra note. numbers are far too low. Much further work remains to be done to test whether people would in fact be willing to spend more for safety, or for environmental amenities, if the result would be significant decreases in absolute income but the same relative income. 
Nor would it be sensible to disregard the presence of tragic choices, as when cost-benefit analysis leads to a choice of course A over course B, but course A leads to uncompensated losers (a group whose members may suffer from serious illnesses and even death).79 Perhaps it is possible, in such cases, to restructure social arrangements so as to reduce or eliminate the tragedy. But even if this is so, a cost-benefit analysis, of the sort to be described, can help inform a decision about what tragedy-reducing course to take, and whether such a course is worthwhile at all. 
Often it is possible to resolve hard questions of law and policy without resolving deeply contested issues about justice, democracy, or the appropriate aims of the state.80 Often it is possible to obtain an incompletely theorized agreement on a social practice, and even on the social or legal specification of the practice. In many areas of law and public policy, people can reach closure about what to do despite their disagreement or uncertainty about why, exactly, that ought to do it. Thus people who disagree about the purposes of the criminal law can agree that rape and murder should be punished, and punished more severely than theft and trespass. Thus people can support an Endangered Species Act amidst disagreement about whether the protection of endangered species is desirable for theological reasons, or because of the rights of animals, plants, and species, or because of the value of animals, plants, and species for human beings. A great advantage of incompletely theorized agreements is that they allow people of diverse views to live together on mutually advantageous terms. An even greater advantage is that they allow people of diverse views to show one another a high degree of both humility and mutual respect. 
I believe that incompletely theorized agreement is possible here; at least this should be the goal of those attempting to understand the uses of cost-benefit analysis in regulatory policy. For reasons just discussed, it would be difficult to obtain agreement on the view (which seems to me implausible) that all questions of regulatory policy should be resolved by asking how much people are “willing 79 See Martha C. Nussbaum, The Fragility Of Goodness: Luck and Ethics In Greek Tragedy and Philosophy (1983); Martha Nussbaum, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). 80 See Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996); Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). to pay” for various social goods.81 But my basic claims here are that it should be possible for diverse people to agree on presumptive floors and ceilings for regulatory expenditures, and that the presumptions can do a great deal of useful work for policymaking and for law. In short, a great deal can be done without confronting the hardest theoretical questions raised by contentious specifications of cost-benefit analysis. 
An obvious question here is: Who could join this incompletely theorized agreement? Who would reject it? My principal claim is that the agreement could be joined by a wide range of reasonable people, including utilitarians and Kantians, perfectionist and political liberals, and those who accept and those who doubt the idea that private willingness to pay is the appropriate foundation for regulatory policy. There is room here for deliberative democrats who emphasize the need for government to reflect on private preferences, rather than simply to translate them into law.82 A prime purpose of the approach is to ensure more in the way of reflection; cost-benefit analysis, as understood here, is a guarantee of greater deliberation, not an obstacle to it. Nor is the approach rigid. Under the proposed approach, agencies have the authority to abandon the floors and ceilings if there is reason for them to do so. If, for example, agencies want to spend a great deal to protect African-American children from a risk disproportionately faced by them, they are entitled to do so, as long as they explain that this is what they are doing, and so long as what they are doing in reasonable. 
Here, then, are eight propositions, offered in the hope that they might attract support from diverse theoretical standpoints. I do not attempt to defend them in detail here; The goal is to provide a starting point for the effort to anchor costbenefit analysis in an incompletely theorized agreement about regulatory policies. 81 See Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L.J. (forthcoming 1999). 82 Absolutists of various kinds might refuse to join an agreement on these principles. Perhaps their refusal would be most reasonable in the case of the Endangered Species Act, where nothing said below explains why millions of dollars should be spent (at least in opportunity costs) to say members of ecologically unimportant species. It would be possible, however, to imagine a kind of “meta” cost-benefit analysis that would point in this direction, perhaps on the ground that it greatly simplifies decision without imposing high costs overall. For the regulatory issues dealt with here, an absolutist approach seems hard to justify, not least because there are dangers to life and health on both sides of the equation. Note that I am dealing here with environmental and related risks, and hence many of the most contentious issues (e.g., how to treat the wrongdoer’s motivation, or how to deal with rights violators) do not arise. See Sen, The Discipline of Cost-Benefit Analysis, supra. courses of action, and also attempt to quantify the relevant effects to the extent that this is possible. When quantification is not possible, agencies should discuss the relevant effects in qualitative terms, and also specify a range of plausible outcomes, e.g., annual savings of between 150 and 300 lives, or savings of between $100 million and $300 million, depending on the rate of technological change. The statement should include the full range of beneficial effects. The problem of particulates and ozone regulation poses some serious difficulties to challengers to cost-benefit analysis (CBA); if the EPA is not to do a form of CBA, what is it to do, concretely? qualitative description of relevant effects. Both qualitative and quantitative descriptions should be provided. It is important to know the nature of the relevant effects, e.g., lost workdays, cancers averted, respiratory problems averted. To the extent possible, the qualitative description should give a concrete sense of who is helped and who is hurt, e.g., whether the beneficiaries are mostly or partly children, whether the regulation will lead to lost jobs, higher prices, more poverty, and so forth. Where the only possible information is speculative, this should be noted, along with the most reasonable speculations. 
This is not because a statistical life and (say) $5 million are the same thing, but to promote coherence and uniformity and to ensure sensible priority-setting. There is nothing magical or rigid about the dollar equivalents; the conversion is simply a pragmatic tool to guide analysis and to allow informed comparisons. statute or Executive Order, via presumptive floors and ceilings. For example, a statute might say that a statistical life will ordinarily be valued at no less than $2 million and no more than $10 million. Evidence of worker and consumer behavior, suggesting a valuation of between $5 million and $7 million per statistical life saved, is at least relevant here. The fact that the willingness to pay numbers are in this range is hardly decisive, but it is supplemented by the fact that similar numbers appear to represent the midpoint of agency practice. Thus both market and governmental measures point in the same basic direction.83 OMB should establish presumptive floors and ceilings for various regulatory benefits. If an agency is going to spend (say) no more than $500,000 per life saved, or more than $20 million, it should have to explain itself. Actual agency practice reveals a mixed record. EPA now values a life at $4.8 million; some agencies go as high as $5.6 or as low as $1; and some agencies do not provide specific numbers at all. 
Perhaps adjustments could be made if, for example, poor people are especially at risk. There should be no adjustments “downwards” for poor people; in other words, the fact that poor people are willing to spend less to protect their own lives (because they are poor) should not call for a correspondingly lower expenditures by government. The principal danger here is that well-organized groups will be able to use equitable arguments on behalf of their preferred adjustments. It is important to ensure a degree of discipline here, and perhaps the dangers of interest-group manipulation are serious enough to suggest that uniform numbers or ranges might be used, or that the presumptions are strong and rebuttable only in the most compelling cases.84 various “qualitative” factors discussed above. For example, they might add a “pain and suffering premium,” or increase the level of expenditure because children are disproportionately affected or because the victims are members of a disadvantaged group. It would be reasonable to conclude that because AIDS has disproportionate adverse effects on homosexuals and poor people, special efforts should be made to ensure against AIDS-related deaths. To the extent possible, they should be precise about the nature of, and grounds for, the relevant adjustments, especially in light of the risk that interest-group pressures will convert allegedly qualitative adjustments in illegitimate directions.85 83 Note, however, that if relative position is what matters, these numbers may be too low, for reasons stated above. 84 See Viscusi, Risk Equity, supra note. 85 See id.; see also James Hamilton and W. Kip Viscusi, Calculating Risks (1999) (showing that allegedly equitable shifts are driven by political pressures not mapping onto any sensible conception of equity). 
Sometimes public concern about certain risks is general and intense, even though the concern is not merited by the facts.86 The best response is educational; the government should not expend significant resources merely because an uninformed public believes that it should. But if education and reassurance fail, increased regulation may be defensible as a way of providing a kind of reassurance in the face of intense fears, which can themselves impose high costs of various kinds. (Consider, for example, the possibility that people who afraid of risks of plane crashes will shift to driving, a more risky method of transportation; consider also the fact that the fear is itself a cost.) should require a general showing that regulation has produced more good than harm, on a reasonable view about valuation of both benefits and costs.87 On this view, courts should generally require agencies to generate and to adhere to ceilings and floors. But they should also allow agencies to depart from conventional numbers (by, for example, valuing a life at less than $1 million, or more than $10 million) if and only if the agency has given a reasonable explanation of why it has done so. The ultimate task would be develop a kind of “common law” of cost-benefit analysis, authorizing agencies to be law-making institutions in the first instance.88 
I have suggested that cost-benefit analysis, often defended on economic grounds, can be urged less contentiously on cognitive grounds. Cost-benefit analysis, taken as an inquiry into the consequences of varying approaches to regulation,89 is a sensible response not only to interest-group power, but also to limited information and to predictable problems in the public demand for regulation. These problems include the use of the availability heuristic; social amplification of that heuristic via cascade effects; a failure to see the benefits that 86 See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 683 (1999). 87 See Margolis, supra note. 88 This has started to happen in various areas. See the development of a common law of “risk significance” under OSHA, discussed in Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, Michigan Law Review (forthcoming 1999). 89 There is no alternative to regulation. What is sometimes described as deregulation, or a failure to regulate, is actually regulation via the common law. accompany certain risks; a misunderstanding of systemic effects, which can lead to unanticipated bad (and good) consequences; and certain emotional reactions to risks. In all of these areas, an effort to identify costs and benefits can properly inform analysis. 
These points do not show how cost-benefit analysis should be specified. Here I have raised questions about the willingness to pay criterion and suggested that at least in principle, it would be obtuse to attempt to assess regulatory proposals via a uniform number for lives saved; but I have also suggested that presumptive ranges, for life as well as other beneficial effects on health and other values, would be an excellent way to clarify and order regulatory policy, in a way that should lead both to greater consistency and more overall protection. If ordinary market behavior and ordinary government behavior point to a similar basic range (e.g., $3 million to $7 million per life saved), that is an excellent place to start. 
My ultimate hope is that it would be possible to produce a convergence on a form of cost-benefit analysis that should be understood as a pragmatic instrument and that ought not to be terribly contentious—a form of cost-benefit analysis that does not take a stand on highly controversial questions about what government ought to do, and that promises to attract support from people with diverse conceptions of the right and the good. I have suggested here that the most promising source of such an agreement is not only or even mostly neoclassical economics, but also behavioral economics and cognitive psychology. Preliminary draft dated 09/04/99. 
Forthcoming in the Journal of Legal Studies. 
All rights reserved. 
Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
(Second Series) 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 1992). (February 1992). 1992). (July 1992). 
A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 1992). 
Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Adjudication (September 1993). 1993). 
Japan (August 1994). 
Protection of Software (August 1994). (December 1994). 
Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 1995). Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
Biotechnology (November 1995). 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). Right-to 
Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
Essay (March 1997). Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997). Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998). 
Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). to Law and Economics (May 1998). 
Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 1998). Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). and Scope of Government? (September 1998) (October 1998) (November 1998) 
Law (November 1998) (December 1998) 
A “Third Way” (January 1999) 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
CONCLUSION .......................................................................... 190 
INTRODUCTION 
In late 1995, Montana became the first and only state to eliminate a numerical daytime speed limit on its interstate highways. Instead, the state adopted a "Basic Rule" of "reasonable and prudent" daytime driving. The law produced a heated debate about its consequences, the relationship between norms and law, and the choice between rules and standards in statutes J.D., Cum Laude, University of Chicago Law School, 1998. 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University School. 
of Chicago Law affecting primary conduct. Montana's endeavor to regulate drivers' conduct without a numerical speed limit offers an intriguing opportunity to explore the role of social norms in regulating behavior, the importance and feasibility of cooperation, and the possibility of controlling behavior through relatively open-ended law. 
In this essay, we investigate the consequences of Montana's daytime driving rules. We examine the law itself, its effects on driving behavior and law enforcement, and recent attempts to overturn the law. Specifically, we evaluate the law's impact on the motoring public and Montana as a whole. We also consider the Basic Rule's effect on legal standards: Does the law's subjective nature promote arbitrary and ineffective enforcement? We explore the effect of the law on so-called "rule of law" values of both drivers and police officers. In late 1998, the Montana Supreme Court invalidated the Basic Rule on due process grounds, and the ultimate fate of the "reasonable and prudent" rule remains unclear. In Part VI, we offer a brief discussion of that issue. 
Our basic findings are as follows: for the driving behavior of Montana citizens, in terms of overall speed and safety. Most citizens appeared to coordinate their behavior around a certain area of appropriate speed, both during the period of an official 55 mile-perhour (mph) limit and after the return of the Basic Rule. This point suggests the possibility that driving habits may outstrip the law. Indeed, we suspect that much of driving behavior is governed by informal norms. Those norms govern speed as well as many other topics, and have a far greater degree of flexibility and specificity than any law. Of course these norms operate against a backdrop set by speed limits in other states and past limits in Montana. It is hard to know how fast Montanans would drive without this backdrop. 
encouraging very fast and somewhat reckless driving by tourists. Many of these drivers appeared to be attracted to Montana by virtue of its Basic Rule. This point also has an important implication; a state that allows very fast driving (because of a high speed limit in the form of a rule or standard) may find itself becoming a "speed magnet," which may produce unanticipated dangers. 
interstate highways of Montana increased after the switch to the Basic Rule. Both statistics, however, generally remained within historical fluctuating ranges, and a sharp upward spike in 1997 does not offer any unambiguous lesson. 
accident rate did not increase enormously in Montana, perhaps because the Basic Rule encouraged drivers to use the interstate highways, which are relatively safe. This point suggests a final important implication; one of the consequences of decreasing safety on interstate highways may be to increase overall safety, if the decrease is a result of a change in policy that shifts drivers away from relatively more perilous rural roads and makes interstate driving more attractive. 
vague nature subjects the Basic Rule to many different interpretations by both drivers and law enforcement officials. The results have included increased roadside confrontations between officers and motorists, and also a judicial and administrative backlog in adjudicating possible violations. 
law. For example, traffic citations for Basic Rule violations, initially soaring in the law's first year, declined as drivers apparently adapted to the flexible standards. Similarly, after a sharp spike in fatalities in 1997, Montana's roadways became safer in 1998, the law's third year of operation. 
In the end, we do not mean to say that the Basic Rule is a good or a bad idea. The most important and interesting elements of this story lie in the details rather than the "bottom line." 
I. 
MONTANA AND THE BASIC RULE 
To understand the Basic Rule, it is necessary to emphasize that Montana is a large and thinly populated area. With 147,047 square miles of territory, it stands as the fourth largest state.' Montana's population, however, totals approximately 870,000, making it the third most sparsely populated state 2 with an average of just six people per square mile. 3 Billings, with its 87,000 residents, is the state's largest city. 4 Yet Billings does not face the suburban sprawl of other metropolitan areas; the first traffic light outside of the city is 145 miles away in Miles City, population 8,400. 5 
Traveling Montana's vast expanse via its interstate highways can be relatively hazardous. The state has 88,000 miles of highway. 6 There is no separate state police force and only 212 Highway Patrol officers monitor the 
See George Bennett, Montana Sees Old Ways Slipping Away, PALM BEACH POST, Apr. 14, 1996, at IA. 
2 See id. (noting that only Alaska and Wyoming have fewer people per square mile). 3 See Mark Mueller, Montana's Wild FrontierBeckons Actors, Writers and Reactionaries, BOSTON HERALD, Apr. 7, 1996, at 6. 
1 See In Big Sky State, Sky's the Speed Limit Again, ST. PETERSBURG TIMES (Fla.), Dec. 9, 1995, at 1A. 
5 See id. 
6 See Tim Cornwell, Bomber from the Backwoods?, INDEPENDENT (London), Apr. 7, 1996, at 10. roads. 7 As of 1995, Montana's rate of 2.3 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles was considerably above the national average of 1.8 deaths per 100 million vehicle miles. 8 Moreover, the deadliest stretch of road in the country and two of the nation's three most perilous highway areas are located in Montana, with fatality rates of 6.206 and 4.031 per 100 million miles, respectively. 9 In sum, Montana's wide open spaces afford ample distance and danger for the motoring public. 
Before the enactment of federally mandated speed limits, Montana governed its highways under its Basic Rule.' 0 This law, passed in 1955,"1 accorded motorists substantial freedom in conducting themselves on the road, requiring drivers to operate their vehicles in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed no greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, condition of brakes, weight of vehicle, grade and width of highway, condition of surface, and freedom of obstruction to the view ahead.12 Citizens of Montana regarded the Basic Rule as practical and a necessary way of life, viewing fast driving in the words of one inhabitant, as a "Godgiven right."' 3 
Congress altered the situation in 1974. In the wake of the 1973 Arab oil embargo, the federal government enacted the Federal Aid Highways Amendments of 1974 and imposed a "National Maximum Speed Limit" of 55 mph. 14 Initially urged as a conservation effort, the law rapidly gained Spaces, WASH. POST, Dec. 9, 1995, at A3. 
1' See Tyce Palmaffy, Don't Brake for Big Government, J. OF AMER. CITIZENSHIP POL. REV., Sept.-Oct. 1996, at 11; see also Cook, supra note 11, at 74. 
HeinOnline -- 79 B.U. L. Rev. 158 1999 support as a safety measure, reducing highway fatalities.15 The federal government enforced the mandate by restricting highway funds for those states that refused to establish the new limit.' 6 As a result, every state acquiesced and 55 mph emerged as the national speed limit.17 
Its libertarian populace' 8 not content to bow to Washington's edict, Montana passed a "[fluel conservation speed limit" to achieve nominal compliance with the federal government's ultimatum.' 9 The law, explicitly designed to "insure conservation of a resource," 20 established violations of the speed limit as misdemeanors not reported against a driver's insurance record. 21 Infractions cost the driver $5, payable directly to the Highway Patrol officer issuing the ticket. 22 Simultaneously, Montana's legislature enacted another law stating that its fuel conservation speed limit would remain effective "only as long as the establishment of those speed limits by the state is required by federal law as a condition to the state's continuing eligibility to receive [federal highway] funds ... "23 
Montana's motorists virtually ignored the newly imposed speed limits; driving behavior was largely a function of norms, not of law. 24 Partly be"5See Palmaffy, supra note 14, at 1 (noting that the law remained in effect long after the fuel crisis ended because of presumed safety benefits). 
16 See id. 11See id. 
11See Tamara Jones, Montana'sRocky Reputation: First the Freemen. Now Maybe the Unabomber. What Gives?, WASH. POST, Apr. 5, 1996, at F1 ("'As soon as they learn to drive a car or handle a rifle, Montanans learn self-sufficiency,' writes Norma Tirrell in her historical guidebook, 'Montana.' 'Neighbors are to be trusted,' she says, 'but it is this ability to take care of one's self that defines the Montana spirit."'); see also Graham Brink, Free to Govern Oneself, ST. PETERSBURG TIMES (Fla.), Dec. 21, 1997, at 4D (quoting one Montanan's view of governmental regulation: "'Speed laws chip away at the already eroding footholds we call liberty."'). 
19MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-304 (1998). It is important to note that Montana's Basic Rule continued to remain in effect even during the period when the fuel conservation speed limit applied. For example, if a driver was stopped for driving 120 mph on a road on which the 55 mph fuel conservation speed limit applied, he would be issued a Basic Rule citation instead of a citation under the fuel conservation speed limit because his actions were not "reasonable and prudent." Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol (Nov. 12, 1998). 
20 MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-304. 
21 See Peyton Whitely, With a Roar, Montana Drops Day Speed Limit, SEATTLE TIMES, Dec. 10, 1995, at A1. 
22 See id. (noting "some Montanans simply kept a stash of $5 bills over the visor, ready to pay and go"). 
23 MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-305 (1996). 
24 See Richard Simon, When the Rules of the Road Are a Big Blur, L.A. TIMES, July 6, 1996, at Al (arguing "the bottom line is that 'it's social norms that drive behavior, not speed limits"'). cause they were accustomed to driving under the Basic Rule and partly because of the weak sanctions for speeding, the state's citizens continued their basic driving patterns in the decades following 1974. As one newspaper described the situation, "Montana drivers are known for flouting the law, and the state for winking at such behavior. 25 Studies reported that a majority of motorists disobeyed Montana's speed limit on both interstates and two-lane highways. 26 Critics derided the national speed limit as "irrelevant," "practically meaningless," and "a joke." 27 Moreover, some disobeyed the speed limit on principle, as a protest against federal intrusion. 28 Thus, the very existence of the law created at least a degree of faster driving. 29 Folklore emerged regarding the laxity of enforcement. 30 The state traffic highway spokesman recognized the dilemma, acknowledging, "'You cannot choose the speed limit for people, . . [t]he truth is that it can't be enforced unless people agree with it.'"31 
The lax compliance took a toll on law enforcement. Despite writing approximately 66,000 $5 tickets per year, the Highway Patrol described the law as "'a nondeterrent to speeding.'" 32 The law also had a corrosive effect 25 Kenworthy, supra note 13, at A3. 
26 See Some in Montana Regret Easing of Speed Limits, CHATTANOOGA FREE PRESS, Dec. 10, 1995 ("[H]alf of all drivers exceeded the 65 mph limit on Montana's interstates. Two-thirds ignored the 55 mph signs on two lane highways."). One resident summarized the widespread violations, noting, "[niobody drove the speed limit anyway." Jim Robbins, With Speed Limits Untied by U.S., Montana Reverts to the FastLane, N.Y. TIMES, Dec. 9, 1995, at 6. 
27 Kowal, supra note 11, at A16. 28 See id. 
29 The social meaning of fast driving became, in the aftermath of the federal speed limit law, a kind of rebellion against federal intrusion, and in some quarters the result was to spur faster driving. See, e.g., Lawrence Lessig, The Regulation of Social Meaning, 62 U. CHI. L. REV. 943, 951 (1995) (discussing the role of social meaning in human behavior). 
30 For example, Representative Pat Williams, Montana's only Congressman, recounted an anecdote where a driver paid a patrolman in cash and the motorist began to close his window to drive away. The officer stopped the individual and said "'Hold on, old timer, hold onto that ticket. It's good for the rest of the day.'" Kenworthy, supra note 13, at A3. In another Montana driving tradition, a driver and each of his passengers would place "$5 on the dashboard, and if the driver made it from Billings to Helena without getting stopped, he won the kitty." In Big Sky State, supra note 4, at IA. "'The joke goes that if you g[ot] pulled over, you'd just give the officer a $20 bill, ... then tell the next three guys you already paid."' Id. 
31 Ben Spiess, Change in Speed Limit Draws Mixed Reviews, MONTGOMERY ADVERTISER, Nov. 18, 1996, at IA. 
32 Kenworthy, supra note 13, at A3 (quoting Col. Craig Reap, head of the Montana Highway Patrol). Admittedly, the Highway Patrol could have punished offenses such as reckless driving, usually defined as traveling at more than 85 mph, more harshly and with on the public's perception of law enforcement. The head of the Highway Patrol noted that motorists' disregard for speed limits "'caused disrespect for us [the Highway Patrol] in particular because we were burdened with enforcing the law.''33 Furthermore, the law demoralized the officers themselves. One patrolman lamented, "'You wondered how much good you were doing out there. "'34 
Montana received its reprieve from federal regulation of its interstate highways with the enactment of the National Highway System Designation Act (the "NHSDA") in 1995. 35 Spurred by the Republicans' desire to limit the role of the national government, Congress enacted the NHSDA by the overwhelming margin of 419 to 7 in the House and on a voice vote in the Senate, thus repealing the federal speed limit. 36 President Clinton "reluctantly" signed the legislation on November 28, 1995. 37 
The NHSDA endured a storm of alarmist and often unfounded protests, many based on predictions about adverse effects on safety. 38 President Clinton admonished states to "exercise this authority responsibly," 39 while Transportation Secretary Federico Pefia sent letters to governors, "imploring them, for safety reasons, to consider not raising speed limits. "40 Insurance companies warned of premium increases to pay for the impending roadway higher fines. The Highway Patrol, however, rarely invoked such penalties, writing fewer than 3,000 reckless driving tickets per year before the Basic Rule. See id. 33 Id. 
11 Id.; see also Steve Lopez, America's Fast Lane, TIME, Oct. 13, 1997, at 44 (describing motorists' disregard for the prior law as "insulting" to law enforcement). 
31 National Hwy. System Designation Act of 1995, Pub. L. No. 104-59, 23 U.S.C.A. § 161 (Nov. 28, 1995). 
36 See Palmaffy, supra note 14, at 11. 
37Id. This essay, however, is a study of Montana's particular experience, and does not purport to be a general treatment of the consequences of raising speed limits. Part of the reason that we avoid firm conclusions about the effects of the change in Montana is the small samples in terms of both years and fatalities. 
38 See Kaye et al., supra note 9, at 71 (predicting "that the end of the ... federal mandate is no less than a death sentence for thousands more motorists whose lives will be lost in speed-related crashes"). 
WEEKLY COMP. PRES. Doc. 2064 Richardson, 55 to Remain the Law for D.C.-Area Drivers, But in Montana, Big Sky's the Limit, WASH. TIMES, Dec. 8, 1995, at Al (noting that the President did not support the bill); Warren P. Strobel, 'Double-Nickel' Comes to End of the Road, Clinton Grudgingly Signs Bill Killing 22-Year-Old Top Speed, WASH. TIMES, Nov. 29, 1995, at A4 (noting that if President Clinton had vetoed the bill, Congress probably would have overridden his veto). 
40 Kaye et al., supra note 9, at 71-72. carnage. 4 I Ralph Nader labeled the repeal "'homicidal legislation."' 42 Montana law enforcement echoed the national fears, predicting a potential 50% increase in fatalities with "phenomenal wrecks ... cars that roll 8, 9, and 10 times." 43 One trooper ominously warned, "'[m]y phone is going to ring more often in the middle of the night.'"44 
Proponents of the NHSDA mounted their own public relations effort. They argued that the law would simply legalize existing behavior by drivers, and bring the law more in accordance with informal norms already producing sufficiently safe driving. 45 Supporters downplayed the safety fears, noting improvements in drunk-driving laws, seat belts, air bags, and anti-lock brakes.46 
On December 9, 1995, Montana reverted to its Basic Rule of reasonable and prudent conduct to govern its roadways. 47 
DRIVING HABITS 
What was the consequence of this change? In the short term, the effects were minimal. Throughout 1996 drivers did not significantly alter their conduct under their new-found roadway freedom. 48 Although the percentage of 4 See id. at 72; Palmaffy, supra note 14, at 11 (discussing insurance companies' beliefs that increased speed will lead to more fatalities). 
42 Strobel, supra note 39, at A4; see also Carol J. Castaneda, Speed-Limit Law Reaches End of Road Friday, USA TODAY, Dec. 4, 1995, at 3A (indicating that Nader called Clinton and Congress "political cowards" for signing the bill because of other favorable provisions); Speed Doesn't Kill; Road Deaths Stable Despite Higher Limits, COLUMBUS DISPATCH (Ohio), Sept. 25, 1997, at 10A (quoting Ralph Nader as predicting that "[h]istory will never forgive Congress for this assault on the sanctity of human life"'). 
13 Robbins, supra note 26, at 6. Such wild fatality forecasts later proved grossly exaggerated. See infra Part lI.D. 
44 Id. 
45 See Kaye et al., supra note 9, at 71 (commenting that the federal speed limit "turned good drivers into scofflaws"); Castaneda, supra note 42, at 3A (noting that "[pleople already are driving 65 or 70 mph in ...55-mph posted zones"). 
46 See Kaye et al., supra note 9, at 73 (finding that cultural factors and safer cars have lowered injury and fatality rates). 
47 See Kenworthy, supra note 13, at A3. The new law, however, provides stiff penalties. Unlike the conservation speed limit, under the Basic Rule fines can range from $70 to $500 and count against a driver's insurance record. See MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-303 (1996). 
48 See Speed Doesn't Kill; Road Deaths Stable Despite Higher Limits, supra note 42, at 10A ("Changing the law didn't change how fast people were driving; it decriminalized their behavior. If people were already driving between 65 and 75 mph, changing the signs along the road would have little effect on the death toll."). motorists traveling above 80 mph increased from 2% to 5%,49 total average speeds increased negligibly, from 72 to 74 mph during the law's first few months. 50 In fact, speed played no part in the first twelve traffic fatalities. 51 Lynn Conn, a Helena resident, seemed to typify Montanans' attitude toward the Basic Rule: "'I'm a 65 mph driver, and I imagine I'll just stay there.' 52 The Director of the state's Highway Traffic Safety Division said, "'[a] lot of press outside the state did not assume Montanans had a modicum of common sense ....I still give the average Montanan a lot of credit for pretty much driving in a reasonable and prudent manner. The. world is not going to hell.' 53 Anecdotal evidence indicates that Montanans' driving behavior remains relatively constant in terms of speed, although speed limit proponents warn that motorists, now more accustomed to the increased roadway speeds, may be driving less carefully. 54 
Three factors may explain the constancy of drivers' behavior. First, it may take a significant period of time for a change in the speed limit to produce changes in driving behavior. Second, as Montanans like to insist, the state's motorists appear to possess good judgment and honed ability in traversing its highways. 55 This accounts for the striking 72 mph speeds before the repeal of the law and the nominal initial increase thereafter. Republican Governor Marc Racicot contended that, "'[w]e tend to respect each other, instead of aiming for one another. I have great faith that Montanans will be concerned with safety and security.' '"56 One state resident maintained that Montanans are "'used to driving long distances, and they know which roads are safe at which speed.' 57 
The third and perhaps the most compelling explanation of drivers' constant speeds may be Montana's often treacherous road conditions. These conditions, more than formal law, may dictate much driving behavior. Interstate drivers in Montana face a litany of perils: brutal weather, icy pavement, '9See James Brooke, Life Without Speed Limits: No Rush to the Fast Lane, N.Y. TIMES, Dec. 31, 1995, at 16. 
50 See id. These figures, however, may underestimate actual speeds because many roadway sensors "embedded in the highway max out at 85 miles per hour .... 'They don't differentiate ...[between] 86 or 105."' Knickerbocker, supra note 7, at 3. 
51See Montana Mayhem? Maybe Not, TELEGRAPH HERALD (Dubuque, Iowa), Jan. 7, 1996, at A7. 
52 No Motoring Mayhem in Montana Yet, CHATTANOOGA TIMES, Jan. 15, 1996, at A5. 53 Bill Hall, Editorial, Montana is Driving Fast and Driving off Its Tourists, LEWISTON MORNING TRIB. (Maine), Jan. 10, 1996, at 10A. 
51 See Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol (Apr. 10, 1998). 
55 See Hall, supra note 53, at 10A. 56 Kowal, supra note 11, at A16. 
57 Valerie Richardson, Montana Drivers Face Judgment Call; Reason, Prudence Only Speed Limits, WASH. TIMES, Dec. 1,1996, at Al. roads not designed for high-speed travel, animal crossings, and sharp curves.5 8 Epitomizing both Montanan drivers' judgment and the often challenging road conditions, one resident stated, "'[i]f you don't drive in a reasonable and prudent manner, you end up in the ditch."' 59 A visiting reporter said that in Montana, "'[t]he real limits are set by the land.'" 6° Thus it appears that driving behavior in Montana is largely a function of local knowledge; it is partly for this reason that the change in law was far less important to behavior than it was feared to be. Before the abandonment of the national speed limit, citizens of Montana were violating it regularly, and when the abandonment occurred, those citizens continued to do what they were doing. B. 
Tourists are the central exception to motorists' constant driving behavior. The repeal of the national speed limit turned Montana into a national speed magnet. 
Montana receives an estimated seven million visitors annually. 6 1 Many of these outsiders came to be known, or more appropriately, derided, as "speed tourists." 62 Such visitors, spurred by their desire to drive fast, descended on the "Montanabahn." 63 Their exploits became legendary. A Porsche driver boasted that he traveled from Missoula to Billings, a distance of 350 miles, in less than three hours; 64 a Minnesota car club wanted to race "700 Corvettes ... across the state at 150 miles an hour;" 65 a writer for Forbes hit a 58 See Mike Henderson, Montana Reconsiders Daytime 'Autobahn,' CHRISTIAN SCI. MONITOR, Sept. 3, 1997, at 3 ("Severe weather conditions [I often leave packed snow and ice, and even in dry weather, roads are ravaged by the effects of constantly changing conditions."); Perspectives, NEWSWEEK, Dec. 11, 1995, at 27 ("[O]ur roads aren't designed for speeds much past 100 mph ....");Richard Simon, When the Rules of the Road Are a Big Blur, L.A. TIMES, July 6, 1996, at Al ("Hitting a deer at 75 mph can badly damage a car or risk death for both motorist and animal."); Whitely, supra note 20, at Al ("At such speeds [95 mph], interstate highways suddenly develop real curves, and signs that say bridges may be icy become very pertinent."). 
at A23. 
60Richard Manning, Your Assignment: Drive Like a Bat Outta Hell and Back; A Quick Trip Across Montana in the Age of No (Speed) Limits, L.A. TIMES, Jan. 21, 1996, (Magazine), at 16. 
61 See Melanie Brennan, A Lesson for Montana: How Speed Can Kill, SEATTLE TIMES, June 23, 1997, at A5. 
62 Montana Wants Brake on Vague Speed Rules for Daytime Drivers, COMMERCIAL APPEAL (Memphis), Dec. 8, 1996, at C6. 
63 Id. 
I See Quentin Letts, Easy Riders Rush West to High-SpeedMontana, TIMES (London), Dec. 28, 1995, at 9. 
65 Brooke, supra note 49, at 16. top speed of 116 mph in a Miata; 66 fifteen test engineers drove a convoy of Mercedes through the state "at speeds in excess of 95 mph;" 67 a French tiremaker "wanted to run tests at 140 mph;" 68 and lastly, a reporter for PopularMechanics drove a high-test minivan, aptly named "The Montana," across the state at 113 mph to review the vehicle. 69 
The resulting behavior outraged state officials: "'I think [the planned Basic Rule violations] show a real lack of respect, not only for the law in Montana, but for the rights and safety of Montana drivers and tourists .... Even if these were professional drivers, not everyone else on the road was." '' 70 Highway Patrol officials were equally livid. One officer questioned a motorist who was stopped for driving 107 mph over a bridge deck, asking, "'What would happen to you in your home state?"' 71 When the man responded that at home he would have been charged with reckless driving, the officer questioned, "'Well, what makes you think it's all right to do that in this state?" 72 
The influx of tourists altered both average speeds and highway fatalities. But before analyzing these statistics, it is important to note their limitations. Most importantly, the Highway Patrol's statistics lack appropriate detail in determining the full impact of Basic Rule driving patterns. For example, the statistics do not reveal how many of the out-of-staters' accidents occurred at times when the Basic Rule was not the governing law and a numerical speed limit was in effect. 73 Nor do the reports specify what percentage of the outof-state drivers' accidents involved factors other than speed, including alcohol or failure to wear seat belts, both significant contributors to highway fatalities. Lastly, fatality statistics tend to fluctuate considerably each year, even under conditions when the posted speed limit remained constant, again undercutting the impact of such annual comparisons. 74 66 See R. Lee Sullivan, The American Autobahn, FORBES, July 15, 1996, at 37. 67 Western Empire, DENV. POST, July 28, 1996, at B2. 
68 Susan Gallagher, Yes, Virginia, There Is a Speed Limit in Montana, Even if It's Not Exact, ROCKY MTN. NEWS, Aug. 18, 1996, at 38A. 
69 Scott Oldham, Montana Run: Cruising Montana at High Speed in a 1997 Pontiac Trans Sport Montana Minivan, POPULAR MECH., Oct. 1996, at 46. 
70 Gallagher, supra note 68, at 38A. " Simon, supra note 58, at 1. 72 Id. 
73 Such non-Basic Rule times and zones include: at night, in a construction zone, within city or town limits, accidents involving trucks, or on a highway with a posted speed limit due to road conditions. See MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-303. 
Sept. 24, 1996, at 15A (explaining factors that influence the reliability of accident fatality statistics). The numbers are already fluctuating again, this time returning to the tourists' favor: Through August 18th of 1998, Montana experienced a 32% decrease from the yearago period in out-of-state vehicles' involvement in overall roadway deaths. See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information 
Within the context of the preceding paragraph's disclaimer, noticeable driving patterns, especially those involving out-of-state motorists, began to emerge. 75 Although the average speed increased only 2 miles per hour during the Basic Rule's first few months, 76 by the close of the law's first year, average speeds climbed to 78 mph on the. interstate, 77 in significant part (it appears) because of tourists. 78 Moreover, a Highway Patrol study indicated that "60 percent of the cars traveling more than 85 mph were from out of state. The figure was 75 percent for those traveling more than 95 mph."79 Another investigation documented that out-of-staters, particularly Canadians, drive at higher speeds than residents on Montana's roads. 80 
The Montana Highway Patrol's roadway safety statistics tend to support the perception of tourists as the more dangerous drivers. From 1996 to 1997, the number of out-of-state vehicles involved in fatal accidents increased by 38%,81 and the number of roadway deaths involving out-of-state vehicles increased by 69% during the same one-year span.82 These numbers should, of course, be put in perspective. For example, non-Montanans were involved in only 23% of fatal accidents in 199683 and only 26% in 199784that out-of-state vehicles were involved in 52 deaths between January 1, 1997 and August 18, 1997, but just 35 between January 1, 1998 and August 18, 1998). 
75 State officials blame misinformation, misunderstanding and the misconception that motorists may drive as fast as they want for the tourists' elevated speeds and reckless behavior. See Henderson, supra note 58, at 3. 
76 See Knickerbocker, supra note 7, at 3 (noting that the average auto speed increased only from 72 mph to 74 mph). 
December 1, 1996 the average speed increased from 72 mph to 78 mph) that available data does not indicate exactly how much of the increase came from out-ofstate drivers. 
78 See id. 79 Montana Wants Brake, supra note 62, at C6. 
80 See Dick Kreck, 105 Degrees West Longitude, DENv. POST, Sept. 29, 1996, at 4 ("Those Canadians can really cook. Of all the drivers whizzing through the Big Sky state, Albertans average 76.8 mph; out-of-state drivers, 74.9 and Montanans, 72.9."). 
81 See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information (Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 1996 & 1997) (indicating that out-of-state vehicles were involved in 42 fatal crashes in 1996 and 58 fatal crashes in 1998). 
82 See id. (indicating that out-of-state vehicles were involved in 48 deaths in 1996 and 81 deaths in 1997). 
83 See id. (indicating that out-of-state vehicles accounted for 42 of 177 total fatal crashes in 1996). 
84 See id. (indicating that out-of-state vehicles accounted for 58 of 223 total fatal crashes in 1997); see also Henderson, supra note 58, at 3 (noting that as of August 10, 1997, "just 25 out-of-state cars were involved in the 122 fatal high-speed accidents"); Katy Witkowski & Bob Edwards, Deaths Up on Montana Roads (National Public Radio, Morning Edition, hardly an overwhelming proportion of roadway crashes. Similarly, nonMontanans were involved in only 24% of roadway deaths in 1996 and 30% in 1997.85 These statistics suggest a simple conclusion. Most fatal accidents do not include out-of-staters, but the Basic Rule attracted unsafe drivers from out of state, and this helped produce an increase in fatalities including nonresidents. 
The varying driving habits of Montanans and out-of-staters indicate a general coordination problem under the law; each motorist may interpret the Basic Rule differently, thereby causing significant divergences in traffic flow. Such speed disparities can be perilous, potentially increasing the "risk of crashes and other hazardous traffic situations, such as unsafe lane changes and following too closely."86 A Highway Patrol study estimated that the number of people traveling with the general traffic flow decreased to a record low of 41 %.87 This is important because accidents may be a function of flow rather than mere speed. Hence a numerical speed limit has an advantage to the extent that it provides a number around which drivers may coordinate their behavior. The significant increase in fatalities in 1997 may have resulted partly from this lack of coordination. 
Despite the slightly elevated speeds and potential traffic flow disparities, the statistics tallying the Basic Rule's effects, measured in terms of fatal accidents and total roadway deaths, remain inconclusive. During the first year under the Basic Rule, both fatal accidents and total roadway deaths declined by 4.8% and 7.9%, respectively. 88 Fatal accidents on interstate highways, Sept. 15, 1997) (citing a later study that indicated that, as of September 15, 1997, "only one-third of this year's fatal accidents involved out of state vehicles"). 
85 See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information (Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 1996 & 1997) (indicating that out-of-state vehicles were involved in 48 of 198 total deaths in 1996 and 81 of 265 total deaths in 1997). 
86 Montana Highway Patrol Handout (Revised, Feb. 13, 1997) to Montana Legislature for January 30, 1997 Montana Senate Highways Committee Hearing on SB 64; see also Mark Roberts & Bob Edwards, Montana Speed Limits (National Public Radio, Morning Edition, Dec. 16, 1996) (quoting the Chief of Montana's Highway Patrol as stating, "We have a lot of trucks, of course, which are restricted to 65 on the interstate and 60 on the two-lanes during the day. And then, we have a lot of farm equipment and RVs and those kind of vehicles that are mixing out there with the faster cars. And those kind of things sure set up the potential for a disaster."). 
87 See Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86. 
1996 & 1997) and total roadway deaths decreased from 215 in 1995 to 198 in 1996) (Vol. 79:155 the roads where the Basic Rule most commonly applies, did increase from 33 in 1995 to 37 in 1996, although the latter was below the 39 lethal crashes recorded in 1994.89 
Statistics from this first year appeared to suggest that proponents of the Basic Rule were correct on some disputed questions. In particular, supporters contended that increased speeds on highways lured motorists away from dangerous country roads and onto better-designed, more expedient highways. 90 Consequently, although interstate deaths increased, the Basic Rule promoted safety by decreasing total deaths on all roads. 9' The first year under the Basic Rule seemed to fulfill the promise of efficient, self-regulating, and most surprisingly, safer, travel on Montana's roads. 
In the following year the safety tide turned dramatically. During 1997, fatal accidents increased by 26% and total roadway deaths soared by 34%.92 Speed proved particularly lethal. Measuring those crashes where speed was a factor, fatal accidents increased 39%93 and total deaths rose by 47%. 94 
Yet the pattern reversed, though not as markedly, in 1998. As of August 18, 1998, comparing the year-ago period, fatal accidents increased a meager .77%95 and total roadway deaths actually declined by 6.2%.96 Even the presumably virulent element of speed proved less troublesome in 1998. Again comparing year-ago periods, fatal crashes in which speed was a factor decreased by 12%97 and total roadway deaths involving speed as a factor decreased by 19%.98 
89 See Montana Highway Patrol 1997 Annual Report, Accidents by Trafficway Statistics (Fatal Crashes), 1993-1997. 
90 See Palmaffy, supra note 14, at 11. 91 See id. 
92 See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information (Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 1996 & 1997) (noting fatal accidents increased from 177 to 223 and total roadway deaths increased from 198 to 265); see also Montana Highway Patrol 1997 Annual Report, Annual Traffic Rates. Note that some Highway Patrol Statistics indicate 49 fatal accidents in 
93 See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information (Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 1996 & 1997) (indicating 90 fatal accidents where speed was a factor in 1996 and 125 in 1997). 
9 See id. (indicating 101 total deaths where speed was a factor in 1996 and 148 in 1997). 
1997 & 1998) 1998). 
96 See id. (indicating 161 deaths during the relevant period in 1997 and 151 in 1998). 97 See id. (indicating 74 fatal crashes in which speed was a factor in the relevant period in 1997 and 65 in 1998). 
98 See id. (indicating 93 total deaths in which speed was a factor in the relevant period in 1997 and 75 in 1998): 
This data is even less conclusive than the vacillating numbers indicate. For example, when comparing 1996 to 1997, excepting those accidents where a numerical speed limit was in effect (i.e., non-Basic Rule times or zones), the increases in fatal accidents and total roadway deaths amounted to 15 %99 and 28 %,100 respectively-higher numbers from the previous year, but not as devastating as the original figures. Deleting those accidents where alcohol was a factor further ameliorates the situation. Calculating fatal accidents and total deaths without those incidents where alcohol was a factor, the numbers rise a modest 13%1o and 19%,102 respectively. Even the specter of unbridled Basic Rule speed, seemingly a leading factor in roadway deaths, may be less important than it seems in light of the complexity in tracing causation. The Highway Patrol suggested, "'[i]t's really difficult to pin down one factor and say this is the primary cause ... [or] factor that resulted in this crash and perhaps this death."10 3 In short, driving safety under the Basic Rule fluctuates, producing relatively less hazardous motoring in 1996 and year-to-date 1998, while exacerbating roadway fatalities in 1997. Equally important, the Basic Rule stands as only one factor in roadway safety analysis; conditions such as alcohol and unsafe driving during times or in zones with numerical speed limits also were significant elements in this multifaceted problem. Of course it is possible that some of these conditions are connected with the Basic Rule. Dangerous driving while drunk may be aggravated in the absence of a numerical speed limit, and reckless driving in zones without such limits may have a "spillover" effect on zones with numerical limits. 
9 See Montana Highway Patrol Fatality Crash Information (Jan. 1 through Dec. 31, 1996 & 1997) (indicating 93 fatal crashes in which a speed limit was not in effect in 1996 and 107 in 1997). 
1o See id. (indicating 107 total deaths in which a speed limit was not in effect in 1996 and 137 in 1998). 
0I See id. (indicating 111 fatal crashes in which alcohol was not a factor in 1996 and 125 in 1998). 
102 See id. (indicating 126 total deaths in which alcohol was not in factor in 1996 and 155 in 1998). 
103Witkowski & Edwards, supra note 84. 
There is also reason to question the meaning of the fatality figures themselves, because such data varies enormously from year to year. For example, from 1987 to 1988 Montana roadway deaths decreased by 15%, while increasing by 17% from 1989 to 1990.104 Consider the following chart: 
MONTANA ROADWAY FATALITIES, 1980-1998105 1 ' 250225 200175150 
Repeal of Fuel Conservation Speed Limit . . . . . . . . . - I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I '80 '81 '82 '83 '84 '85 '86 '87 '88 '89 '90 '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97'98 
Measured in historical context, the 34% increase in roadway fatalities in 1997 appears to be a statistical anomaly within this fluctuating /range, while the aggregate of almost three years under the Basic Rule is not greatly out of line with historic patterns of overall roadway death variations. 106 Some state lawmakers have so urged, with one asserting, "'[a]s far as I can see, the statistics aren't there to warrant' [a numerical speed limit]. . . . One year's worth of statistics are not enough to make a determination." 10 7 The Director of Montana's Highway Traffic Safety Division captured the essence of the fatality-rate debate, noting, "[i]f you're looking for a compelling reason to have a maximum speed limit, you won't find it in the data." 0 8 
In conclusion, the Basic Rule has done little to alter Montanans' driving behavior. Tourists, however, relish the lack of numerical limits, potentially contributing to divergent traffic flows and increased overall speeds. Overall, the nascent fatality figures, representing a decrease in deaths in 1996, a substantial increase in 1997, and a subsequent decline in 1998 year-to-date com101See Montana Highway Patrol 1997 Annual Report, Fatalities by County 1935 to Present (Yearly Totals). 
101See id. (1980-1997 figures); Telephone Interview with Montana Highway Patrol Accident Records Department (Jan. 8,1999) (1998 figures). 
106 For example, even accounting for 1997's spike of 265 roadway fatalities, that number is still below the fatality figures for 1980, 1981 and 1983. 
017 Montana Wants Brake, supra note 62, at C6. 108 Richardson, supra note 57, at Al. parisons, suggest a possible increase in unsafe driving, but offer an inconclusive verdict on Basic Rule safety. 
III. TRADEOFFS 
The Basic Rule carries with it both advantages and disadvantages. Although we cannot undertake a full cost-benefit analysis here, we can cast light on some of the important variables. Part of the analysis involves a form of "risk-risk tradeoffs,"109 which occur when the regulation of one risk affects another risk. Just as regulation of one source of environmental danger (such as nuclear power plants) may increase the danger from another source (such as coal-fired power plants), so too for speed limits. Increasing or decreasing speed limits may increase some risks while decreasing others. For example, a higher speed limit on an interstate highway may increase deaths on the interstates while reducing the use of, and deaths on, less traveled, more dangerous roads. Hence, an increased speed limit may save aggregate lives. This section seeks to identify and analyze some of the most important tradeoffs. 
The most heralded detriment of Montana's Basic Rule is the law's impact on roadway safety. As noted in Part II.B above, while the numbers are less than conclusive, it seems fair to characterize Montana's roads as somewhat more dangerous under the Basic Rule. Increased speeds, reckless tourists and traffic flow disparities appear particularly hazardous under the new law. Admittedly, the evidence is ambiguous, for it is possible to claim that many of the accidents and deaths occur at times or in zones not governed under the Basic Rule, that such numbers tend to fluctuate from year to year, and that increased seatbelt usage and decreased use of alcohol could have dramatically increased safety. These claims undercut the most alarmist reading of the data. More evidence is necessary for a final judgment; currently, it appears that the Basic Law has decreased safety by a modest but non-trivial amount. On the whole, safety, while the most significant concern, cannot yet be shown to be more than a slight detriment overall. 
Decreased fuel efficiency represents another adverse consequence of the Basic Rule' As vehicle speed increases, fuel efficiency decreases, thereby causing motorists to spend more on gasoline and consume more than necessary of a non-replenishing natural resource. The Popular Mechanics re109 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk-Risk Analysis, in THE MORTALITY COSTS OF REGULATORY EXPENDITURES: A SPECIAL ISSUE OF THE JOURNAL OF RISK AND UNCERTAINTY 5 (W. Kip Viscusi ed., 1994) (suggesting risk-risk analysis as a replacement for cost-benefit analysis). porter who test drove the Montana minivan throughout the state provides a colorful discussion of the decrease in fuel efficiency at high speeds, writing, "[b]ack at 113 mph, the trip computer on the Trans Sport [Montana minivan] says we're averaging 6 miles per gallon. Right there, we discover the first drawback of traveling-even legally-at such high speeds. At this rate, the Trans Sport's 24-gal. tank will be dusty by Tarkio, about 125 miles down the road."1 10 Conversely, a commercial truck driver noted the economic advantage of lower speeds, stating that on his trip through Montana from Vancouver, British Columbia, to Hartford, Connecticut, "'[i]t's about a thousand bucks in my pocket to drive slower."' 1 I 
Reasonable questions, however, can be raised about the fuel efficiency argument. Obviously, fuel efficiency alone is not the criterion upon which to establish speed limits; if it were, the law would limit vehicles to their most efficient and unrealistically low speeds of 35 to 40 mph. 112 It is also possible to increase fuel efficiency while maintaining a relatively high speed limit through, for example, higher miles per gallon or using light rather than heavy trucks. 1 3 Even accounting for such rebuttals, however, decreased fuel efficiency looms as another Basic Rule disadvantage. 
Increased air pollution is another adverse effect of the Basic Rule. Preliminary data from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) suggests that "rural states such as Montana, which have sharply raised their speed limits [although the increase in actual speed itself is slight], face a higher increase 110Oldham, supra note 69, at 46. The reporter also admitted that at the vehicle's top in ozone-forming Nox [oxides of nitrogen] emissions." 114 The EPA survey estimated that Montana faced a 12.74% increase in ozone forming emissions.115 On the other hand, Montana already meets the national primary and secondary standards for ozone, and hence the increase in air pollution from automobiles does not appear to create serious risks of any kind. An official from the Montana Department of Environmental Quality, Jim Carlin, found a negligible impact on the environment of motorists' higher speeds."16 While Mr. Carlin noted elevated levels of carbon monoxide around Billings and Missoula were probably attributable to increased speeds, he characterized the practical effect of such speed-related increases in air pollution as "hardly even quantifiable; they [the higher levels of emissions] wouldn't be a good reason to debate the speed limit law."" 7T This appears to be a plausible view, though the increased pollution certainly counts as an adverse effect. 
The fact that Montana operates as a "speed magnet" is not only a negative; perhaps the Basic Rule actually helps generate more tourism, thereby creating various positive welfare effects. This is certainly a reasonable judgment. Nevertheless, there is a debate about whether the "reasonable and prudent" standard might decrease tourism, another potential drawback." 8 Initially, as with many other aspects of the new law, Basic Rule opponents made alarmist predictions, forecasting a steep drop in tourism,11 9 Montana's second largest industry. 20 But these predictions were based on anecdotes, not evidence. For example, the Highway Patrol reported that "one out-ofstate woman had called to say she was canceling her vacation for safety reasons."' 2' A Maine newspaper, after observing only one month under the Basic Rule, exhorted: 
A lot of people from other states will avoid driving through Montana now that they know some of the barriers are down against extravagant speeds on those highways .... Montana is right to be worried about 1'iHigher Speeds Mean Higher Pollution, GANNETT NEWS SERV., Oct. 27, 1996. 11 See id. (showing that this is a larger increase than in any other state). 
of Environmental Quality environment to the small increase in actual speed). 
117 Id. 
118 See Hall, supra note 53, at 10A. Although after documenting non-Montanans' relatively more dangerous driving habits, one wonders if a decrease in tourism, despite the economic detriment, actually might constitute a net advantage under the Basic Rule. 119 See id. 
120 See Kathleen McLaughlin, Travel Agents Figure Headlines Won't Hurt, BILLINGS GAZETTE, Apr. 22, 1996, at B1. 
121 Robbins, supra note 26, at 6. how people will view a state with its speeders unleashed. That gorgeous state suddenly looks like a place to visit some other year." 122 In analyzing a potential decrease in tourism, the Billings Gazette polled travel agents in New York, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia and New Jersey to query whether vacationers intended to cancel planned trips to Montana.1 23 None reported any cancellations. 124 Christopher Reynolds, a Los Angeles Times travel writer, concurred that the spate of publicity would not deter tourists. 125 The general manager of one of Missoula's newest hotels asserted, "I think the speed limit [the Basic Rule] will bring people into Montana." 126 An official from Travel Montana, the state's tourism agency, confirmed that "there is no indication that the law has either helped or hindered tourism." 27 In the end, speed limits seem to have no significant effect on Montana's robust tourism industry. Any decrease from frightened motorists has probably been matched by those seeking a state without numerical speed limits. 
A final concern to Montana under the Basic Rule, the detriment to the state's reputation, is less tangible. Montana has endured national ridicule and derision from the public since instituting the Basic Rule. Comedians poked fun at Montana and its free-wheeling spirit.128 Others have been less charitable. National Public Radio's "Car Talk" program labeled Montanans 122 Hall, supra note 53, at 10A. 
123 See McLaughlin, supra note 120, at BI (investigating whether Montana's recent publicity regarding the Basic Rule, the Freemen, and the Unabomber is hurting state tourism). 
124 See id. 125 See id. 
126 Sarah Harrington, The Inn Crowd: Missoula's Five New Hotels Open Their Doors to Visitors, MISSOULIAN, June 30, 1996, at P1. 
117 Telephone Interview with Thurston Elfstrom, Information Services Coordinator, Travel Montana (Apr. 13, 1998); see also Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol, supra note 54 (acknowledging that the Basic Rule probably did not discourage visitors, but noting that the Highway Patrol receives numerous telephone calls from tourists who do not understand the Basic Rule). 
128 See Gary Dunford, Love's Labor Isn't Lost, TORONTO SUN, Jan. 4, 1996, at 6 ("What do you call a car going 55 mph in Montana? Parked. What color is Montana's state flag? Checkered. And what do you call a speed bump in Montana? A pedestrian."); Cameron Morfit, The Lighter Side of 1995: Year Had Its Share of Weird Stories, FALLS POST REG. (Idaho), Jan. 1, 1996, at Al ("December: Montana takes down speed limit signs, adopts 'reasonable and proper' limit to driving. Becomes 'Official State of NASCAR."'); Simon, supra note 58, at 1 ("'You know, coming to Montana's kind of different. You're expected to drive 100 mph and look at the landscape."'); Speed Delivery, TIRE Bus., Jan. 22, 1996, at 23 ("[1In Montana, at least, 'Domino's Pizza now guarantees delivery in three minutes or less."'). "a bunch of morons." 129 Syndicated columnist Tony Kornheiser was equally condescending in his description of Montanans, quipping, "[h]ave you seen the kind of people who live in Montana? Montanans make West Virginians look like it's opening night at Lincoln Center. This is the end of Montana as a state and the beginning of Montana as a test track." 30 A Highway Patrol officer lamented that the Basic Rule "'[m]ade us the joke of the nation.'"1'3 
Montanans viewed outsiders' criticism as an attack on their state's values and vehemently defended their libertarian ways. Governor Racicot's Communication Director bristled, "'[tihe tone of much of the coverage has been patronizing at best .... And I understand it. Urban Americans can be uncomfortable if they don't have someone else telling them what to do." 1 32 One resident replying to Kornheiser's arrogant missive did not mince words: The whole thing shakes down to a simple truth about how we do things here. Our legislature made a law reflecting reality instead of prescribing it. We're doing just fine with that, thank you, we're used to being responsible for ourselves. If you can't come to terms with that, don't drive here. 133 Despite these impassioned rebuttals, Montana's image emerged a bit battered from the national press pounding. On the whole, however, since tourism remains unaffected and Montanans themselves shrug off outsiders' opinions, the eccentric reputation may prove a source of pride for the state's independent residents. 
The benefits under the Basic Rule, although more difficult to quantify than the detriments, appear substantial. Increased efficiency represents the most important advantage under the new law. The state's vast distances, isolated commercial centers and dearth of traffic 34 argue for the value of higher 129 Hallgren, supra note 59, at A23. 
130 Tony Kornheiser, There's No Safety in These High-Speed Numbers, ROCKY MTN. NEWS, Dec. 10, 1995, at 122A. 
since December of 1995 when Montana suspended its daytime speed limit for highway drivers, it's been the butt of national jokes.") 
132 Dennis McCann, Fast Friends, Montana Drivers, High Speed Go Together, MILWAUKEE J. SENTINEL, Dec. 16, 1995, at 1; see also Larry Slonaker, Kook Image Worries Montanans, TIMES-PICAYUNE (New Orleans), Apr. 14, 1996, at A17 (quoting Governor Racicot's Communications Director, Andrew Malcolm, as saying, "[r]easonable-andprudent is a viable system in Montana ... because residents have learned to police themselves. 'It may be difficult for (outsiders) to understand, but it works here."'). 133 Hallgren, supra note 59, at A23. 
134 Lack of traffic is a recurring theme among Basic Rule supporters. Even the Spokesman of the Montana Department of Transportation, Dennis Unsworth, admits, "'[Y]ou can drive for several hours and not see another car. It can be pretty lonely."' speeds.1 35 There may well be significant productivity gains from time saved. Highway Patrol Sergeant Robert Koch highlighted the economic importance of saving time on the roadways, noting, "'[w]e have a lot of people making a living driving, . . . and they are appreciative of the fact they can drive 70 or even 80 miles per hour on the interstate."" 136 Residents also favor the increased speeds to facilitate weekly errands or enhance social life. 137 The increased speeds can result in substantial time savings. "A car going 65 mph takes more than 10 hours to cross Montana. Go 80 mph, and you shave off two hours." 138 Overall, a U.S. News & World Report article aptly summarized the productivity argument, stating, "[fluel efficiency has doubled since 1974, and saving a few bucks on a long trip by doing 65 vs. 75 is hardly compelling. But many drivers will find savings of an hour or two in travel time quite appealing." 1 39 It would be highly desirable to quantify the various savings from these efforts, though we have not been able to do so here. 
Interestingly, Basic Rule supporters also claim increased safety as an advantage under the Basic Rule. Proponents contend that prior to the law, the majority of motorists did not obey the posted speed limits.1 40 Consequently, advocates argue, drivers who adhered to the mandated levels were actually dangerous, disrupting the traffic flow by traveling significantly slower than most other vehicles on the road.141 Furthermore, proponents claim that the Ken Hoffman, In Big Sky Country, No Speed's the Limit, but Try 85, HOUSTON CHRON., Dec. 10, 1995, at 7. 
135 Montana Representative Sonny Hanson, a leading Basic Rule advocate, summarizes the arguments: "The reason we have to have a variable-type speed limit is because of the size of the state. And so, we really need a daytime speed limit that reflects the distances that we as individuals have to make our living by traveling." Roberts & Edwards, supra note 86; see also Susan Gallagher, Montana Speeders Get Reality Check, TELEGRAPH HERALD (Dubuque, Iowa), Aug. 28, 1996, at 4 ("With a few exceptions, Montana highways are not crowded, [Representative Hanson] said, and he believes people should be able to cover the state's vast distances quickly, if they can do it safely."). 
136 McCann, supra note 132, at 1. 
137 See Manning, supra note 60, at 16 ("People here routinely run a hundred miles to shop for groceries or for a beer and conversation on a Saturday night."); In Big Sky State, supra note 4, at IA (citing Rosebud County Clerk Geraldine Custer, who drives "the 100 miles to Billings twice a month or so to go shopping," as a Basic Rule beneficiary; Ms. Custer now makes the trip in "just over an hour."). 
138 In Big Sky State, supra note 4, at IA. 139 Kaye et al., supra note 9, at 72. 
140 See Some in Montana Regret Easing of Speed Limits, supra note 26 (citing a state highway study showing that "half of all drivers exceeded the 65 mph limit on Montana's interstates. Two-thirds ignored the 55 mph signs on two-land highways."). 
141See Hardy, supra note 112, at 5 ("[S]peed proponents say the 55-m.p.h. law also means that people obeying speed-limit laws become a highway danger, causing unexpected slowdowns in the flow of traffic. 'When I drive a government vehicle, I have to obey the speed limit,' says [traffic operations engineer James] Poston. . . . 'But when I do, I feel prior law extended driving times over long, tiring distances, decreasing roadway safety.' 42 One Montanan emphasized the weariness and peril of such protracted travel: "'The big killer out here is falling asleep on a straightaway .... If you drive slower, you just spend more time on the road getting fatigued." "143 All in all, proponents' safety arguments, contradicting speed limit advocates' safety claims, require empirical evaluation. We have not found much direct evidence in their favor. 
Montanans' deep sense of pride and satisfaction with the Basic Rule represents an intangible, yet not trivial, benefit. The Basic Rule epitomizes Montanans' self-reliant attitudes. 44 One reporter's comments summarized the citizenry's gratification as follows: "[T]he core issue has to do with sustaining'the cult of Western independence. No one-certainly not some pudgyfingered, Hyundai-driving carpooler at the Department of Transportation in the District of Columbia-tells the independent man how fast he can drive." 145 The Basic Rule generates a heartening chorus among Montanans. 146 One individual exclaimed, "'I think no speed limit is the most like I'm a hazard, since accidents often come from speed differentials."'); Manning, supra note 60, at 16 (quoting its reporter who drove at the prior posted speed limits, "I am the most dangerous driver on the road."). 
42 See Hardy, supra note 112, at 5. 143Id. 
144 See Hallgren, supra note 59, at A23 (reporting on a resident's view of "the law's assumption that we will be responsible for our own driving"); Letts, supra note 64, at 9 ("The lack of limit matches Montana's libertarian instincts. Since the days of the 19th century outlaws 'Rattlesnake Jack' and 'Liver Eating Johnson' . . . the state has had its share of wild folk."); Richardson, supra note 57, at Al ("'Montanans seem to think they can handle it [driving under the Basic Rule]-unlike in Washington [D.C.], they don't need a lot of signs telling them when they can stand here or park there."'); Simon, supra note 58, at I ("'Our people, [Montanans] they have a philosophy .... [t]hey like the freedom to be prudent."'). 
115 John Taylor, The Big Sky's the Limit; Speed Limits in Montana, ESQUIRE, Mar. 1996, at 114; see also Brink, "suprnaote 18, at 4D (personifying the state's determination and support for the Basic Rule, one Montanan averred, "Free people ... govern themselves."). Speed limit proponents respond to this mantra, noting that "Freedom without responsibility doesn't work." Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol, supra note 54. 
116 See In Big Sky State, supra note 4, at IA ("'It's a blast going fast."'); Letts, supra note 64, at 9 ("Teenage drivers whooped at the dismantling of the roadside speed signs."). Montanans' glee over the demise of numerical limits on one occasion transcended words: shortly after the former law's repeal, an unknown celebrant "impaled a 55 mph speed limit sign" in front of the state capitol. Across the USA: News from Every State, USA TODAY, Dec. 13, 1995, at 10A. A cottage industry of "No Limits" gear sporting a 65 mph speed limit sign circled and slashed also reflects the state's elation with the Basic Rule. See Jan Falsted, No Limits to Making a Buck, BILLINGS GAZETTE, Oct. 16, 1996, at Al. fabulous thing that ever hit the United States." 1 47 A reporter described the state's euphoria, noting that "Montana has discovered the modern equivalent of the 'yee-hi!,' dust-stirring stagecoach gallop, and it is fun." 148 Eliciting a wellspring of public support, the Basic Rule fosters an incalculable, but perhaps important, advantage; the law represents an extension of Montana's distinctive culture, embodying and affirming residents' independent values. 
IV. LAW ENFORCEMENT 
For law enforcement officials, the Basic Rule is both a blessing and a burden. The highway patrol is writing considerably more speeding tickets. 149 In 1995, the Highway Patrol issued 4,197 citations. 150 That number soared to 6,825 in 1996, but declined to 5,262 in 1997 as people became accustomed to the law.' 5' Since fines under the conservation speed limit cost 147 Gary Gerhardt, Wyo. Zooms into FastLane, ROCKY MTN. NEWS, Dec. 9, 1995, at 6A. 
148 Letts, supra note 64, at 9. 
149 Ironically, one of the Highway Patrol's initial arguments against the Basic Rule was a predicted decrease in speeding infractions. See id. at 9. Law enforcement contended that such traffic stops enabled officers to detain suspicious drivers, often resulting in the motorists' arrests for other, more serious crimes. See id. ("Mr. Wakefield [a Montana Highway Patrol officer] added that speed offenses used to allow the police to pull over shifty-looking motorists. He once apprehended a gang of armed robbers that way."). The argument implied that under the Basic Rule, officers would have fewer opportunities to stop motorists for speeding, thereby depriving police of the opportunities to discover and arrest dangerous offenders. See id. Despite the dubious constitutionality of such a tactic, the predictions now seem inapposite: the Highway Patrol actually issues more citations, perhaps increasing the chance encounters. See Ann Treneman, Speed Is in the Eye of the Cop, INDEPENDENT, Sept. 27, 1996, at 17. 
15o See Montana Highway Patrol 1997 Annual Report, Highway Patrol Activity, Citations Issued, Speed-Basic Rule, 1993-1997. See supra note 19 for an explanation of the pre-1996 statistics. 
Citations Issued, Speed-Basic Rule, 1993-1997, supra note 150; see also Across the USA: News from Every State, supra note 146, at 9A start of no daytime speed limit on Montana highways, 588 tickets were written for drivers exceeding a speed reasonable and prudent .... 300 speeding tickets were issued in December '94.") the Highway Patrol issued 3,094 warnings and 3,622 tickets for violations of the 'reasonable and prudent' standard. During the same period in 1995, the figures were 487 warnings and 1,823 citations.") HERALD (Dubuque, Iowa), Jun. 1, 1996, at All ("[T]he Highway Patrol issued 530 basic rule tickets in April [1996], about 200 more than in the same month last drivers $5152 and Basic Rule infractions range from $70 to $500,153 the result was a windfall for the state treasury. State revenues increased by an estimated $545,000 during the law's first year.154 
Another benefit to law enforcement under the Basic Rule is the wellspring of public support for "reasonable and prudent" driving. For example, the Montana office of the American Legion reinstituted its custom of commemorating fatal crash scenes with miniature steel crosses, a practice which it had not undertaken in 40 years. 155 In addition to the American Legion's efforts, Montana embarked upon a major advertising campaign to inform motorists about the Basic Rule and encourage safe driving. 156 Described as a "public information blitz," 57 the $20,000 campaign 158 intones, "Whoa, Dude, there is a Speed Limit in Montana." 159 The state uses a variety of mass media in targeting its message primarily to non-Montanans.160 
Despite the increased revenues and enhanced civic support, law enforcement faces significant burdens in administering the Basic Rule. First, officers have encountered more roadside confrontations with motorists. 16 1 The law's subjective nature results in a growing number of "official-violator relationships," where drivers argue with officers over appropriate speeds. 162 year. ");Treneman, supra note 149, at 17 (noting that through September of 1996 the number of speeding tickets approximately doubled). 
152 See MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-718 (1996). 153 See MONT. CODE ANN. § 61-8-303. 
151 Charles S. Johnson, Speed Is Freedom-or Hazard, INDEPENDENT REC. (Helena, Mont.), Jan. 31, 1997, at 2A. 
155 See Brooke, supra note 49, at 16. A reporter recounted observing the crosses and their poignant effects: 
Occasionally, you will find a single cross here and there, some with smallpatches of flowers planted beneath them. More often, though, you will find two or three welded together. The most I saw in one spot on a recent trip through Montana was five. Several times. They weren't limited to the wide-open spaces or the interstates. You will find them on the approaches to small towns and larger cities, in the mountains and on the prairies, on curves and straight roads and places where there is nothing for miles and miles but miles and miles. It goes without saying, the crosses are a sobering experience, one that reminds you that speed limits are not a bad idea. 
Fred Lowery, Crosses PresentDeadly Reminder on Killer Ways, SuN-SENTINEL (Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.), Dec. 9, 1995, at 5B. 
156 See Gallagher, supra note 68, at 38A; Knickerbocker, supra note 7, at 3. 157 Knickerbocker, supra note 7, at 3. 158 Gallagher, supra note 68, at 38A. 159 "Whoa, Dude, There Is a Speed Limit in Montana" Bumper Sticker. 
160 See Gallagher, supra note 68, at 38A (describing the campaign's use of billboards, posters, fliers, bumper stickers, and television ads). 
161 See Rocky Barker, Montana Speed Limit Reasonable and Prudent; Cops Aren't, FALLS POST REG. (Idaho), Mar. 24, 1996, at Bl. 
162 Treneman, supra note 149, at 17 ("Now every traffic stop is a hassle."); Barker, supra note 161, at 131. A numerical limit could avoid such strife by clarifying the law for Second, the Basic Rule's mutable standards encourage motorists to challenge citations in court, resulting in more numerous and protracted trials. 163 Consequently, law enforcement and Montana's legal system must endure a deluge of Basic Rule cases. The Highway Patrol described the increasing workload: 
More offenders are taking basic rule violations to court. Thus officers must prepare for the case and appear in court for these challenges. Because of the law's subjectivity, trials involving basic rule violations tend to take more time. Case preparation and court appearance time have increased by 614 hours over the previous year [1995].164 Montana's Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, derided the increase in court time and costs, emphasizing the detriment to public safety by decreasing officers' time patrolling the highways. 65 Third, the increase in accidents under the Basic Rule resulted in a further drain on officials' time. Comparing 1995 to 1996, officers spent an additional 4,000 hours in 1996 investigating crash sites, a 9.6% increase from 1995.166 Fourth, local courts appear doubly affected, as they deal with both the rising case load as well as recording the Basic Rule infractions. 67 Finally, uncertainty about the meaning of the rule means that drivers do not know, in advance, when they will be violating the law, and hence there is a risk of lack of fair notice-a point we take up below. 
In the end, law enforcement faces a dilemma. On the one hand, the increased revenues, the American Legion's efforts, and the state's advertising campaign facilitate the Highway Patrol's efforts to ensure roadway safety. both officers and motorists. See Oldham, supra note 69, at 46 (referring to statements by Montana Highway Patrol Major Bert Obert). 
163 See Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86; see also Roberts & Edwards, supra note 86 (quoting Montana Attorney General Joseph Mazurek stating, "[t]he time in court defending basic-rule citations because of the subjective nature of those violations is going up dramatically"). 
164 Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86. Strangely, another Highway Patrolman complained that the Basic Rule "makes our officers work harderthey have to have their evidence and argument together when they go to court." Richardson, supra note 57, at Al. One wonders why this is a problem for officers or why it would constitute a change under the Basic Rule. On a more serious note, Colonel Craig Reap, the head of Montana's Highway Patrol, commented on the expense of such court time, noting that one case cost a small county $700, a substantial sum for a rural, underpopulated area. See Telephone Interview with Craig Reap, Colonel, Montana Highway Patrol (Mar. 21, 1997). 
165Roberts & Edwards, supra note 86 (quoting Montana Attorney General Joseph Mazurek, stating, "You're taking officers off the streets and putting them in the courtroom. "). 
166 See Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86. 
167Henderson, supra note 58, at 3 ("[Clourt clerks say they can't handle the paperwork from all the citations for basic-rule violations."). In opposition, roadside confrontations, court time, legal costs, crash investigations and an overburdened judicial system make enforcement more difficult. Despite the augmented revenues and moral support, it appears that the demands of apprehending, investigating and prosecuting Basic Rule violations significantly burdens Montana's thinly-staffed Highway Patrol.168 
The most difficult challenge under the Basic Rule is establishing workable criteria for arrest and prosecution. The essential problem is that there is no quantitative basis for deciding whether a motorist has violated the law. Variously described as "confusing," 169 "nebulous,"170 "squishy," 17 1 "vaguely defined,"1 72 "arbitrary and inconsistent," 173 and "an enforcement nightmare," 1 74 administering the Basic Rule is an onerous task because it is so unclear. Law enforcement officials and motorists find the law too subjective, hindering both drivers' ability to comply with the Basic Rule and the Highway Patrol's ability to deter violators. 175 A reporter analogized the dilemma to asking every law enforcement official "to decide how many drinks each driver may have, based on body weight and type, before becoming too drunk to drive."' 76 A survey of what speed would constitute a Basic Rule violation revealed the considerable disparity in estimates on the subject. 177 168 However, law enforcement's economic and temporal strains appear less a function of the Basic Rule and more a result of the state's budgetary allocation. See supra Part IV.A. From the Basic Rule's expanding revenue figures, it seems plausible that the fines could ameliorate the law's increased costs as well as provide for the hiring of new Highway Patrol officers, judges or court personnel to meet law enforcement's needs. 
169 Treneman, supra note 149, at 17. 170 Laura Bly, The Big Sky Isn't the Limit, USA TODAY, Jun. 7, 1996, at 3E. 171 McCann, supra note 132, at 1. 172 Whitely, supra note 21, at Al. 
173 Telephone Interview with Craig Reap, Colonel, Montana Highway Patrol, supra note 164. 
174 Id. 
175 See Barker, supra note 161, at B1. Additionally, while the primary "standards" controversy involves the speed constituting a Basic Rule violation, there is uncertainty relating to the hours of the day in which the law is in effect. See Oldham, supra note 69, at 46 (articulating the imprecise guidelines the Highway Patrol follows, stating, "Officially, one-half hour after sunset is night. But the rule of thumb, according to [Highway Patrol Major Bert] Obert, is that if you can read your analog wristwatch without the help of artificial light, or without putting it up to your face, it's technically still daytime."). 
176 Jim Fisher, Montana Should Avoid Idaho's Speed Limit Roulette, LEWISTON MORNING TRIB. (Maine), Sept. 10, 1997, at 10A (concluding that "The answers from different officers would of course be all over the map, just as different officers' definitions of reasonable and prudent no doubt are."). 
177 A reporter for Popular Mechanics summarized the divergence of views on complying with the law: "How fast is reasonable and prudent? Ask 20 people and you'll get 20 Opinions ranged from "'they'll ticket you if you go past 85,"'178 to "'[b]reak 90, and you better start looking over your shoulder,"" 79 to a Highway Patrolman's assertion that "'in my opinion, 90 is an unsafe speed for pretty much any conditions."" 180 
Speeds of more than 100 mph are particularly vexing for law enforcement. Many officers state the refrain that "'[a]nything in triple digits is probably a ticket," '" 8 1 defining 100 mph as "the real Montana speed limit." 82 But others are not as certain that the 100 mph threshold triggers a violation. When queried whether a motorist legally could drive more than 100 mph, Major Steve Barry, Deputy Chief of Montana's Highway Patrol, admitted, "'I can't really answer that."" 83 Another officer acknowledged that he would be disinclined to stop a professional driver on a desolate highway at speeds in excess of 100 mph. 184 
Montana's judiciary also is reluctant to assign a fixed numerical speed limit. Some judges impose a de facto 85 mph limit, asserting, "'[b]ring that speed into my court and that person is guilty." 1 85 Other judges disagree, contending "there's no speed that would necessarily result in a conviction. . . . 'Ninety-five on the interstate between here [Helena] and Billings might be perfectly OK." 1 86 This disparity in judicial attitudes has caused many officers to complain that "dangerous" drivers are often "let off by judges." 187 different answers." Oldham, supra note 69, at 48 (commenting "there's more gray in this law than in all the hair in Florida"). 
178 Richardson, supra note 57, at Al. 179 Oldham, supra note 69, at 50. 
180 John Hiscock, Catch-22 on Montana's 'Open Roads,' DAILY TELEGRAPH, Apr. 27, 1996, at 11. 
181 Robbins, supra note 26, at 6; see also Barker, supra note 161, at BI (noting that "officers routinely stop drivers traveling over 100 mph"). 
182 Dave Barry, PretendSpeed Limit Is Abolished, STUART NEWS/PORT ST. LUCIE NEWS (Stuart, Fla.), Mar. 13, 1996, at CI (quoting Steve Barry, Deputy Chief of Montana's Highway Patrol). 
183 Simon, supra note 58, at Al; see also Barry, supra note 182, at Cl (quoting Major Barry admitting that there is "'no theoretical upper speed limit"'). 
184 Oldham, supra note 69, at 50 ("If I observe Mario Andretti going 113 mph in a new Ferrari on a flat stretch of interstate, I probably wouldn't pull him over."). 
185 Tom Vines, Safe at What Speed, CAR & TRAVEL, Jan.-Feb. 1997, at 4a (describing the difficulties of Basic Rule jurisdictional disparities, noting, "Other judges are setting unofficial speed limits, which is causing lots of confusion not only to law enforcement officers, but to the public as well-especially when another judge across the county line has different criteria. There may even be differing interpretations among judges in the same county."). 
186 Whitely, supra note 21, at Al. 187 Sullivan, supra note 66, at 37. 
Frustrated by the lack of established limits, some Highway Patrol officers and state officials resorted to employing non-numerical guidelines to encourage Basic Rule compliance. One Highway Patrolman exhorted, "'Don't drive so fast you can't enjoy the scenery!" ' 8 8 Other officers emphasized conformity with prevailing traffic patterns, warning, "'People who are passing everything-that's the type of person we're going to be focusing on." 1 89 Finally, some law enforcement officials appealed to drivers' caution, imploring individuals to travel "at a speed that would be comfortable with a carload of your children." 190 
The dearth of consistent standards resulted in arbitrary and ineffective enforcement. The discretion of scores of officers, prosecutors and judges combined with the numerous Basic Rule conditions concerning weather, roads, and vehicle maintenance fosters inconsistency.' 9' Additionally, the Highway Patrol asserts that the Basic Rule's subjective nature hinders enforcement by creating longer vehicle stops and increased court appearances. 92 Consequently, law officers spend less time on the road, 193 and the roadside stops become more confrontational, detracting from overall safety and enforcement efficiency. 94 
A recent Park County case involving a motorist traveling at 101 mph illustrates the debate over establishing workable standards.'95 A district court jury acquitted the driver of any Basic Rule violations.1 96 The decision incensed law enforcement officials. 197 Highway Patrol Chief Craig Reap stated "'[i]f someone hits your car at 101 mph, wouldn't you be outraged to hear there's no violation?""' 98 The Attorney General was equally indignant, proclaiming "if being caught driving 101 mph isn't violating the basic rule, ... [I don't] know what [is]."1 9 The defendant's attorney countered that the driver's background as a mechanic, the car's exemplary maintenance, and 188 id. 189 High-Speed Image WorriesMontana, supra note 151, at A 11. 19 Id. the deserted road's flat surface made travel at 101 mph perfectly reasonable and prudent. 2°° The attorney dismissed claims that the law was confusing, emphasizing the jury's sound judgment in considering the totality of the driving environment. 20 1 
The Basic Rule has had a detrimental effect on the consistency and potentially the overall effectiveness of Montana's law enforcement. Admittedly, the Basic Rule affords ample and possibly excessive discretion. However, the cause of the "standards" problem emanates not only from the law's vagueness, but also from patrolmen' and judges' variable interpretations of the Basic Rule's expressed "reasonable and prudent" standards. Those officers and judges who establish their own, perhaps idiosyncratic, numerical limits and uniformly stop or convict defendants under fixed guidelines might be thought to endanger both the spirit and the letter of the Basic Rule, in turn creating an uncertain patchwork of rule-free and rule-bound law enforcement. A more uniform enforcement process might have reduced this problem. Consequently, the Basic Rule's enforcement problems stem partly from the vagaries of individual assessments and multiple conditions. These points lead naturally to the question of whether the Basic Rule compromises values associated with the rule of law. 
Drivers face numerous opportunities to either comply with or disobey the rule of law. As discussed previously, Montanans routinely ignored prior speed limits, causing disrespect for the law and demoralizing the officers charged with enforcing the state's statutes. 20 2 Furthermore, some officers speculated that violation of speed limit laws lead to infractions of other vehicular offenses and a general deterioration of rule of law values. 20 3 Speed 200 Id. The Highway Patrol disagreed with the defense attorney's argument that the driver's background as a mechanic ameliorated the Basic Rule violation: "[O]ther drivers cannot possibly be expected to factor another driver's occupation into their decision making." Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86. 
201 See Johnson, supra note 154, at 2A. 202 See supra Part I.B. 
203 "'People develop a habit of not obeying the law' when the speed limit is lower than most people are driving. . . . 'That bleeds over to stop signs, crosswalks, things that get people hurt."' Hardy, supra note 112, at 5 (quoting Major Steve Barry, Deputy Chief of the Montana Highway Patrol). Not all commentators ascribe to Major Barry's theory. See Steve Thompson, ChangingDriving Habits in a New York Minute, AUTOWEEK, Jan. 8, 1996, at 10 (expressing skepticism that "ignoring unrealistic speed limits equals scofflaws equals running red lights .... Better cars and higher speeds don't necessarily make people blow red lights. Driving behavior, like all human behavior, is much more complicated than that."). limit opponents heralded the return of the Basic Rule, averring that the new law would cease turning "law-abiding citizens into scofflaws." 2°4 
Rule of law values also suffer under the Basic Rule. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the Basic Rule also gives rise to additional traffic violations, although the infractions differ from those arising under prior speed limits. 20 5 For example, officers report that drivers frequently do not decelerate when leaving the interstates and entering commercial centers. 2°6 Law enforcement officials from neighboring states also report externalities. In Idaho, a state policeman assigned to patrol the Montana-Idaho border regularly stops drivers exceeding 90 mph. 20 7 The Idaho officer notes that many motorists are unaware of Idaho's laws or are simply inattentive to their vehicle's speed, despite three signs denoting the change in state speed limits. 20 8 
As with most effects of the Basic Rule, the law's effects on motorists' rule of law values appears inconclusive. While evidence suggests that traffic violations that are not related to speed have decreased, other speed-related violations are on the rise. 2°9 Likewise, the theory that motorists are no longer being turned into "scofflaws" is countered by the significant increase in citations issued under the Basic Rule 210 and by the externalities reported in border states. 211 
RECENT LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION 
One year after Montana reinstituted the Basic Rule on its highways, the state's Republican Governor, Marc Racicot, Democrat Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, and the Highway Patrol led a campaign to reestablish numerical speed limits. 212 Citing the rising number of accidents and interstate 204 Hardy, supra note 112, at 5; see also Hallgren, supra note 59, at A23 ("Our legislature made a law reflecting reality instead of prescribing it."). 
205 See Roberts & Edwards, supra note 86 (reporting that drivers grow used to faster speeds and do not realize when they are violating a numerical speed limit). 
206 See id. ("[Clity police, [Montana Highway Patrol Colonel Craig] Reap says, report drivers who grow used to faster speeds on the highways and don't slow down to posted limits inside towns. 'When they stop the people and question them about it, the people argue that they did slow down, that they can't believe that they were going 60 in a 45 and those kinds of things."'). 
207 See Gene Fadness, A Year Later: Most Motorists Stick to 75 mph, FALLS POST REG. (Idaho), Apr. 28, 1997, at Al. 
208 See id. (noting that some motorists "will tell you exactly how fast they were going, but they say they were being 'reasonable and prudent"'). 
209 See Roberts & Edwards, supra note 86. 210 See Treneman, supra note 149, at 17. 2 See Fadness, supra note 207, at Al. 
212 See Montana Wants Brake, supra note 62, at C6; see also Kowal, supra note 11, at A16. The effort marked a change for Governor Racicot who previously supported the Basic Rule as "enhanc[ing] the way of life" for Montanans. Id. fatalities, the speed limits coalition proposed a daytime speed limit of 75 mph with a fine of $25 for driving 10 mph over the posted limit and no points against the individual's insurance record. 2 13 Motorists driving more than 10 mph over the speed limit would incur additional fines and have the infraction posted to their insurance record. 2 14 
State Senator Bill Crippen presented the coalition's proposal in a bill introduced in January 1997.215 The legislation faced an uphill battle from the outset. Proposed in a "legislature [that] has a long history of turning down proposals to increase speeding penalties," 216 the bill encountered significant opposition and was defeated on a procedural vote of 35 to 15.217 Although Senator Crippen managed to revive the legislation on a 26 to 24 committee vote to debate the issue before the full Senate, 218 the bill's prospects seemed bleak. 
Opposing lawmakers asserted that the public did not support altering the Basic Rule. Polls showed that 56% of Montanans and 58% of legislators opposed numerical limits. 2 19 As one conservative legislator explained, "'[p]eople in Montana don't feel it's necessary .... We drive in a prudent manner. I went door to door during the election, and a good percentage didn't think government had any business interfering in how fast people want to drive."' 220 Other speed limit detractors echoed the dearth of public support, noting that "a number of state groups representing county attorneys, lower court judges and sheriff and police officers didn't testify at the hearing because they declined to take a position on SB 64."221 Senator Arnie Mohl summarized the opposition position best, declaring "'[t]he public don't [sic] want a speed limit. Let's leave it lay."' 22 2 Opponents ultimately prevailed, voting down the bill 41 to 8.223 
In September of 1997, several state legislators renewed calls for numerical speed limits. Since the Montana legislature meets every other year and had concluded its 1997 session, several legislators petitioned the Secretary of 213 See Montana Wants Brake, supra note 62, at C6 (the coalition also proposed a 65 mph speed limit for most two lane roads). 
214 See id. 25 See S.B. 64, 55th Reg. Sess. (Mont. 1997). 
216 Tom Kenworthy, As Freeway Deaths Rise, Montana Ponders a Speed Limit, WASH. POST, Feb. 3, 1997, at A15. 
27 Montana, STATE NEWS BRIEFS, Feb. 13, 1997. 
218 See id. The Committee voted to allow debate on a modified version of Senator Crippen's bill with the daytime speed limit raised to 80 mph. Id. 
219 Montana Wants Brake, supra note 62, at C6 (noting "many Montanan's are proud of the fact that Montana is the only state without limits"). 
220 Id. 221 Johnson, supra note 154, at 2A. 222 Other People's Houses, COLUMBIAN, Feb. 16, 1997, at 10. 223 See Montana Rejects Auto Speed Limits, L.A. TIMES, Feb. 16, 1997, at 31. State's office for a special session to pass speed limit legislation. 224 The tenth legislator's request on September 4, 1997 triggered a mail canvass of lawmakers; proponents needed a majority of 76 votes to convene the legislature. 225 Speed limit proponents again cited mounting highway fatalities as justification for numerical limits. 226 An impassioned legislator decried, ."'[o]ur friends and neighbors are dying out there.' 227 
Opponents rejected the link between the Basic Rule and fatalities. One lawmaker observed that "many of the deaths have involved alcohol or the failure to use seat belts, and that many have occurred at night, when a speed limit is in effect. "228 Given the legislature's historic dislike of speed limits, S.B. 64's resounding defeat, and the overall lack of public support, it appeared unlikely lawmakers would vote to convene the legislature. 229 These predictions came true as speed limit proponents lost their bid to reconvene the legislature by a lopsided vote of 110 to 38.230 
The political polarization the speed limit issue engenders is the most interesting aspect of recent legislative actions. Although polls show that Montanans are roughly evenly split on the speed limits question, significant differences of opinion exist by geographic region, gender and age. For example, residents of Montana's more rural eastern and central regions favor the Basic Rule to shorten the time required to travel the long distances between the areas' isolated communities. 231 City residents tend to favor numerical limits. 232 224 See Taking a Brake on Speed Law/Montana's Death Toll Rises on No-Limit Roads, NEWSDAY (New York, N.Y.), Sept. 8, 1997, at A21 (explaining that some Montanans call for a numerical speed limit as a "matter of life and death"). 
225 See id.; see also Western Empire, DENY. POST, Oct. 12, 1997, at B-2. 226 See Taking a Brake on Speed Law, supra note 224, at A21 (indicating that between January and September 1997, 177 people died in traffic accidents-42 more than had died during the same period in 1996). 
227 Id. 228 Id. 
229 News stories and polling data confirmed the dim outlook for convening a special session to impose speed limits. See Quote, Unquote, STATE CAPITOLS REPORT, Oct. 31, 1997 ("'Absolutely not, no way!' [said] Montana House Minority Leader Vicki Cocchiarella, when asked if a special session should be held to reinstate speed limits for the state's highways."); Witkowski & Edwards, supra note 84 ("[T]he call for a special session is not expected to succeed ....");Across the USA: News from Every State, supra note 146, at 12A ("A Great Falls Tribune poll finds 64% of Montanans want speed limits on highways, but 50% say the Legislature shouldn't convene in special session to establish them. Fortythree percent say a special session is necessary."). 
230 See Western Empire, supra note 225. The defeat may be attributed to the cost of invoking a special legislative session and the unwillingness of some legislators to repeal the law after such a relatively short test period. See Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol, supra note 54. 
231 See Witkowski & Edwards, supra note 84 ("A speed limit faces stiff opposition from conservative eastern Montana lawmakers. They come from the wide open plains, 
Gender and age are even more indicative of individuals' preferences in the speed limits debate. When residents were asked whether they "would favor or oppose having the Legislature enact a specific, daytime speed limit," respondents split almost evenly on the question, with 48% in favor and 45% opposed. 233 However, women favored the limits by a substantial 68% to 28% margin, while men opposed the limits 62% to 30%.234 Questioned on the specific proposal from Governor Racicot and Attorney General Mazurek, women favored the legislation by an even wider 69% to 25% margin. 235 Men still opposed the limits plan, although by the smaller margin of 50% to 43%.236 Age appears to reinforce gender speed limit preferences. In similar surveys, men between the ages of 18 and 30 were the strongest Basic Rule advocates, while women over 63 were the leading supporters of numerical limits. 237 
The recent legislative actions exemplify Montana's factionalized opinion on the speed limits issue. Yet despite the clamor over increased highway fatalities and the role of excess speed in such accidents, until Montanans develop a consensus bridging geography, gender, and age, a legislative alteration of the Basic Rule seems unlikely. 
VI. VOID FOR VAGUENESS? 
In late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague. 238 The case involved a defendant who had been doing a steady 85 miles per hour. 239 In a brief opinion, the Court concluded that the Basic Rule did not give the defendant "reasonable notice of the speed at which his conduct would violate the law." 240 Neither the arresting officer nor the Attorney General was able to specify a speed that would have been reasonable for the defendant. 24 1 The where you might not pass another car for miles."); Brooke, supra note 49, at 16 ("Driving speeds tend to be higher in the plains of eastern Montana, where long stretches of straight, flat road connect farflung communities."); Daytime Speed Limit Not Supported, STATE NEWS BRIEFS, Dec. 19, 1996 ("Lawmakers say they do not believe polls showing an equal split on the issue of posted daytime speed limits. Three legislators from central Montana say they've found little or no support for the proposal."). 
232 See Daytime Speed Limit Not Supported, supra note 231. 
233 See Charles S. Johnson, What We Prefer, STANDARD (Lee, Mont.), Jan. 5, 1997, at Court emphasized that the law enforcement machinery of the state had not attempted to limit the discretion of police officers through guidelines, and that it had relied instead on individual, case-by-case judgments. 242 Thus "the average motorist in Montana would have no idea of the speed at which he or she could operate his or her motor vehicle .... Furthermore, the basic rule not only permits, but requires the kind of arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement that the due process clause in general, and the void-for-vagueness doctrine in particular, are designed to prevent," largely because it delegates "basic public policy" to police officers, judges, and juries. 243 A dissenting opinion by Justice Regnier emphasized that the defendant had been "[o]perating a vehicle at 85 miles per hour on a two-lane highway with frost heaves, steep hills, and curves, where farm vehicles may unexpectedly appear." 244 Thus Justice Regnier's suggestion appeared to be that the defendant in the case could not reasonably claim to have lacked notice that he was violating the law. 245 
The purpose of this paper is principally empirical, and thus we do not venture a detailed discussion of the Court's ruling under the due process clause. But what we have said here offers some lessons about the need for empirically-informed constitutional law. It is difficult for a court to venture a judgment about vagueness without knowing how a law operates in practice. A law that seems vague may be far less so when taken in the context of public and private practices. Note. for example, that on the day after it invalidated the Basic Rule, the Montana Supreme Court upheld the prohibition on "reckless driving," notwithstanding the apparently unclear definition of "reckless driving" as operating "any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property." 246 The constitutional question is what legal terms are taken to mean, by public and private actors, and a seemingly open-ended term may be proved far less open-ended by practice. 
The evidence that we have discussed does provide considerable support for the Court's ruling. As we have seen, diverse law enforcement officials interpret the basic law in diverse ways, and motorists cannot always know, with precision and in advance, how much speed is excessive. The strongest opinion for invalidation might have been empirical, emphasizing the unmistakable record of uncertainty and arbitrariness. 
We think, however, that it was probably premature for the Court to invalidate the law. There is some evidence of an increasing degree of clarity about the circumstances in which drivers will be found to violate the law. At the very least, there seems to have been an emerging judgment about what 24? See id. at *7. 243 Id. at *6. 244 Id. at *9 (Regnier, J., dissenting). 245 Id. 246 State v. Stanko, No. 98-106, 1998 WL 896273, at *7-*8 (Mont. Dec. 24, 1998). 
kinds of driving behavior would count as unreasonable and imprudent. Motorists, and grudgingly, law enforcement, were adjusting to the law. 
Probably the best outcome would have been for the Court to reserve judgment on the ultimate issue with a holding that the defendant in the case was certainly on notice that he was not driving prudently. If the Court had reserved judgment on the due process issue, by showing that the particular defendant could not claim a lack of notice, it might have encouraged chief law enforcement authorities to provide greater guidance to the driving public, perhaps through illustrative examples of speeds that would be considered reasonable and speeds that would be considered unreasonable in diverse circumstances. 
It remains to be seen how Montana will respond to the ruling of its Supreme Court. A revised version of the Basic Rule might attempt to provide greater clarity through some kind of standard ceiling, or it might, in the spirit of the Basic Rule, use guidelines and exemplars. It might even require the adoption of guidelines and exemplars by law enforcement officials; the Court was obviously troubled by the failure of law enforcement to provide greater clarity for the driving public. On the basis of the evidence discussed here, we believe that it is legitimate to ask for greater guidance for rule of law purposes. But in a case in which the largest issues might best have been left undecided, the Court may well have invalidated the Basic Rule prematurely, at least in the absence of a more detailed factual report. 
CONCLUSION 
Montana's Basic Rule appears to be a simple proposition: During daytime hours on the state's highways and interstates, motorists must drive in a "reasonable and prudent" manner. Yet the Rule's impact on America's fourth largest state, its roadways, its courtrooms, and its residents, has proven to be anything but simple. 
Enacted in accordance with Montana's libertarian principles, the Basic Rule drew national attention but caused no substantial difference in Montanans' driving habits in the short term. Although the average speed increased by a non-trivial amount from 72 mph to 78 mph, most Montanans continued driving at approximately the same speed. While remaining within historical fluctuation ranges, the state's total fatalities decreased during 1996, soared in 1997, and declined again in 1998; it remains unclear if this variation is attributable to the change in law or to some other factor or set of factors. The underlying lesson appears to be that driving habits are only partly a function of law. Probably the most discernible effect of the Rule is that Montana has become a "speed magnet," attracting tourists who view Montana's interstates as race tracks. It is also clear that the Basic Rule created several complex tradeoffs. Highway safety, fuel efficiency, air quality, and Montana's reputation suffered under the Basic Rule. Probable economic efficiency, increased social ties, shorter driving times, and personal satisfaction stand as benefits. 
Enforcement is perhaps the biggest problem with the Basic Rule. Although ticket revenues have increased, roadside confrontations, accident investigations and court appearances also have increased, depleting the already scant resources of the Highway Patrol and judiciary. Furthermore, the subjective standard has proven an onerous task to administer. Arbitrary and inconsistent enforcement by the police, prosecutors, and judges impedes citizens' compliance and the law's effectiveness. Legislative attempts to reinstate a numerical speed limit have failed amidst geographic, age and gender factionalization. However, in late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague, a move we have criticized in light of the insufficient factual record of the case. 
A more consistent application of the law might have reduced some of these problems and may have prevented, or at least forestalled, the recent Montana Supreme Court's action. Recent evidence of declining roadway fatalities and Basic Rule citations may indicate that drivers were adapting to the flexible standard. Furthermore, as Montanans, tourists, the Highway Patrol, prosecutors and judges became more accustomed to "reasonable and prudent" travel, a consensus might have emerged, reducing the difficulty of establishing workable standards for law enforcement and the judiciary. 
An overall evaluation of the law and its consequences would require more time and data. Even at this early date the transition from the 55 mph limit to the Basic Rule offers some significant lessons. It highlights the important role that social norms play in generating driving behavior. It reveals how a state may become a speed magnet or a speed repellent. It also illustrates the need to assess a number of effects in order to evaluate a change in transportation policy. Finally, the study demonstrates the palpable adverse effects of a vague, highly subjective standard on law enforcement. These lessons do not permit any simple or straightforward verdict on the Basic Rule. But they do bear on a number of recurrent debates in private and public law, most notably the choice between rules and standards, and the relationship between law and social norms. 
is pleased to announce the election of its Editorial Board for the 1999-2000 academic year: 
GILBERT L. HENRY PATRICIA R. STEMBRIDGE RONALD J. BAUMGARTEN ELIZABETH K. CHEN JENNIFER W. CORINIS JEREMY N. KUDON CHRISTINE M. O'MALLEY 
CHRISTINE M. FITZGERALD 
KELLY N. HONOHAN JULIA A. MILLER JULIANNA M. THOMAS JEREMY L. BARTELL JOSHUA J. LOZNER CHRISTOPHER C. MILLER DAVID T. SCHUR JEFFREY S. SIEGEL 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 77 (2D SERIES) 
Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
Cass R. Sunstein,* David Schkade,** and Daniel Kahneman*** For those interested in the effects of law on human behavior, deterrence is of course the central question. No one doubts that legal sanctions, civil and criminal, can have significant behavioral consequences. Thus the economic theory of punishment in general, and of punitive damages in particular, is designed to ensure optimal deterrence of private and public misconduct. Emphasizing this point, many observers have suggested that participants in the legal system should be asked to choose among punishments by answering explicit questions about how to achieve optimal deterrence.1 To take just one illustration, Polinsky and Shavell have gone so far to offer a model jury instruction, one that would direct jurors to focus their attention on the probability that the defendant’s act would be detected.2 
Extending and elaborating on the standard law-and-economics wisdom on this topic, Polinsky and Shavell urge that the principal purpose of punitive awards is to make up for the shortfall in compensatory damages, a shortfall caused by the failure of potential plaintiffs to detect the injury and to seek compensation. Polinsky and Shavell would ask jurors to multiply the compensatory award by * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. ** Professor of Management and William R. Spriegel Fellow, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Ausin. *** Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University. The authors are grateful to the Exxon Corporation for financial support for the first of the studies contained in this Article; Exxon bears no responsibility for our analysis or our conclusions. We are also grateful to Douglas Baird, Jonathan Baron, Riohard Craswell, Daniel Kahan, Saul Levmore, Martha Nussbaum, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and David Weisbach for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 1 See, e.g., Robert D. Cooter, Economic Analysis of Punitive Damages, 56 S Cal L Rev 79 (1982); William Landes and Richard Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law 160-63 (1987); Robert Cooter, Punitive Damages for Deterrence: When and How Much?, 40 Ala L Rev 1143 (1989). 2 A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869 (1999). the probability that injured persons would not detect and receive compensation for the injury.3 Thus, for example, no punitive award should be permitted when the probability of compensation is 100%, and the compensatory award should be doubled when the probability is 50%.4 Polinsky and Shavell object that in the real world, jurors do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence; their jury instruction is designed to move juror performance in that direction.5 
An obvious question raised by proposals of this kind is whether jurors are able or willing to carry out the relevant tasks. Perhaps it is unlikely that jurors could master the complex causal issues involved in making ex ante probability judgments; hindsight bias, for example, might contaminate the inquiry (causing artificially diminished awards).6 But even more basic questions are whether citizens generally would approve of this approach to punitive damages, and whether jurors would be willing to perform this task if asked to do so. Previous research suggests that people’s judgments about punitive damage awards are a reflection of outrage at the defendant’s actions rather than of deterrence.7 This is not to say that people do not care about deterrence; of course they do. Our hypothesis here is that they 3 Id. at 957-62. 4 There are some qualifications here. Polinsky and Shavell would also allow punitive damages to force the defendant to disgorge socially illicit gains; here the purpose would allow be to promote optimal deterrence by ensuring that the defendant, if an individual, is not able to profit from (illicit) hedonic gains from, say, an assault or rape. Id. at 909-10, 954. Note also that it is possible to imagine routes to optimal deterrence that diverge from the conventional “multiplier” approach. See Richard Craswell, Deterrence and Damages: The Multiplier Principle and its Alternatives, 97 Mich. L. Rev. (forthcoming 1999). These and other qualifications are essentially irrelevant to our claims here. 5 See id. 6 See Jeffrey Rachlinski, A Positive Psychological Theory of Judging i n Hindsight, 65 U Chi L Rev (1998) ; Reid Hastie, David Schkade and John Payne, Juror judgments in civil cases: Hindsight effects on punitive liability judgments. Law and Human Behavior (1999). 7 See Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, Intuitions About Penalties and Compensation in the Context of Torty Law, 7 J Risk and Uncertainty 17 (1993); Jonathan Baron, R. Gowda, and Howard Kunreuther, Attitudes toward Managing Hazardous Waste: What Should be Cleaned Up and Who Should Pay for It, 13 Risk Analysis 183 (1993); Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale LJ 2071 (1998). do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence; for this reason they do not make the kinds of distinctions that are obvious, even secondnature, for those who study deterrence questions. Above all, they may not believe that in order to ensure optimal deterrence, the amount that a given defendant is required to pay should be increased or decreased depending on the probability of detection , a central claim in the economic analysis of law.8 
In this paper we discuss two studies designed to test whether people believe in optimal deterrence. In the first study, we focus people’s attention on the probability of detection, in order to see how this variable influences their judgments. If people do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence, this factor would be viewed as largely irrelevant (a point that we qualify below). This finding would in turn have implications for the role of juries in implementing deterrent goals. If optimal deterrence is the purpose of some legal reform, that purpose could be met with resistance in the jury system. If optimal deterrence is the goal of legal reform, it may be necessary to rely on less populist institutions, such as regulatory agencies. 
In the second study, we ask the optimal deterrence question more directly. We present subjects with the question whether it is proper, or fair, for public officials (including judges) to vary the degree of punishment with the probability of detection. We ask whether it is proper for judges to refuse to allow punitive damages when the probability of detection is 100%, and also whether the Internal Revenue Service should increase penalties when a smaller number of agents means that there will be a larger degree of undetected tax cheating. Compared to the first study, this is a more straightforward test of the question whether people want optimal deterrence. If people reject explicit official decisions to vary punishment with the probability of detection, it is safe to include that they do not believe in achieving optimal deterrence. 8 See Polinsky and Shavell, supra note; Landes and Posner, supra note. A low probability of detection might, however, suggest stealthiness, and for that reason increase the penalty in certain circumstances, because it increases outrage. See below. We have not tested that question here. 
Outside of the context of punitive damages, psychological work on punishment has suggested that when thinking about punishment, people are not simple consequentialists, and that their ideas about punishment diverge from what would be expected from an optimal deterrence approach. For example, Baron and Ritov studied people’s judgments about penalties in tort cases involving harms resulting from the use of vaccines and birth control pills.9 I n one case, subjects were told that the result of a higher penalty would be to make companies try harder to make safer products. In an adjacent case, subjects were told that the consequence of a higher penalty would be to make the company more likely to stop making the product, with the result that less safe products would be on the market. Most subjects, including a group of judges, gave the same penalties in both cases. 
A related study found no reduction in penalty even when subjects were told that the amount of the penalty would have no effect on future behavior—because the penalty was secret, the company had insurance, and the company was about to go out of business.10 While not directly tied to the topic of optimal deterrence, these studies strongly suggest that intuitive punishment judgments are not tailored to consequentialist goals. 
Another test of punishment judgments asked subjects, including judges and legislators, to choose penalties for dumping hazardous waste.11 In one case, the penalty would make companies 9 Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, Intuitions About Penalties and Compensation in the Context of Tort Law, 7 J Risk and Uncertainty 17 (1993). 10 See id. 11 Jonathan Baron, R. Gowda, and Howard Kunreuther, Attitudes toward Managing Hazardous Waste: What Should be Cleaned Up and Who Should Pay for It, 13 Risk Analysis 183 (1993). There is, in fact, a large literature documenting that deterrence considerations do not explain public opinion toward punishment, even when members of the public say that “deterrence” is their primary concern. See, e.g., Tom R. Tyler & Renee Weber, Support for the Death Penalty: Instrumental Response to Crime, or Symbolic Attitude, 17 L. & Soc'y Rev. 21 (1982); Phoebe C. Ellsworth & Samuel R. Gross, Hardening of the Attitudes: Americans’ Views on the Death Penalty, 50 J. Soc. Issues 19 (1994). try harder to avoid waste. In another, the penalty would lead companies to cease making a beneficial product. Most people did not penalize companies differently in the two cases. Perhaps most strikingly, people preferred to require companies to clean up their own waste, even if the waste did not threaten anyone, instead of spending the same amount to clean up far more dangerous waste produced by another, now-defunct company. 
These studies indicate that when assessing punishment, people do not focus solely on social consequences, at least not in any simple way. If this is true, it is reasonable to think that people also do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence. But this proposition has not been tested. We attempt to make some progress on the question here, above all by asking people to focus on a key variable: the probability of detection. 
The first study offered three personal injury cases (see Appendix) to test the effect of explicitly varying the probability of detection on juror judgments. The question we examined was whether people would offer different judgments about penalty levels when the probability of detection was varied. In one case, for example, the plaintiff suffered serious post-operative complications after surgery on his broken leg. He claimed that the surgeon was incompetent, and sued the owner of the hospital. The hospital had previously received several complaints about the surgeon, but had not disciplined him. Compensatory damages had already been awarded. 
Three versions of each case were prepared. These differed only in the relative frequency of detection, which was set at 1 out of 100, 1 out of 10, or 1 out of 5. The level of compensatory damages was the same for all cases ($200,000) as was firm size (annual profits of around $150 million). Here, for example, is the relevant wording for one of the cases: 
compensation do not always receive it because ( don’t know what caused their problem and therefore don’t sue, ( they sue and lose, even though they deserve to win under the law, because their lawyers are not good enough. Research has shown that in only 1 out of 100 situations where someone has an experience like Joan Glover is the company eventually required to pay compensation to the victim.” 
Note that several features of this design were specifically selected in order to enhance the likelihood that respondents would use, rather than ignore, the information provided on the probability of detection. Both firm size and compensatory damages were held constant, and these were the only other quantitative factors presented; moreover, a quantitative response was required. Thus the design drew attention to the only number that varied between cases, the probability of detection, increasing the chance that it would be thought relevant. The probability information was also provided in the form of relative frequencies, which are more easily understood and processed than decimals. Jurors were specifically directed to deterrence (as well as retribution) in the jury instructions (see Appendix). Note also that our purpose, in this study, was not to ask directly whether the legal system should pursue optimal deterrence, nor to see if people could or would pay attention to probability of detection if required to do so, but instead to examine whether information on that question would be used appropriately if provided and emphasized. Any answer would tell us a great deal about people’s intuitive approach to punishment questions. 
which were constructed to ensure that ( all three cases, ( probability of detection, ( combinations of case and probability of detection were equally represented in each of the three ordinal positions (first, second, third). The design is summarized in Table 3 (in the Appendix). 
A total of 699 jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited and paid by a survey firm. Session sizes varied from 23 to 29 and were held in conference rooms of local hotels. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the nine conditions described above, resulting in the sample allocation in Table 3 in the Appendix. The data were analyzed using a repeated measures analysis of variance, with probability of detection, case, and sequence as independent variables, along with a subject factor. Because the award distribution is severely right skewed, as is typical of punitive damages awards,12 the natural log of awards was used as the dependent variable. 
probability of detection did not produce significant changes in dollar awards, even though it was varied by a factor of 20; this was apparently irrelevant to their dollar judgments (Table 1). 13 To be sure, there does appear to be a positive trend in the means, but this difference is not statistically significant (F( and even if it were, it is in the opposite direction of that required by the deterrence argument: The greater the likelihood of detection, the higher the award. The clear implications of this result are ( that explicitly drawing people’s attention to a low probability of detection does not by itself produce higher or materially different awards and ( not promoted by people’s spontaneous judgments about appropriate punishment. 
required to think about issues of optimal deterrence, as urged by Polinsky and Shavell, jurors might be willing to do so. Study 1 does not demonstrate that the proposed Polinsky-Shavell jury instruction would necessarily be met with a form of civil disobedience. It remains possible that people do care about deterrence but do not understand the relationship between probability of detection and (optimal) deterrence; perhaps they are confused about how best to deter. Perhaps they do not understand the risk of overdeterrence and 12 See Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, supra note. 13 When interpreting a non-significant result as meaningful it is important to be sure that enough statistical power was present. Note that we did find significant effects of case (F( < .001), and a case by sequence interaction (F( therefore clear that we had sufficient statistical power(with over 2000 total observations) to detect any effect of probability of detection if one in fact existed. underdeterrence and might be willing to think in these terms if the concepts were explained. Nor did we undertake a within-subjects test of the sort described in Part I; we do not know whether respondents, confronted with two cases, otherwise identical but with different probabilities of detection, would treat the two cases in the same way. And while the first study tests whether jurors will take account of the low probability of detection when prominently placed before them, it does not ask for reactions to officials or institutions who have done exactly that. Our second study sheds some light on these issues. * These figures are derived from the mean log awards used in the analysis of variance. To make the figures more easily interpreted, the mean log award for each cell was converted to $ by taking the inverse. For example, the mean log award for the Glover case with a 1/100 probability was 13.426, and e13.426 = 677,399. 
The first study did not expressly ask people whether optimal deterrence policies were appropriate or proper. In our second study, we asked University of Chicago Law School students to answer this question. The general hypothesis was that most people would reject optimal deterrence policies if chosen by an administrative agency or by a district court. The University of Chicago Law School, however, would seem to be extremely unfavorable terrain for this hypothesis. University of Chicago Law School students generally learn a great deal about deterrence theory in their first year of law school, and they study optimal deterrence in their required courses about the law of tort and criminal law. Thus training in the first year of law school alerts University of Chicago students to the possibility of over- or underdeterrence and to the need to consider both level and probability of penalty in achieving optimal deterrence. It would therefore be reasonable to speculate that a large percentage of students would accept optimal deterrence theory. But the speculation would be wrong. 
Two questions were presented to 84 students in the first session of a general administrative law class, taken by both second-year and third-year students. The questions involved enforcement policy and punitive damages. The question involving enforcement policy was this: 
“Suppose that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has a large number of agents per 10,000 people in California, but a small number of agents per 10,000 people in Utah; suppose too that because of practical constraints, the IRS cannot increase the number of agents in Utah. Suppose that you are head of the IRS, and that your second-in-command has sent you a memorandum saying, ‘To make up for the shortfall of agents in Utah, ensure the right level of deterrence, we need to impose higher penalties for tax violations in Utah than for tax violations in 
this effect.’ Putting aside purely political considerations, would you agree with this policy?” The question involving punitive damages was this: 
“Tom Johnson, a construction worker, was severely injured as a result of grotesquely reckless safety practices by his employer. In the trial, uncontradicted experts testified that Johnson’s employer ‘did not even try to take the most minimal and obvious precautions to protect workers against serious risks to life and health.’ The jury awarded Johnson $50,000 in compensatory damages and $300,000 in punitive damages. The trial judge set aside the punitive award on the ground that ‘there was essentially no chance that Johnson would not seek and receive compensation, and hence there is no need for punitive damages in this case.’ Assume that the trial judge was correct on his factual claim—and thus that there was no chance that Johnson would not seek and receive full compensation. Do you agree that punitive damages should not be awarded?” 
questions: strongly disagree ( agree ( result was “fair,” believing that this formulation might bias answers against optimal deterrence policies.) The question order was varied; about half of respondents answered the IRS question first, and about half answered it second. Since it seemed that an unusual number of respondents, having been schooled in optimal deterrence policies, would accept those policies, we also asked a follow-up question for each problem. The question was whether most other people would agree with the policy. Thus, each participant gave four responses, all on a 1-4 disagree-agree scale: Self and Other ratings for both the IRS and punitive damages questions. 
The simplest statement of the result is that very strong majorities of respondents rejected optimal deterrence policies in both settings, disagreeing with both the IRS policy and the punitive damage ruling. More particularly, 84% rejected the judge’s decision to set aside the punitive damage award, and 75%, rejected the IRS’ policy. Substantial majorities believed that most other people would also reject the optimal deterrence policy—67% of respondents said that most people would disagree with the punitive damage judgment, and 87% of respondents said that most people would disagree with the IRS policy. In short, substantial majorities both rejected the optimal deterrence approach and believed that most people would reject the optimal deterrence approach. 
The overwhelming majorities with respect to the punitive damage judgment are especially noteworthy. Respondents at the University of Chicago Law School are well aware of the economic theory of punitive awards. They apparently rejected that theory with the thought that reckless or invidious behavior deserves to be punished, whatever deterrence theory may suggest. Hence the respondents’ refusal to accept optimal deterrence theory provides some information about the content of punitive intuitions: I n general, moral judgments about inappropriate behavior are affected little or not at all by the probability of detection. 
There is an interesting wrinkle in the findings: More people disapproved of the punitive damages judgment than believed that most people would disapprove of the punitive damage judgment. It is not clear how to account for this. But subsequent informal discussion suggested a possible explanation: A small group of students who disagreed with the judge’s decision to set aside the punitive award believed that because of the publicity given to apparently excessive punitive awards, most people would approve of a judge’s decision to set aside any such award. 
tn ree 
g e c a re is P D MR r t A S ry t a 2 
s le lt b u a s 
e T m m u S R 2 y d u t S m A o S d e t a R n n o i t s e u r 
r so e e e lfe th lf h r 
t e P S O S 
O iev eg t a i S S n m R R u a iev eg ll t a ra i n m u a e v 2 1 
The obvious implication of this study is that people generally reject optimal deterrence policies. The IRS example is a conventional regulatory effort to increase penalties because of the low probability of detection; the punitive damage case is a conventional application of conventional optimal deterrence theory. If even University of Chicago Law School students reject optimal deterrence approaches by a substantial margin, there is no reason to expect, and every reason to doubt, that such policies would obtain majority or even significant support elsewhere.14 
Several questions might be asked about the implications of these findings. In the IRS study, the question asked about an IRS increase in penalties because of a lower probability of detection in Utah. Would people’s answers shift if respondents were asked about an IRS decrease in penalties because of a higher probability of detection in California?15 In other words, the answers may have been affected not only by the (apparently unjustified) inequality between citizens of Utah and citizens of California, but also because of a framing effect in which the former were being subjected to what might seem to be unusually high penalties. Perhaps a different framing of the question would produce a shift in answers. Or perhaps the key problem in the IRS case was the evident inequality between similarly situated citizens. Would respondents reject an optimal deterrence policy if it was global—if, for example, an administrative agency increased penalties in 2001 because of reduced enforcement 14 In light of the unambiguous support for our hypothesis—that people reject optimal deterrence policies—in this unfavorable population, any study with the general juror pool would add little for our limited purpose here, which is to show that in their intuitive punishment judgments, people do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence. Of course this is not to deny the value of obtaining more information about the judgments of diverse groups, including large samples of ordinary citizens (as in Study 1); such information could produce a great deal of further information about intuitive punishment judgments, as discussed below. 15 There is also a question whether the effect we find is partly an “IRS effect”—that antipathy of the IRS helps drive disapproval of the policy. We cannot rule out this possibility. But it is quite doubtful that the result would be substantially different if (say) the Environmental Protection Agency or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration were substituted for the IRS. resources, or if a new agency offered high penalties because of underfunding? 
Similarly, the punitive damages problem involved a judicial elimination of the jury award because of a 100% probability of detection, an outcome that apparently seemed outrageous to many respondents. It is easy to imagine a case in which the judge increases the penalty because the probability of detection was (say) 10%. We know from Study 1 that such an increase would not occur to jurors spontaneously. But how many people would find this outcome unacceptable? 
These are important questions, and some answers would give more precise information about the psychology of punishment. But they do not bear on the general issue pursued here, which is whether people attempt to promote optimal deterrence. Even if variations in the cases might increase the number of people willing to approve of some probability-penalty tradeoff, it would not follow that optimal deterrence policies fit comfortably with moral intuitions. We have offered considerable evidence that they do not. The fact that optimal deterrence policies are rejected in both the administrative and the judicial domains, among a group most likely to be predisposed in their favor, strongly suggests that any effort to move in the direction of optimal deterrence would encounter strong popular resistance. 
The claims that people do not attempt to promote optimal deterrence policies, and that they are likely to reject many such policies, raise two further issues. The first has to do with the structure (if any) of people’s judgments, if those judgments are not based on the idea of optimal deterrence. In previous work we have started to develop a descriptive model of punitive damages, with implications for punishment judgments in general. 16 The essential claim is that punitive awards emerge from a cascade of judgments, moving from outrage to punitive intent to dollar awards. The evaluative aspect of outrage can be measured on bounded numerical scales, and even within diverse demographic groups, there is considerable uniformity in outrage judgments, thus measured.17 16 See Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, 16 J. Risk & Uncertainty (1998); Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, supra note. 17 See Sunstein, Kahneman, and Schkade, 107 Yale LJ at 2097-2100. Punitive intent, which can also be measured on bounded numerical scales, is determined both by outrage and by additional factors, such as harm, which do not affect outrage itself. Dollar awards emerge from a combination of punitive intent and still additional factors, such as firm size, which do not themselves affect punitive intent (measured on a bounded numerical scale). 
It should be clear that as described, the outrage model does not incorporate any effort to seek optimal deterrence. But as we have noted, it remains possible that a low probability of detection would affect outrage, not because deterrence requires severe punishment, but because a stealthy act is more outrageous than one that is out in the open. We suspect that if the probability of detection sometimes matters—if a low or for that matter high probability drives up dollar awards—it is because of the increased outrage elicited by a stealthy or shameless act. It would be feasible, for example, to examine whether people would offer higher awards when the defendant’s conduct was extremely open and thus indicated a kind of obliviousness to widespread social norms; it would equally be possible to explore whether people would offer higher awards when a defendant took careful (fiendish?) steps to conceal his wrongdoing. From the standpoint of retribution, and outrage, it is not clear, in the abstract, whether a defendant should be deemed stealthy and sneaky, and hence more severely punished when the probability of detection is low, or instead deemed shameless, and hence more severely punished when the probability of detection is high. It is reasonable to think that outrage, and hence dollar awards, might be increased through cases that exemplify either phenomenon. 
The second issue has to do with the relationship between our findings and the real world of punitive damages. Here the question is whether juries tend to increase awards because the probability of detection was low. There is no evidence that this happens, and considerable reason to believe that it does not. Those who claim that punitive awards are predictable show that the compensatory award tends to “anchor” the punitive award, that is, the punitive award is much affected by the compensatory award.18 Juries do not add a special multiplier when the probability of compensation is low, nor do they refuse to go beyond the compensatory award when the probability is 100%. Polinsky and Shavell themselves give a number of examples of cases in which the probability of detection did not matter and suggest that judicial determinations “do not reflect in any clear manner the formula that achieves optimal deterrence.”19 We agree that the inevitably messy real-world data show that juries do not pursue optimal deterrence. What we have added is less messy evidence that people do not promote optimal deterrence even when given information that would enable, even encourage them to do so—and also that people reject optimal deterrence policies in important settings. 
People do not spontaneously think in terms of optimal deterrence and indeed they would be reluctant to accept effort to build the law on the foundation of optimal deterrence theory. Their proposed punishments do not differ depending on the probability of deterrence, even when this factor is specifically drawn to their attention. In addition, people reject law enforcement policies that increase or decrease penalties because of the probability of detection. These findings have several implications. 
First: Serious practical issues would be raised by any effort to require ordinary people to think in terms of optimal deterrence. Any such effort could run up against widely held moral intuitions. This does not mean that people will not obey the law. But there is a serious risk that a jury instruction asking jurors to think in terms of optimal deterrence would not be followed in the real world. 
Second: The public will be skeptical of an effort to base law enforcement policy on principles of optimal deterrence. An attempt to move policy in this direction could be widely perceived as unfair and wrong. Even if the perception is naïve or ignorant—and we take no stand here on the normative question—it is important for policymakers to know about it. 
Third: If government is going to base its enforcement policy on the idea of optimal deterrence, it has several alternatives. It might keep its policy quiet. Alternatively, it might attempt to educate the 19 See Polinsky and Shavell, supra note, at 897; see also 897-904. public, so as to convince people that this is, in fact, the proper strategy. Or it might use optimal deterrence policies in settings in which they can be “framed” so as to fit most comfortably with moral intuitions.20 Perhaps more promisingly, it might use less populist institutions to promote the relevant goals. It might, for example, shift decisional authority away from juries and toward bureaucracies, with the knowledge that whatever ordinary people think, the relevant administrators will seek to promote optimal deterrence. 20 We have suggested several possibilities above, though we have not investigated them here. 
In this study we would like you to imagine that you are a juror for a legal case in a civil court. Civil law suits involve disputes between private individuals, companies, or individuals and companies, in which the plaintiff alleges that the defendant harmed them in some way. The primary purpose of a civil suit brought by a plaintiff is to seek compensation from the defendant for the alleged harm. 
a defendant could be could be required to pay. Compensatory damages are intended to fully compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered as a result of the defendant’s actions. Punitive damages are intended to achieve two purposes: ( misconduct, and ( committing similar actions in the future. 
Punitive damages should be awarded if a preponderance of the evidence shows that the defendants acted either maliciously or with reckless disregard for the welfare of others. Defendants are considered to have acted maliciously if they intended to injure or harm someone. Defendants are considered to have acted with reckless disregard for the welfare of others if they were aware of the probable harm to others but disregarded it, and their actions were a gross deviation from the standard of care that a normal person would use. 
Civil suits differ from criminal cases, in which the government prosecutes an individual or a company for alleged violations of the law. Plaintiffs in a civil trial must prove their claim by “a preponderance of the evidence,” which means that it is more likely than not that the plaintiff’s claim is justified. This differs from criminal trials, where the prosecution must prove the defendant’s guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt,” which is a much stronger level of proof. 
Please imagine that you are a member of the jury for this case. Your job is to decide whether and how much the defendant should be punished, in addition to paying compensatory damages. In the case you will consider, the jury has already ordered the defendant to pay compensatory damages to the plaintiff. This does not necessarily mean that punitive damages must also be awarded. Whether or not punitive damages should be awarded and if so how large they should be is completely separate from compensatory damages. 
Joan Glover, a five-year-old child, ingested a large number of pills of a non-prescription allergy medicine called Allerfree. The Allerfree bottle carried a label reading "Childproof Cap", but it did not meet federal regulations for the use of that label. Joan's parents testified that they had been very careful in ensuring that all of their medications had childproof safety caps. Joan found the pills in a kitchen drawer and ingested most of the bottle. The overdose permanently weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life, and may reduce her life expectancy.Joan's parents sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company, a drug manufacturer with annual profits of around $150 million. Internal company documents showed that General Assistance had chosen to ignore federal regulations about the standards for using the label "childproof cap". An internal memo presented at trial says that "this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money"; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree might be punished for violating the regulation but says "the punishments are extremely mild; basically we'd be asked to improve the safety caps in the future." The trial jury ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $200,000 in compensatory damages for the harm done to Joan's health. 
always receive it because ( problem and therefore don’t sue, ( sue, or ( the law, because their lawyers are not good enough. Research has shown that in only 1 out of 5 situations where someone has an experience like Joan Glover is the company eventually required to pay compensation to the victim. As you have seen, the trial jury has already ordered General Assistance to pay the plaintiff the Glovers $200,000 in compensatory damages as full compensation for the harm suffered. As a member of the punishment jury for this case, your job now is to decide how much in punitive damages (if any) General Assistance should be required to pay, in addition to paying these compensatory damages. _______________________________________________ ___________ 
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should General Assistance be required to pay as punishment and to deter them and others from similar actions in the future? Compensatory damages do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the appropriate amount of punitive damages in the blank below. 
$ _____________________ 
Tom Fredericks suffered serious post-operative complications after surgery on his broken leg. He claimed that the surgeon was incompetent, and sued the owner of the hospital, HealthServe Corporation, a national health care company with annual profits of $150 million.Normally, the type of operation Fredericks had involves only minor initial pain, and after two months the leg is completely healed. However, Fredericks was in excruciating pain for three months, and was on crutches for six months. He still has difficulty sitting for long periods, and experiences muscle spasms and swelling.Evidence presented at trial showed that the surgeon hurried through the operation by leaving out certain standard medical precautions. HealthServe had previously received several complaints about the surgeon, but had not disciplined him. A former secretary testified that a manager said, “So he makes a few mistakes; he does more operations per day than other doctors, and that helps our bottom line. Besides, he hasn’t killed anyone yet.” The trial jury ordered HealthServe to pay Fredericks $200,000 in compensatory damages. 
Paul Elegin was seriously injured in an automobile accident which occurred when his steering malfunctioned. He claimed that the cause of the accident was a defectively designed steering system and sued the manufacturer, T & C Components.Although he was wearing his seatbelt, Elegin suffered a broken pelvis and a severely fractured cheekbone, both of which required surgery. He was in severe pain for six months as his pelvis healed. The cheekbone injury permanently disfigured his face, and he has frequent and debilitating migraine headaches.T & C Components, a company with annual profits of $150 million, is a major supplier of parts to the largest auto manufacturers in the country. Internal company research reports presented at trial include the statement “the steering system may be subject to dangerous malfunction on variable road surfaces. Recommend retest and possible redesign.” T & C never attempted to correct or redesign the mechanisms detailed in the reports, or conduct a retest. A memo stated “engineers worry too much—testing for everything they think of would be too expensive.” The trial jury ordered T & C to pay Elegin $200,000 in compensatory damages. This working paper is a preliminary draft dated 5/23/99. All rights reserved. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Cost 
Benefit Analysis (April 1999) Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Back Together Again (May 1999) 
Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
For far too long, American debates about regulatory policy have been caught between two unproductive poles. On the one side are the defenders of regulatory policies characteristic of the early 1970s-favoring a kind of absolutism with respect to safety, skeptical about tradeoffs, dismissive of claims made by "business." On the other side are the "consumer sovereignty" voices of the early 1980s, claiming that consumers generally "know best," and that market arrangements are sufficient for purposes of promoting citizen welfare. The debate between the two sides often seems blocked, not least in Congress, which has had an extremely difficult time in directing agencies to pursue any particular course and which often shuttles back and forth between absolutism and an open-ended plea for "balancing."' 
The problem with the absolutist regulatory approach should be obvious: it makes no sense to spend a great deal of money when the benefits of expenditures are very low, especially in light of the fact that regulatory expenditures are often borne not by "business," but by employees and consumers. But there are problems with the ideal of "consumer sovereignty" as well. Frequently consumers lack relevant information, and even when they have the facts, they may display bounded rationality. 2 In any case, the American tradition is one of "Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School. This essay draws on a more detailed discussion found in Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis, 29 J. LEGAL STUD. (forthcoming 2000). This essay is a revised version of oral remarks presented at the Federalist Society Eighteenth Annual Student Symposium at The University of Chicago Law School on April 9-10,1999. 
Moments, andthe Cost-BenefitState, inFREE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 348-83 (1997). 
2.See Christine Jolls et al., A BehavioralApproach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 1477 (1998) ("Bounded rationality ...refers to the obvious fact that human cognitive abilities are not infinite. We have limited computational skills and seriously popular sovereignty, not "consumer sovereignty." Despite its appeal in some contexts, the latter ideal is a distortion, almost a parody, of founding ideals, and it involves deliberative selfgovernment, not consumer choices.3 
In this essay I suggest that the debate over regulatory policy is most sensibly treated as a debate over the nature of costbenefit analysis. We should be able to make a great deal of progress if we shift from the contested and often implausible idea of consumer sovereignty and agree that some form of costbenefit analysis is the appropriate basis for regulatory policy. We may accept this proposition without necessarily agreeing with the most controversial economic claims about the nature of valuation or "willingness to pay." The best argument for cost-benefit analysis is offered not on the ground that government should be seen as a kind of machine for aggregating private preferences, but with the thought that some form of cost-benefit balancing is both inevitable and desirable. It is possible to debate how relevant values should be quantified, and I offer some brief suggestions on that topic here. My basic submission, for present purposes, is only that a great deal of progress can come from a shift away from the deep theoretical waters to more confined debates about hownot whether-to undertake cost-benefit balancing. 
Often it is possible to resolve hard questions of law and policy without resolving deeply contested issues about justice, democracy, or the appropriate aims of the state. 4 Often it is possible to obtain an incompletely theorized agreement on a social practice and even on the social or legal specification of the practice. In many areas of law and public policy, people can reach closure about what to do despite their disagreement or flawed memories."). This notion originates in Herbert A. Simon, A BehavioralModel of RationalChoice, 69 Q.J. ECON. 99, 99-101 (1955). 
THE MILD VOICE OF REASON: DELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT (1994) (arguing that the Framers sought to produce a system of republican self-government partly because of a judgment that political deliberation can be best promoted through a representative system). 
4.See generally CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT (1996); CASS R. SUNSTEIN, ONE CASE AT A TIME (1999). No. 1] From ConsumerSovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis uncertainty about why, exactly, they ought to do it. Whether they are utilitarians or retributivists, people who disagree about the purposes of the criminal law can agree that rape and murder should be punished and punished more severely than theft and trespass. People can support an Endangered Species Act amidst disagreement about whether the protection of endangered species is desirable for theological reasons, or because of the rights of animals, plants, and species, or because of the value of animals, plants, and species for human beings. A great advantage of incompletely theorized agreements is that they allow people of diverse views to live together on mutually advantageous terms. A greater advantage is that they allow people of diverse views to show one another a high degree of both humility and mutual respect. 
I believe that an incompletely theorized agreement is possible here; at least achieving such an agreement should be the goal of those attempting to improve the operation of the system of regulatory protection and to understand the uses of cost-benefit analysis in regulatory policy. To be sure, it would be difficult to obtain agreement on the view (which seems implausible to me) that all questions of regulatory policy should be resolved by asking how much people are willing to pay for various social goods. Often people lack important information; sometimes they are quasi-rational.5 There is also a difference between the judgments people make as consumers and those that they make as citizens, and sometimes the latter deserve to prevail. 6 
But my basic claims here are (1) that whatever their theoretical disagreements, it should be possible for diverse, reasonable people to agree on presumptive floors and ceilings for regulatory expenditures and (2) that the presumptions can do a great deal of useful work for policymaking and for law. In short, a great deal can be done without confronting the hardest theoretical questions raised by contentious specifications of cost-benefit analysis. 
"quasi-rational" refers to the fact that people's actual behavior departs from that of the "rational actor" posited by many economic models. 

An obvious question here is: Who could join this incompletely theorized agreement? My principal claim is that the agreement can be joined by most of those who accept and those who doubt the idea that private willingness to pay is the appropriate foundation for regulatory policy. Thus, there is room here for deliberative democrats who emphasize the need for government to reflect on private preferences, rather than simply to translate them into law.7 A prime purpose of the approach is to ensure more in the way of reflection; cost-benefit analysis, as understood here, is a guarantee of greater deliberation, not an obstacle to it. Nor is the approach rigid. Under the proposed approach, agencies have the authority to abandon the floors and ceilings if there is reason for them to do so. If, for example, agencies want to spend a great deal to protect African-American children from a risk disproportionately faced by them, they are entitled to do so, as long as they explain that this is what they are doing. 
Here, then, are eight brief propositions, offered in the hope that they might attract support from diverse theoretical standpoints. I offer these as a tentative starting point for the effort to anchor cost-benefit analysis in an incompletely theorized agreement about regulatory policies. 8 
proposedcourses ofaction and also attempt to quantify the relevant effects to the extent that this is possible. When quantification is not possible, agencies should discuss the relevant effects in qualitative terms and also specify a range of plausible outcomes (e.g., annual savings of between 150 and 300 lives or savings of between $100 million and $300 million, depending on the rate of technological change). The very decision to specify effects should improve the decisionmaking process and also make the democratic process work better by giving the public a sense of the stakes. 
displacea qualitativedescriptionof relevanteffects. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses should be provided. The qualitative description should give a concrete sense of who is helped and who is hurt-for example, whether the regulation will lead to lost jobs, higher prices, more poverty, and so forth. Where the only possible information is speculative, this should be noted, along with the most reasonable speculations. Here, too, the goal is to improve the democratic process by giving people, in government and outside of it, a chance to understand the likely effects of regulation and nonregulation. 
(including,for example, lives saved, healthgains, and aesthetic values) into dollarequivalents. This point does not suggest that a statistical life and $5 million, for example, are the same thing, but it aims to promote coherence and uniformity and to ensure the sensible setting of priorities. There is nothing magical or rigid about any particular dollar equivalents; the conversion is simply a pragmatic tool to guide analysis and to allow informed comparisons. Economists have attempted to estimate the amount that people are "willing to pay" to save a statistical life, with a range of between $3 million and $10 million.9 These studies are controversial, but at least they provide a start. In addition, the same range of numbers seems to be the median on the government's cost-per-life-saved charts.10 
If $5 million seems too high, or too low, the question should be the following: on what basis might an alternative number be chosen? Note here that any monetary values are intended as presumptive, not conclusive (see proposition 5 below). 
RISK 34-74 (1992); W. Kip Viscusi, Regulating the Regulators, 63 U. CHI. L. REV. 1423, 1430-36 (1996). 
REGULATION 24-2 controlled,by statuteorExecutive order,via presumptivefloors and ceilings. For example, a statute might say that a statistical life will ordinarily be valued at no less than $2 million and no more than $10 million. Evidence of worker and consumer behavior, suggesting a valuation of between $5 million and $7 million per statistical life saved, is relevant here. The Office of Management and Budget should move in the direction of establishing presumptive floors and ceilings for various regulatory benefits. If an agency is going to spend, for example, no more than $500,000 per life saved, or more than $20 million, it should have to explain its decision. 
or to choose a low or high end ofthe range,on the basisof a publicly articulatedandreasonablejudgment that such an adjustment or such a choice is desirable. To avoid unnecessary controversy, and what would reasonably be seen as injustice, there should be no adjustments downwards for poor people. In other words, the fact that poor people are willing to spend less to protect their own lives (because they are poor) should not call for a correspondingly lower expenditure by the government. 
ofa reasonableassessment ofvariousqualitativefactors,such as whether the risk is faced voluntarily, is controllable, is dreaded, is potentially catastrophic,and is equitably distributed." For example, they might add a pain and suffering annual premium or increase the level of expenditure because children are disproportionately affected or because the victims are members of a disadvantaged group. To the extent possible, they should HOWARD MARGOLIS, DEALING wITH RISK (1996); Paul Slovic et al., Regulation ofRisk: A PsychologicalPerspective,in REGULATORY POLICY AND ThE SOCIAL SCIENCES 241 (Roger G. Noll, ed., 1985). See also Robin Gregory & Robert Mendelsohn, PerceivedRisk, Dread and Benefits, 13 RISK ANALYSIS 259 (1993) (using regression techniques to identify the major explanatory variables for lay people's risk perceptions and finding, among other things that people care about whether the risk has immediate or latent effects, whether it will affect future generations, and whether its effects are catastrophic or diffuse). be precise about the nature of, and grounds for, the relevant adjustments. 
evidence and to relatedripple effects, is education andreassurance rather than increased regulation. Sometimes public concern about certain risks is general and intense, even though the concern is not merited by the facts.12 The best response is educational, but if education and reassurance fail, increased regulation may be defensible as a way of providing a kind of reassurance. 
regulationshould requirea generalshowing that regulationhas producedmore good than harm on a reasonableview about valuation of both benefits and costs. On this view, courts should generally require agencies to generate and to adhere to ceilings and floors, but they should also allow agencies to depart from conventional numbers (by, for example, valuing a life at less than $1 million or more than $10 million) if and only if the agency has given a reasonable explanation of why it has done SO. 
For the last thirty years, debates over regulatory policy, and protection of consumers, have been blocked unnecessarily by intransigence, sloganeering, and conflict. "Absolutism" makes no sense; the question is always what will be gained and what will be lost (though of course we might disagree about how to answer that question). The idea of "consumer sovereignty" is too contestable and too vulnerable to be challenged by those who stress limited information, bounded rationality, and the difference between the decisions people make as citizens and those they make as consumers. 
1M See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability CascadesandRisk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. 683, 691-703 (1999) (discussing examples of widespread and intense, but ultimately unwarranted, public concern over events such as Love Canal and the use of the pesticide Alar on apples). 
I have suggested that it should ultimately be possible, first, to obtain an incompletely theorized agreement on the need for cost-benefit analysis and, second, to obtain incompletely theorized agreements on certain understandings of what costbenefit analysis entails. I have briefly suggested the possible nature of such understandings. Perhaps some of the eight propositions are wrong or misdirected; perhaps some of them ignore relevant arguments. The task for the future is not to press implausible arguments about consumer sovereignty but to see how cost-benefit analysis might be refined so as to attract, and to deserve, broad support. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 132.174.255.116 on Wed, 09 Mar 2016 20:22:40 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions As Government programs and polic es become more complex and far eaching, we must be sensit ve to the articulation of new rights of action that do not 
Informational regulation takes everal dif erent forms. Sometimes the government at empts to improve the behavior of private industry by requiring companies to disclose information about, for example, toxic rel ase , 
For many years it has be n unclear whether, and under what circumpromise to provide many of the most important public law case in the next several decades. The outcome of thes strug les wil have signif cant con 
Federal Election Com is ion v. Akins15 is by far the most important pronouncement on the general is ue of standing to btain information. More congres ional rather than judic al resolution. It fol ows that whether someone has informational standing depends on what Congres has aid. If "injury" can ot be decided in the abstract, or sole y by reference to the "facts"; it urns instead on posit ve law. Many sta utes and regulations now require the disclosure or even the growing out of laws involving health, safety, and the nvironment-is a post-1960s phenomenon. Mandatory disclosure was a central part of the 
24See the discussion of informational strategies in ROBERT V. PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND POLICY 612-27 (2d ed. 1996). 
Consider the eco-label required by the European Union. See Council Regulation general y Kleindorfer & Orts, supra note 4. contain sac harin.29 There are numerous other il ustrations, but several post-1980 in tiatives are special y strik ng and es rve brief description by way of il ustration and for purpose of understanding the standing question. 
In 1983, the Oc upational Safety and Health Admin stration ("OSHA") is ued a Haz rd Com unication Standard ("HCS"), ap licable to the manufacturing sector.30 In 1986, the HCS was made general y ap licable.31 Under the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the haz rds of the chemicals they produce or import; develop technical haz rd information for material safety dat she ts, and labels for haz rdous ubstances; and, most importantly, transmit his information to users of the rel vant substances. Al employers must adopt a haz rd com unication program-one that includes indiv dual train g-and inform workers of the rel vant risks.32 tious et of proposals, the FDA required a form of disclosure that af ected nearly al fo d and rink purchased in the United Sta es. The FDA (1) compel ed nutrit onal abeling on nearly al proces ed fo ds, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (2) required compliance with government-specif ed serving sizes; (3) compel ed companies to conform to government defin tions of standardized terms, including, "reduced," fresh," fre ," and "low"; and (4) al owed health claims only if the claims (a) are sup orted by scientif c evidence and (b) com unicate clear and complet information about such mat ers as fat and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blo d pres ure, and calcium and osteoporosi .3 
Act (TSCA) ; 40 C.F R. ? 156.10 (19 8) (detail ng EPA regulations requir ng warni g labels on pestic des promulgated under the Federal Insectic de, Fungic de and Rodentic de Act (FI RA) . standard requir ng that he swe tener cause cancer in laboratory animals). 
29 Se 21 U.S C. ? 343(o) (19 4) (requir ng a warni g on products contain g sac harin 30 Se Haz rd Com unication, 29 C.F R. ? 1910.120 (19 8). OSHA promulgated a al chemical manufacturers and importers to as es the haz rds of chemicals which they produce or import, and al employers having workplaces in the manufacturing div sion, . to provide information to their employe s concerni g haz rdous chemicals by means of haz rd com unication programs including labels, material safety dat she ts, train g, and ac es to writ en records. 
Id. programs."). 
31 Se 52 Fed. Reg. 31,852 (1987) (expanding the scope of the HCS to "cover al em32 Se id. ("Expansion of the scope of the HCS requires non-manufacturing employers to ployers with employe s exposed to haz rdous chemicals in their workplaces"). establish haz rd com unication programs to transmit information on the haz rds of chemicals to their employe s by means of labels on containers, material safety dat she ts, and train g 3 Se 58 Fed. Reg. 2,927 (19 3). 
A great deal of rec nt at ention has be n given to informational regulation in the particular context of the com unications industry. As an alterpose of disclosure is principal y to trig er polit cal safeguards coming from the government's own judgments or from external pres ure.41 Hence, any governmental indif erence to adverse nvironmental ef ects is perfectly acceptable under NEPA. The idea behind the sta ute is that if the public is concerned, then the government wil have to give some weight o environmental ef ects. 
In 1986, Congres enacted an ambit ous ta ute, the Emergency Planni g and Com unity Right- o-Know Act ("EPCRA").42 Under this ta ute, firms and indiv duals must report o sta e and local governments the quantities of potential y haz rdous chemicals that have be n stored or el ased into the nvironment. Users of such chemicals must report o their local fire departments the location, types, and quanti es of stored chemicals. They must also give information about potential adverse health ef ects. On the basi of the rel vant results, the EPA publishes pol ution dat about he release of over 30 chemicals from over 20, 0 facil ties.43 This has be n an exceptional suc es story, one that has wel exce ded the xpecta ions at he time of the sta ute's enactment.4 A detailed report by the General Accounting Of ice sug est that EPCRA has had important benefic al ef ects, spur ing in ovative, cost-ef ective programs from the EPA and from sta e and local governments.45 into this general category. The Animal Welfare Act is designed partly to ensure public ty about he treatment of animals; thus covered laboratories are required to file reports with the government about heir conduct,46 with the ap arent hought hat he reports wil det r noncompliance and also allow continual monitoring. In ad it on to its various com and-and-control provis ons, the Clean Air Act requires companies to create and isclose "risk management plans" involving ac idental rel ase of chemicals, which 
Many other sta utes involving health, safety, and the nvironment fal the only role for a court is to insure that he agency has considered the nvironmental conseabil ty of information . would enable the public to put substantial pres ure on companies to quences"). the action"). reduce mis ions."). [hereinafter GAO Report]. 
41 Se id. (noting that NEPA is an "area of discretion of the xecutive as to the choice of 42 42 U.S C. ? 1 ,0 1-50 (19 4); se also supra note 5 and ac ompanying text. 43 Se HAMILTON, supra note 34, at 302 (sta ing thes figures for EPA pol ution dat ). 4 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 624, 626 ("Congres antic pated that he avail45 Se General Ac ounting Of ice, Toxic Chemicals, Report o the Congres (19 1) 46 Animal Welfare Act, 7 U.S C. ? 2131-59 (19 4). must include a worst case scenario.47 The Safe Drinking Water Act was amended in 19 6 to require an ual "consumer confidence reports" to be developed and is eminated by com unity water sup liers.48 Sta utes governi g mortgages, crime, discrimination, sexual violence, and medical care also se m partly com it ed to the idea that "sunlight is . the best of dis nfectants";49 thus, they require covered insti utions to compile reports about their conduct and compliance with ap licable law.50 As noted, FECA requires polit cal com it e s to disclose a great deal of information about their activ ties. In the same category is a proposed code for tel vis on broadcasters, designed partly to ensure public ty about he public service activ ties of various ta ions. Its goal is to ensure more in the way of such activ ties indirectly, and simply by virtue of the fact hat here wil be a public ac ounting.51 
42 U.S C. ? 7412(r) (19 4). 48 42 U.S C. ? 30 g-3(c)(4) (19 4). 
The phrase comes from LOUIS D. BRANDEIS, OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY AND HOW THE 50 Se , e.g , Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (HMDA), 12 U.S C. ? 2801- 0 BANKERS USE IT 62 (Torchbo k ed. 1967). (19 4) (requir ng banks to maintain records of where they make mortgage loans and to make such records available to the public); Com unity Reinvestment Act of 197 (CRA), 12 U.S C. ? 2901-07 (19 4) (subjecting banks to detailed reporting requirements and rating the banks based on the xtent o which they serve their com unity); Crime Awarenes and Campus Security Act of 19 0 ? 204(a), 20 U.S C. ? 1092(f)(1)-(6) (19 4) (requir ng that col eges develop olic es to encourage the prompt reporting of crimes to police and col ege of ic als); Higher Education Amendments of 19 2 ? 486(c)(1)-(2), 20 U.S C. ? 1092(f)(1)(F), (f)(7) (19 4) (requir ng that col eges compile and report sta istics on listed crimes including sexual as ault, and requir ng that col eges promulgate and enforce polic es against sexual as ault); Federal Water Pol ution Control Act, 3 U.S C. ? 1319, 1342, 1369 (19 4) (requir ng permit holders to sample their discharges and then submit he results in the form of dischargemonitoring reports ("DMRs") to the proper authority; thes DMRs are made available to the 
It is increasingly recognized that information is often a far les expensive and more f ic ent strategy than com and-and-control, which consi ts of rig d mandates about regulatory ends (a certain percentage reduction in sulfur dioxide, for example), regulatory means (a technol gical mandate for cars, for example), or both.54 A chief advantage of informational regulation is its compar tive flexib lity. If consumers are informed of the salt or sugar content of o ds, they can proce d as they wish, trading of various product char cteristics however they se fit. If workers are given information about the risks posed by their workplace, then they can trade safety against other pos ible variables (such as al ry, investments for children or etirement, and leisure).5 From the standpoint of ef ic ency, information remedies can be bet er than either com and-and-control regulation or eliance on unregulated markets alone. substantial advantages. A wel -functioni g system of deliberative democracy requires a certain degre of information, so that cit zens can engage in their monitoring and eliberative tasks. Subject as they are to parochial pres ures, segments of the government may have insuf ic ent incentives to disclose information on their own; consider FOIA or FECA, where the selfinterest of the government or private groups may pres in the direction of to lit le disclosure. A go d way to enable cit zens to verse government action and also to as es the ne d for les , more, or dif erent regulation, is to inform them of both private and public activ ty. The very fact hat he public wil be in a posit on to engage in general monitoring may wel spur desirable outcomes. largely unantic pated reductions in toxic rel ase have come about without anything in the way of direct regulation.56 This ap roach ap ears to be emerging as the wave of the future.57 In the area of broadcasting, it is possible to hope that disclosure of public interest program ing, and the mere ne d to compile the information each year, wil increase ducational and public af airs program ing without involving overnment mandates at al .58 
Se BREYER, supra note 4, at 161-64 (analyzing disclosure as an alternative regulatory regime); OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-49 (explaining the les interventionist strategy of infor5 Se CAS R. SUNSTEIN, FRE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 327-28 (19 7) (dismation regulation). cus ing ef ic ency and information). increase ducational program ing). 
56 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 612-16 (discus ing the f ica y of informational ap roaches to toxic substance regulation). 
A primary virtue of informational regulation is that it rig ers polit cal safeguards and al ows cit zens a continuing oversight role-one that is, in the best case , largely self-enforcing. 
Consider, for example, the fact hat he government estimated the cost Under imaginable as umptions uch regulation wil be inferior to com andand-control regulation and to reliance on markets unac ompanied by disclosure requirements. There are two problems with informational strategies. 
First, provid ng information may be xpensive, sometimes costing more than it is worth. Second, the provis on of information is ometimes ineffectual, or even counterproductive. of the FDA disclosure rules as "$1.7 bil ion over twenty years."59 The president of the National Fo d Proces ors As ociation claimed that he firstyear cost alone would exce d $2 bil ion.60 In either case, the cost is ignif cant, and an important question is what improvements-in terms of reduced mortality or morbid ty-are produced in return. OSHA's haz rd com unication policy is estimated to save 20 lives per year-a large number-but at an an ual cost of $360 mil ion.61 The xpenditure per life saved is therefore $1.8 mil ion. This is far bet er than a large number of regulations, and is probably an amount wel worth spending; but it is more than many agencies pend for life-saving regulations.62 The OSHA rule does not stand out as a means of saving lives especial y cheaply.63 (Of course there 
59 Nancy Ryan & Linda M. Har ington, FDA Of ers New Rules on Fo d Labels, Claims, CHI. TRIB., Nov. 7, 19 1, at 2. 
60 Se id. 
61 Thes figures come from John F. Mor al I , A Review of the Record, 10 REGULATION 25, 30 (Nov./Dec. 1986), which was crit cized in Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Cost of Mythic Proportions, 107 YALE L.J 1981, 19 9-20 0 (19 8). 
FOR RISK 264 (19 2). 
62 Se W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOF S: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIB LIT ES 63 When informational strategies are costly, there are two pos ible response from the government. The first is to do nothing. If the savings-in terms of health, life, and informed choice-are relatively low, then costly strategies, even informational ones, make lit le sense. There wil , therefore, be circumstances in which a government remedy for an absence of information is unwar anted. 
The second pos ib lity is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure. By a regulatory strategy I mean a mandatory outcome, such as a flat ban on the materials in question, or governmental specif cation of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum level of carcinogens in the workplace. Sometimes the regulatory strategy wil be cheaper because the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is o high. This is likely to be the right response when most or al people would respond to the information in the same way. In that case, it is un ec s ary to provide information, and bet er simply to dic 
For example, California's Proposit on 65, an in tiative designed to proare likely to be large morbid ty and other gains that are not captured in the "lives aved" number.) they may be inef ectual and thus have low benefits; they may even be counterproductive. This is o for various reasons, and here a great deal more work remains to be done. People have a limited abil ty to proces information.64 They have a notoriously dif icult ime thinking about lowprobabil ty events. Sometimes people discount such events to zero; sometimes they treat hem as much more dangerous than they actual y are. If people are told, for example, that a certain substance cause cancer, then they may think that it is far more dangerous than it is in fact.6 But some carcinogenic substances pose lit le risk of cancer. There is also a pervasive risk of "al rmist bias," as frighteni g information is more salient and potent than comforting information, regardles of what is true. mote cit zen awarenes of risk levels, requires warni gs for exposure to carcinogens.67 At first glance, the requirement se ms entirely unexceptionable, inde d an important advance. But it has in some ways be n counterproductive. Consumers ap ear to think that welve of every 10 users of a product with the required warni g wil die from cancer, an estimate that exce ds reality by a factor of 10 0 or more.68 With respect o information, les may be more. If information is not provided in a clear and usable form, it may actual y make people les knowledgeable than they were before, producing over eactions, or under eactions, based on an abil ty to understand what he information actual y means. People also face a pervasive risk of "information overload," causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as ta e an outcome that, by hypothesi , is general y or almost universal y prefer ed. For an especial y dangerous ubstance, one that reasonable people would cho se not o encounter, a flat ban is ap ropriate. enough"). et al. eds., 1982); Christine Jol s et al., A Behavioral Ap roach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 153 -37 (19 8) (discus ing how simply provid ng information "is not 64 Se JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES (Daniel Kahneman Se W. KIP ViscusI, PRODUCT-RISK LABELING: A FEDERAL RESPONSIB LITY 1 -16 (19 3) (analyzing the results of California's Proposit on 65); W. KIP VISCUSI, RATIONAL RISK POLICY 5 (19 8) (sug esting that "[i]ndiv dual risk perceptions are often in er or"). 1657, 16 6- 7 (19 7) ("[T]he fear of the worst case scenario rec ives greater weight han 6 Se W. Kip Viscusi, Alarmist Decis ons with Divergent Risk Information, 107 ECON. J. does the low risk as es ment."). the information problem). 
67 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 616-21 (describ ng California's ap roach to 68 Se W. Kip Viscusi, Predicting the Ef ects of Fo d Cancer Risk Warni gs on Consumers, 43 FO D DRUG COSM. L.J 283, 28 (198 ) (finding that "indiv duals have a dif icult time in proces ing refined istinctions betwe n very min scule probabil ties"). With respect o industry response , companies may respond to certain equivalent o no information at al .69 Certainly this is true when disclosure campaigns are fil ed with details that can ot be proces ed easily. disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at al (if this is an available option). The result wil be the removal from the market of information that is useful overal . If industry responds to a requirement of evidentiary sup ort for scientif c laims with mere "puf ing," then consumers may have les information than they di to begin with. If advertisers must conduct extensive test before they are permit ed to make claims, then they wil be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at al .70 
There is a further problem: optimistic bias.71 People often believe themselves to be im une from risks that hey acknowledge are signif cant and real with respect o thers. About 90% of people believe that hey are above-average drivers, les likely than others to be involved in automobile ac idents.72 In one study, 97% of those surveyed ranked themselves as average or above average in their abil ty to avoid both bicycle and power mower ac idents.73 If most people think that he information does not ap ly to them, disclosure requirements may have lit le f ect. people who are undereducated, elderly, or po r. If this is o, the disadvantaged may continue to face the risks that informational disclosure strategies are aimed to counteract (at least if market forces fail to induce general changes from producers).74 And when risks are placed on outsiders who are 
HEALTHY MIND 10-1 (19 3). 
69 Se Jacob Jacoby et al., Cor ective Advertis ng and Af irmative Disclosure Sta ements: Their Potential for Confusing and Misleading the Consumer, 46 J. MARKETING 61, 70 (1982) (describ ng how the language used in remedial sta ements designed to cor ect misleading advertis ng mes ages may be more confusing to the consumer than the advertis ng mes age it70 Se Richard Craswel , Interpreting Dec ptive Advertis ng, 65 B.U. L. REV. 658, 71971 Se Christine Jol s et al., A Behavioral Ap roach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. 25 (1985) (noting the various incentives that sel ers have to not disclose useful information). REV. 1471, 1524-27 (19 8) (describ ng optimistic bias as "[a] com on feature of human behavior" where "[p]eople tend to think that bad events are far les likely to hap en to them than 72 Se SHEL EY E. TAYLOR, POSIT VE IL USIONS: CREATIVE SELF-DECEPTION AND THE 73 Se id. at 1 6. 
74 Se George W. Schucker et al., The Impact of the Sac harin Warni g Label on Sales of Diet Soft Drinks in Supermarkets, 2 J. PUB. POL'Y & MARKETING 46, 54-56 (1983) (finding no change in diet soft drink sales in po r, undereducated areas after the FDA ad ed warni g Thes points hould be taken as cautionary notes, and not as ug esnot in a contractual relationship with the wrongdoer,75 information may do lit le go d, because the outsiders are not in a posit on to extract a higher In ad it on, both private and public agencies may have an incentive not some help. The incentive not o disclose takes multiple forms. People may not want o disclose because of the she r economic burden of doing so in the first instance. It can be quite costly to compile and is eminate the rel vant reports. Consider the large xpense involved in producing an EIS,79 as wel as other paperwork requirements that may impose substantial burdens.80 to disclose because of the qualita ively diverse problems, and cost , that may fol ow disclosure. The market may wel punish bad news via decreased sales or (perhaps in consequence) decreased stock prices; the punishment may be mild, optimal, or exces ive and al rmist,81 and it can be hard to predict in advance. A cereal company that disclose the nutrit onal content of its fo ds may find itself with much fewer purchasers; a company that disclose workplace risks may have to increase wages or cut back production. An agency and af ected evelopers may resi t compil ng an EIS because once the sta ement is made public, the project itself wil be in jeopardy. The perception of jeopardy may impose costly delays and eventual y development may be blocked entirely-a far from uncom on result of the EIS proces .82 So to , a polit cal organization that disclose its financial backers may find itself ar les influential. 
Thes incentives not o disclose may be special y hard to counteract in light of the fact hat information is often a public go d.83 As noted above, the benefits of disclosure are often obtained by many people, whereas the cost of ensuring disclosure are borne (at least in the short run) by one or a few. In thes circumstances, it is pos ible that with market ordering, or even a law on the bo ks, few or none wil bother to take the nec s ary steps-economic, polit cal, or otherwise-to counteract he unlawful withholding of information. Thus, the conomic and polit cal markets may underproduce disclosure, even in the face of a law that mandates it. 
WIL IAM RODGERS, ENVIRONMENTAL AW 806 (19 4). 3501-20 (19 4 & Sup . I 19 6), was a clear esponse to perceived expense . 
79 Mil ions of dol ars are ap ropriated each year for federal oversight alone. Se 80 Hard at are dif icult o find, but he Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 4 U.S C. ? 81 There is a real pos ib lity of an al rmist reaction, producing exces ive punishment; al rmist information is especial y salient and hence memorable, and people might read nonal rmist information in an al rming way. Se Timur Kuran & Cas R. Sunstein, Availabil ty Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming Apr. 19 9); Viscusi, supra note 6 , at 16 8 (concluding that people overvalue risk, over eact o highly public zed risks, and "place considerable weight on the risk information provided to them"). ap roach). 
OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-26 (same). 
82 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 1060-65 (discus ing the adequacy of the EIS 83 Se BREYER, supra note 4, at 26 (discus ing the public go d aspects of information); 
Congres may of er a broad grant of standing-perhaps even to cit zens general y-so as to counteract he rel vant incentives. The hope is that some plaintif , whether altruistic or self-interested, wil take steps to ensure the availabil ty of information. FOIA is the most obvious example. The grant of the power to btain information, and to lit gate, to "any person"84 operates to inform agencies that here wil be ready judic al review of any denial of a FOIA request, a factor that should make agencies les likely to engage in unlawful denials. In any case, such denials can and often wil be cor ected if they are unlawful. Or Congres may decide that cit zens general y can bring suit against he FEC to ensure compliance with federal campaign laws, believing that his mechanism wil det r violations of a law central to the lectoral proces . A general grant of standing may help to remedy the problems created by the rel vant incentives and the public-go d char cter of information, for there may be someone, out of a large group of potential benefic aries, who is wil ing to bear the cost of a lawsuit. As we shal se , Akins itself is a prime xample.85 idea. Lawsuits can be xpensive; they also can be diversionary and even frivol us. With respect o information, a grant of standing to al cit zens may divert an agency from its prefer ed course of action and can make sensible priority-set ing extremely dif icult. It even may involve a kind of private conscription of public resources86 in a way that undermines a ful y democratic ef ort, by the agency involved, to al ocate its limited resources to the most serious problems. If al cit zens can bring suit against he FEC to require it o regulate al groups that any cit zen would like to se treated as "polit cal com it e s," then the FEC may have to spend al of its time defending itself in court. If any agency defin tion of "animals" can prompt a federal action by some cit zen asking the government o expand its defin tion,87 the government may have fewer esources to enforce the Animal Welfare Act. Alternatively, the mere risk of a cit zen suit may lead the agency to an outcome that it believes is undesirable, and that perhaps is, in 
After Akins, there are, with respect o information, many easy case . If 
Congres granted standing to cit zens in general to se k information and information has be n with eld, cit zens in general can bring suit. Certainly this is clear if the information bears directly on their behavior as voters. It se ms equal y clear if the information bears directly on the plaintif s' activ ties in their indiv dual or organizational capacit es. Sup ose, for example, that an indiv dual or insti ution is interested in obtain g information relating to enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act, and that indiv dual or organization has a demonstrable interest in the protection of animals from suf ering. In such case , standing is clearly available. se king information invokes no interest expres ly related to the polit cal proces and when that indiv dual or insti ution can ot show that he information would relate to rel vant activ ties on his or its part. The strongest argument for denying standing would be that he plaintif has a purely ideol gical interest, or an interest in law enforcement for its own sake. Sup ose, for example, that an ordinary, relatively young cit zen is e king information about compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. Sup ose the cit zen se ks this information simply because she is curious, or because she general y wants to make sure that he government is enforcing the law. It is pos ible to argue that Akins does not cover this case. As ta ed, the plaintif has no particular interest as a cit zen, and she can ot con ect he denial of information to any tangible activ ty independent of the lawsuit. Thus, there is a plausible basi for denying standing even in light of the outcome in Akins. 
of standing in a case of this kind would probably be consti utional after Akins. (If there is no such grant, then standing should probably be denied on prudential grounds.)18 The first point is analogical and involves FOIA. Under FOIA, anyone can bring suit o btain any information that FOIA requires to be made public.189 The plaintif ne d not show an interest in using the information for anything in particular; simple curiosity is enough. The denial of the information is the injury in fact. No court has held this provision unconsti utional. It is hard to distinguish the countles imaginable FOIA case from the hypothesized case. 
189 See 5 U.S.C. ? 552 (1994) (stating that agency rules, opinions, orders, records, and proce dings are public information). 
sued a nar ow ruling, saying that when cit zens bring suit o btain information directly involving the polit cal proces , there is no consti utional obstacle to a congres ional grant of standing. As noted, there is ome language in Akins emphasiz ng that he case itself involved voting, "the most basic of polit cal rights,"190 and it would be pos ible to seize on this language to confine the opin on's reach. A nar ow understanding of this kind, however, would not be consi tent with the spir t of the decis on, for the Court spoke far more general y about Congres 's creation of a legal right o information and its grant of a right o bring suit o vindicate that interest. The remark about "the most basic of polit cal rights" was in the nature of an exclamation point, and not in any sense central to the Court's reasoni g. guish betwe n cit zens e king information directly bearing on the polit cal proces and cit zens e king other kinds of information. If the question is whether the plaintif has uf ered injury in fact, then why would that line be ap ropriate? At best, such a line would invite strategic behavior and ingenious pleading; almost any information can plausibly be char cterized as bearing on voting behavior. In the hypothesized case, for example, the plaintif could contend, at least as plausibly as the cit zens in Akins, that he rel vant information would bear on her decis on about how to vote, and in what kinds of polit cal activ ty to engage. Put ing the risk of strategic behavior to ne side, nothing in Article I sup orts the view that Congres may create cit zen standing in case involving denial of information bearing on the right o vote, but may not do so when voting is not at stake. Article I requires a legal right-if Congres has created a legal right o information, that requirement is atisfied. 
I conclude that after Akins, the injury in fact est is not a bar ier to explic t congres ional grants of standing to cit zens e king information to which they have a legal right. The real dif iculties lie lsewhere; they have to do with redres abil ty and with congres ional instructions. 
Sup ose that he government or some private nti y refused to disclose information, or sup ose that he government failed to require disclosure of information by some third party, either public or private. Sup ose, to , that the nondisclosure is unlawful. If a plaintif sues to btain the information, there is injury in fact, and the plaintif me ts the redres abil ty requirements under Akins. Now instead sup ose that he information has be n disclosed 190 Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1786. after the fil ng of the complaint but before the judgment, and that he plaintif se ks declar tory relief or the imposit on of monetary penalties. The problem is far from hypothetical. Congres sometimes al ows plaintif s to impose financial burdens on both those who have failed to disclose information191 and pol uters (and others) who sometimes disclose information only after a lawsuit has be n threatened or insti uted. Is there a standing problem? would go directly to the plaintif . If a plaintif stands to rec ive compensation for information unlawful y with eld, then the case is akin to many conventional case in which a plaintif se ks damages for il egality, and there is no standing question at al . If the plaintif stands to rec ive a "penalty" not repres nting compensation but aking the form of a bounty, then the problem is a lit le harder, but here should be no problem here ither. A potential award of a penalty or a bounty would make the case akin to several old prerogative writs, such as quo war anto, informer's actions, and qui tam actions.192 In Lujan, the Court sug ested that a grant of a bounty to the cit zen-plaintif s would solve the consti utional dif iculty,193 and there is upport for this idea in the qui tam action, as ug ested by early congres ional practice and in several Supreme Court decis ons.194 al ; sup ose that he plaintif is enti led only to a declar tory judgment, with ap ropriate fines going to the U.S Treasury. In a case of this kind, the Court rec ntly held that here can be no informational standing. Ste l Co. v. Cit zens for a Bet er Environment involved a complaint, by a public interest organization, that Ste l Company failed to disclose its toxic rel ase , in 
191 Se EPCRA, 42 U.S C. ? 1 045(c) (19 4) (imposing civ l and admin strative penal192 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 168-79 (describ ng the history of standing in the 193 Se Lujan v. Defenders of Wild ife, 504 U.S 5 5, 572-73 (19 2) (distinguishing Luties for fail ng to me t he reporting requirements of EPCRA). 
English and American systems). for the victorious plaintif '). jan from the simple case where standing exist because Congres has provided "a cash bounty 194 Se , e.g , Act of May 19, 1796, ch. 30, ? 18, 1 Sta . 469, 474 (awarding private cit zens bounties for informing the U.S government of violations of the Act); Act of Mar. 2 , 1794, ch. 1 , ? 4, 1 Sta . 347, 349 (of ering a bounty to persons who prosecute violations of the Act); Act of Feb. 20, 1792, ch. 7, ? 25, 1 Sta . 232, 235 (granting one half of the penalties col ected to the person "informing and prosecuting" the violation); Act of March 3, 1791, ch. 15, ? 4 , 1 Sta . 19 , 209 (provid ng one half of al penalit es col ected for violation of the Act to the person who discovers the violation); United Sta es ex rel. Marcus v. Hes , 317 U.S 537, 541 n.4 (1943) (sup orting the Court's as ertion that "[q]ui tam suits have be n frequently permit ed by legislative action"); Marvin v. Trout, 19 U.S 212, 2 5 (1905) (as erting the standing of the plaintif s to sue in qui tam actions). 
plain violation of EPCRA.195 Al sides agre d that Ste l Company had not done what it was legal y obliged to do. So n after Cit zens for a Bet er Environment sent Ste l Company a sta utory notice of intent o sue, however, the company filed the overdue forms and isclosed the rel vant information. The plaintif claimed that he sta ute nti led it o various kinds of "ap ropriate" relief: a declar tory judgment hat he company violated EPCRA, civ l fines (of $25,0 0 per day) that would be paid to the government, an award of cost , and an order equir ng the company to provide them with copies of al compliance reports ubmit ed to the EPA.196 whether "being deprived of information that is up osed to be disclosed under EPCRA-or at least being deprived of it when one has a particular plan for its use-is a concret injury in fact hat satisfies Article I ."197 (Akins answers that question af irmatively, though without he ap roval of Justice Scalia, who wrote the opin on in Ste l Co.) Instead the Court simply concluded that he plaintif could not me t he requirements for edres abil ty. If the plaintif won, how, exactly, would its injury be remedied? The Court explained that "[n]one of the specif c items of relief sought, and none that we can envis on as 'ap ropriate' under the general request, would serve to reimburse respondent for los es caused by the late reporting, or to eliminate any ef ects of that late reporting upon respondent."198 The result might have be n dif erent if the civ l penalties could be "viewed as a sort of compensation or edres to" the plaintif , but he fact hat he penalties would go to the Treasury sug ested that he plaintif instead sought "not remediation of its own injury. . but vindication of the rule of law."19 formational standing: a plaintif must show not only that here has be n a deprivation of information, but also that he plaintif stands to gain something from a decre in its favor. To be sure, it is reasonable to doubt he Court's decis on, which was, on the consti utional is ue, quite cavalier.20 As a mat er of irst principles, or as a mat er of consti utional text and history, why is Congres prohib ted from concluding that cit zens who have suf ered an injury should be al owed to require violators of the law to pay ap ropriate penalties to the government? The history sug est a far broader Ste l Co. is important because it sug est a signif cant obstacle to in195 1 8 S. Ct. 10 3 (19 8). 198 Id. 19 Id. 
20 Se id. at 1027-30 (Stevens, J., concur ing) (noting the Court's ubstantial departure from its previous treatment of case without redres abil ty). The outcome in Ste l Co. was presaged by an intriguing court of apunderstanding of legislative power.201 Nonethel s , Ste l Co. is consi tent with the thrust of the Court's rec nt redres abil ty holdings. It hus ug est that a plaintif se king information must show that if the suit is uc es ful, the plaintif wil rec ive something for its trouble. If the plaintif would receive the information, there is no problem. There is also probably no problem if the plaintif would rec ive compensation or a bounty. If, however, the plaintif stands to gain nothing else, standing wil be denied. peals case rais ng a similar problem of informational standing in a quite different set ing. In Com on Cause v. FEC, the court of ap eals rej cted a claim of standing on behalf of the plaintif , a wel -known organization interested in campaign finance is ues.202 Com on Cause al eged that in the 198 Senate lection in Montana, the Montana Republican Party and the National Republican Senatorial Com it e had violated federal campaign el ction law by making exces ive contributions and expenditures and by fail ng to ac urately report hes contributions. The lat er claim sug ested an interest in obtain g information. In denying standing, the court said that the mere fact of deprivation of knowledge as to whether there had be n a violation of the law could not, by itself, create standing; this, ac ording to the court, would be quivalent "to recogniz ng a justic able interest in the enforcement of the law."203 But if Com on Cause was "as erting an interest in knowing how much money a candi ate spent in an el ction," then it would have standing to protect hat "legal y cognizable injury in fact."204 (This point is very much in line with the conclusion in Akins.) of monetary penalties, rather than disclosure itself. Thus, a central problem for standing was that he monetary penalties would not benefit Com on Cause at al . Concur ing, Judge Sentel e stres ed this point and its con ection to the problem of redres abil ty. In his view, the imposit on of monetary penalties would only speculatively produce future compliance with the law-penalties themselves would not redres any injury.205 But Judge Sen201 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-74 (discus ing the sug estion of a historical survey that "the public action-an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the public enforcement of public obligations-has long be n a feature of our English and American law" (cita ion and internal quota ions omit ed) . 204 Id. 
205 Se id. at 419 (Sentel e, J., concur ing) ("If the injury al eged were the cognizable deprivation of information upheld in Akins, admin strative discipline of the al eged wrongdoers would not remedy that injury.") We may thus draw several conclusions. There is no problem with retel e also acknowledged that he "redres abil ty requirement can be satisfied by requesting that he wrongful y with eld information be disclosed."206 dres abil ty if the plaintif se ks to btain information, compensation for information with eld, or (though this is les clear) a bounty for information with eld. But a problem of redres abil ty wil arise if Congres grants cit zens tanding to se k declar tory judgments, at orney's fe s, or penalties to be paid to the Treasury for information with eld. If Congres wants to allow standing in case like Ste l Co. and Com on Cause, then it should amend the rel vant sta utes to provide a financial benefit not only to the Treasury, but also to the plaintif s, in the form, perhaps, of ixed or scheduled compensation for information with eld, and also (or instead) a smal bounty for the trouble of bringing suit. This would be asy to do. Although the question is not entirely set led, a sta ute of this kind probably would,207 and certainly should,208 be upheld. granted standing to the plaintif s. But many informational standing case involve the APA, and therefore involve ambiguity about he is ue of standing. The APA grants tanding to any "person suf ering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely af ected or ag rieved by agency action within the meani g of a rel vant sta ute."209 What does this provis on mean in the context of a request for information? Here there is a question of sta utory interpreta ion; and recal that he Akins Court sug ested that here remains a prudential bar ier to "generalized grievance[s]."210 Thus there is a further question about how prudential bar iers are to be understo d when people se k to btain information from government or private persons. series of case in the D.C Circuit Court of Ap eals. The basic sug estion in thes case is that if the governi g sta ute is ambiguous, then standing wil be denied in informational case where the plaintif is one of a very large group of people. The denial is based on prudential rather than Article 
C. Generalized Grievances Within the Zone? 206 Id. at 420 (Sentel e, J., concur ing). 207 Se supra note 194 (provid ng sta utory and case sup ort for such a bounty system). 
208 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-79, 232 (discus ing the historical sup ort for, and the substantial merits of, a bounty system). 
209 5 U.S.C. ? 702 (1994). 210 Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1785 (1998). cho se . The question is whether, and to what extent, this line of argument makes ense in general or after Akins in particular. To answer this question it is nec s ary to investigate the case in some detail. 
principal y involve informational standing. In Hait an Refuge Center v. 
Gracey, the plaintif organization claimed that it had an interest in counseling and repres nting Hait ans who had be n interdicted from entering the United Sta es.21 The court concluded that his interest was not within the zone of rights created by the rel vant laws, and therefore, that he plaintif lacked standing to protect he rel vant rights.212 This conclusion ap lied to the plaintif s particular claim that it should have be n al owed to rec ive pertinent information from the interdicted Hait ans: 
If any person or organization interested in promoting knowledge, enjoyment, and protection of the rights created by a sta ute or by a consti utional provis on has an interest hat fal s within the zone protected or egulated by the sta ute or consti utional provis on, then the zone-of-interest est is not a test because it excludes nothing.213 The court insi ted in particular that he zone of interest test should be 
In the first case using this kind of reasoni g to deny informational read in the light of the ban on standing based on a "generalized grievance";214 if a plaintif claiming to be within the zone was a member of a large clas , then standing should be denied. This was of course not a "pure" information case, since it di not involve a sta ute that required isclosure of information. But it has turned out o be quite important in such case . standing, the D.C Circuit Court of Ap eals refused to al ow the Haz rdous Waste Treatment Council to as ert an unambiguous informational injury.215 The Council sought o sue on the ground that regulated third parties were exempted from certain sta utory reporting requirements under a haz rdous waste sta ute.216 The Council claimed that he xemption would make it harder for the Council to advance its "educational and promotional activ ties."217 In denying standing, the court di not deny that here was an injury in fact. Instead it said that he Council's goals di not fal within the rel 212 Se id. at 813-16 (examin g the zone of interest that is created by the rel vant laws). 21 809 F.2d 794 (D.C Cir. 1987). 
214 Id. (cit ng Schlesinger v. Res rvist Com . to Stop the War, 418 U.S 208 (1974), and United Sta es v. Richardson, 418 U.S 16 (1974) . (holding that a plaintif can ot at ain standing for a generalized grievance simply by forming an organization that has as its goal furtherance of the interest at he heart of the grievance). 217 Id. at 286-87. 
215 See Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 287 (D.C. Cir. 1988) vant sta ute's zone of interest , beyond a "general coincidence of goals."218 In so concluding, the court implied that it would read the prudential bar ier in light of the ad it onal prudential bar ier that operated against generalized grievances.219 Thus the court sug ested that he two prudential bar iers would have a kind of synergy, preventing members of large clas es from claiming information unles there was a clear indication that Congres intended them to be able to do so. 
Espy.2 0 In that case, the Animal Legal Defense Fund and the Humane Society of the United Sta es chal enged the government's relatively nar ow defin tion of "animal" for purpose of the Animal Welfare Act.2 1 More specif cal y, they complained that "the xclusion of birds, rats, and mice from the defin tion of 'animal' [would] hamper[] their at empts to gather and is eminate information on laboratory condit ons for those animals."2 2 A broader defin tion would require laboratories to provide more information about heir treatment of animals to the government, which would mean that such information would be included in an an ual report o Congres . The rel vant organizations contended that hey would use this report in "public education and rulemaking proce dings."2 3 In ad it on, the nar ow defin tion of "animal" would make it harder for the organizations to educate the laboratories about "the humane treatments of birds, rats, and mice."2 4 The Animal Legal Defense Fund thus urged that it had standing to ensure that the information was disclosed, especial y because the information would be central to its activ ties. fal within the zone of interest of the sta ute under which suit is brought."2 5 The key point was that he Animal Legal Defense Fund was not at empting to promote its members' own legal rights, but "simply to educate al those who desire to promote the sta ute's ubstantive pur 
The court concluded that "informational injury, without more, does not 218 Id. at 287. 
219 Se id. (arguing that if any organization could secure standing by showing a general coincidence of goals with a sta ute, anyone could secure standing to chal enge any action taken by the agency implementing that sta ute). 
F.3d 426 (D.C Cir. 19 8) (finding standing for someone claiming an aesthetic interest in observing animals). 
2 4 Id. 225 Id. at 502. 220 23 F.3d 496 (D.C. Cir. 1994); cf Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 pose ."2 6 To have informational standing under the zone of interest test, an organization must show far more than a "general corporate purpose to promote the interest to which the sta ute is ad res ed . [I]t must show a congres ional intent o benefit he organization or some indication that he organization is 'a peculiarly suitable chal enger of admin strative neglect.'"2 7 Here, an unusual provis on of the sta ute itself prohib ted any such showing. The Animal Welfare Act creates an oversight com it e consi ting of private cit zens designed to ensure compliance with the Act.2 8 In the court's view, "on the face of the Act he organizations are not he intended repres nta ives of the public interest in animal welfare."2 9 an important case in which organizations were held to have fulfil ed the prudential requirements for informational standing. In Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens v. Heckler,230 the court permit ed a senior cit zens' group to chal enge regulations that restricted the flow of reports from third parties involving compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. The Action Al iance contended that hes regulations would interfere with its basic mis ion. 
The court agre d, noting that he regulations would make it harder for the plaintif organization to help elderly people now and to protect heir legal interest in the future.231 In the court's view, this injury was wel within the sta ute's zone of interest . The distinction betwe n Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens and Espy is thin. The best argument would stres the xistence of a special private insti ution designed to ensure compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, but it is far from clear that his is a convincing distinc 
tion.232 Cir. 198 ) . 
To what extent must an organization se king information con ect its interest o the substantive purpose of the sta ute? This question was not 2 6 Id. 227 Id. (quoting Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 283 (D.C. 228 See 7 U.S.C. ? 2143 (1994) (discussing the "standards and certification process for 229 Espy, 23 F.3d at 503. 
230 789 F.2d 931 (D.C. Cir. 1986), vacated on other grounds, 494 U.S. 1001 (1990). humane handling, care, treatment, and transporta ion of animals"). 
231 Se id. at 937-38 (identifying ad ed expense and if iculty as the likely results of the 232 Se infra text fol owing note 24 (arguing that Congres 's creation of a cit zen review restrictions on information). board in conjunction with the Animal Welfare Act does not adequately explain the preclusion of suit by the Animal Legal Defense Fund); se also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. 
Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 4 5 (D.C Cir. 19 8) (noting that he Animal Welfare Act di not establish private cit zen com it e s to verse animal exhib tions, but "antic pated the continued monitoring of concerned animal overs to ensure that he purpose of the Act were honored"). pres ed in the case just discus ed, al of which involved a close con ection betwe n the plaintif 's interest and the sta ute's basic oncerns. In the leading case, Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute v. National Highway Traf ic Safety Admin stration,23 two rganizations, the Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute and Consumer Alert, brought suit o chal enge the National Highway Traf ic Safety Admin stration's ("NHTSA") decis ons that lowered the min mum Corporate Average Fuel Economy ("CAFE") standards for passenger cars. Both organizations complained of NHTSA's failure to produce an EIS discus ing the adverse safety ef ects of the CAFE standards. They argued that he absence of such a sta ement made it harder for them to btain and is eminate information that was central to their organizational activ ties. In the abstract, their complaint had a high degre of plausib lity insofar as fuel economy standards may have adverse safety ef ects-a point that, it is reasonable to think, des rves public at ention when an agency is decid ng how much to require in the way of uel economy.234 for federal jurisdiction when the information is "es ential to the injured organization's activ ties" and when "the lack of the information wil render those activ ties infeasible."235 To me t his tandard, the organization "must as ert a plausible link betwe n the agency's action, the informational injury, plaintif organizations di not have standing under this test o contest he agency's failure to provide an EIS. This was because there was no showing of "how the lack of that as es ment from NHTSA ha[d] signif cantly harmed their abil ty to educate and inform the public about highway safety."237 The court acknowledged that, under previous case ,238 NEPA had be n held to have created a right o information about he nvironmental ef ects of government action, and that a denial of that information "consti 
233 901 F.2d 107 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 234 Se John D. Graham, Saving Gasoline and Lives, in RISK VERSUS RISK: TRADEOF S IN PROTECTING HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT 87, 98-102 (John D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds., 19 5) (discus ing the important role of the Insurance Insti ute for Highway Safety in bringing the safety risks as ociated with stricter CAFE standards into the public policy debate). 
235 Competitive Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 12 . 236 Id. 
238 Se National Wildlife Fed'n v. Hodel, 839 F.2d 694, 712 (D.C. Cir. 198 ) (finding that the "elimination of the op ortunity to se and use an EIS prepared under federal aw does consti ute a consti utional y suf ic ent injury on which to ground standing"), rev'd on other With respect o the ap lication of prudential requirements to informatutes a consti utional y cognizable injury, without further inquiry into causation or edres abil ty."239 In such case , however, it would be nec s ary to show that he information sought involved a specif cal y environmental harm; "there is a crit cal dif erence betwe n se king an EIS for the purpose of dis eminating information about potential environmental harm and se king an EIS as a vehicle for obtain g or dis eminating information on a nonenvironmental is ue."240 The court emphasized that he plaintif s, who di not invoke nvironmental concerns, were not within NEPA's zone of interest , which involved strictly environmental consequences of government action.24 tional actions, the lower court rulings thus reflect considerable complexity. 
But hre proposit ons e m to underlie the rulings, and we can organize the law in the fol owing way. First: An organization may sue to btain information when that information is important o protect its members' (noni formational) sta utory legal rights, at least if the injury is not widely generalized. This premise is the basic point of Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens. 
Second: When an organization se ks information and when its interest are very widely shared, the courts wil deny standing on prudential grounds, apparently even if the information is important o the organization's mis ion. 
Third: Under NEPA (designed to safeguard environmental goals) and other sta utes designed to protect interest that are not purely informational, an organization can bring suit o require an EIS or otherwise to btain information es ential to its activ ties if the reason for bringing suit is to protect interest that are specif cal y environmental or otherwise in line with the sta ute's ubstantive goals. This third proposit on, however, is ubject o qualif cation from the second. With suitable amendments, thes propositions ap ear to ap ly to indiv duals as wel . conclusions-Akins ug est only (what he lower court case do not deny) that Congres can grant purely informational standing if it cho se . If the lower court case remain go d law, then most of the doctrinal work in challenging at empts to bring suit for information wil be prudential. Courts wil ask (1) whether the plaintif fal s within the sta ute's zone of interest ; (2) 239 Competi ve Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 123. 240 Id. 
241 Se id. (stres ing that standing under NEPA has only be n granted when the plaintif s' interest relate to environmental interest protected by NEPA). For those who believe, as Akins itself sug est , that he key standing is 
Consider, for example, the Animal Welfare Act. If an ordinary cit zen from age discrimination). It is rel vant in this regard whether the zone of interest test is general y meant o be strict or lenient; the Court's most recent pronouncement in National Credit Union Admin stration v. First National Bank & Trust Co.,242 sug est great leniency, in line with the basic thrust of other Supreme Court decis ons.243 sue is whether Congres has authorized the suit, the problem in al of thes case is imple to pose: Is this the kind of plaintif whose interest are safeguarded by the legal provis on at is ue? If this is the proper question, then perhaps tanding should have be n al owed in al of the case above, with the xception of Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute, in which the plaintif s' complaint lay far outside the domain of sta utory concerns. Thus, there is reason to think that some or many of the lower court case should not survi e Akins. concerned with animal welfare sought o require the regulations at is ue in Espy, a response might be that he ordinary cit zen should not be al owed to sue unles she can show a distinctive personal or profes ional interest in the protection of animals or in the use of the rel vant information; otherwise, the case would se m to involve an interest in law enforcement for its own sake. Espy itself, however, was quite dif erent. The Animal Legal Defense Fund had a special and particularized interest in the rel vant information and in dis eminating it, as a way of protecting the legal rights protected by the Animal Welfare Act. Thus, the Animal Legal Defense Fund was wel within the sta ute's zone of interest and had no widely generalized injury. 
Congres implic tly precluded the suit by creating a cit zen review board. 
This would sug est hat he outcome was a nar ow one, based on the distinctive structure of the Animal Welfare Act. Perhaps one could argue not 242 118 S. Ct. 927, 938 (1998) (finding that the "interest [of competing financial instituSee Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 479 U.S. 388, 396 (1987) (finding that the trade tions] in limiting the markets that [federal] credit unions can serve" is within the statute's zone of interests); see also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 444 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (stating that "the zone of interests test is generous and relatively undemanding"). administrative action"). But see Air Courier Conf. v. American Postal Workers Union, 498 U.S. 517, 517-18 (1991) (arguing that the union's interests were outside the zone of interests because the monopoly statute's purpose was to give an economic advantage to the Postal Service and not to protect postal jobs, and, therefore, holding that postal workers have no standing to chal enge the Service's decision to al ow competition in international remailing services despite its tatutory monopoly). that here was a prudential bar ier to standing, but instead, that Congres implic tly had prohib ted the suit. Such an argument is analogous to the reasoni g of Block v. Com unity Nutrit on Insti ute, in which the Court denied standing on similar grounds.24 If the creation of the review board id in fact repres nt a decis on not o al ow private supervis on in the form of suits by people within the zone of interest , a denial of standing would be perfectly ap ropriate. As a mat er of sta utory interpreta ion, however, this argument is fragile. Why should we view the review board and the courtro m as competing rather than complementary? Since the plaintif s had a distinctive organizational interest in the rel vant information, standing should have be n granted. 
under NEPA. Note first hat in the ordinary NEPA case, the plaintif se ks not information but a delay in the completion of a project until an EIS is produced; hence, the plaintif must show, as a mat er of interpreta ion of NEPA, that he has a distinctive stake, usual y environmental, in the action.245 For example, a cit zen of Wyoming who complains about he failure to compile an EIS about a development in New York must show that he development would in some way af ect his aesthetic, recreational, or material interest . This cit zen should ordinarily be denied standing because no interest protected by NEPA sup orts his action. But a question remains. EIS to protect his environmental interest in New York, but hat he sought an EIS in order to rec ive information about important is ues bearing on his duties and activ ties as a voter? The mere fact hat he rel vant EIS would produce information of personal or profes ional interest is not enough-not, it must be ad ed, as a mat er of 
The best answer is that he cit zen of Wyoming could not so contend. 
24 467 U.S 340, 348 (1984) (holding that consumers may not obtain judic al review of milk market orders under the Agricultural Marketing Agre ment Act because the Act does not contemplate such suits). standing because it failed to show "indiv dualized harm to itself or its members"). Ac ording to this view, the holding in Sier a Club is largely an interpreta ion of NEPA. There is no injury in fact because NEPA created no legal interest! If this formulation se ms od , consider its imilarity to the analysi in Akins. Akins had an injury in fact because he had a legal interest. Extending this analysi , Sier a Club is very similar to United Sta es v. Richardson, 418 U.S 16 (1974), in which the Court held that he taxpayer di not have standing because he failed to show an injury or im ediate danger of legal y cognizable injury. In both case , standing was denied because the rel vant provis on of law di not create indiv dual rights. 
245 See Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727 (1972) (holding that the petitioner lacked enacting NEPA.246 It is here that he zone of interest test and the prudential bar ier to generalized grievances me t-not as inferences from Article I or even the APA, but as a somewhat crude and indirect way of get ing at he key question, which relates to the text and purpose of the sta ute pursuant to which the plaintif in tiates uit. Thus, the ap ropriate conclusion is that when a court denies tanding to a plaintif on the ground that its interest is both highly generalized and not within the zone of sta utory interest , it is real y saying that he underlying sta ute is best read not o al ow suits by plaintif s of that sort. As we have se n, this is the best defense of the "injury in fact" and "redres abil ty" standards as wel . And the best defense of the lower court case denying standing on this rationale is that when the injury is highly generalized, there should be a presumption against standing on the ground that such injuries are best redres ed polit cal y. Congres can overcome that presumption if it cho se to do so. 
With thes basic onclusions, we can as es a series of stylized case , 1A. A group of workers in a plant in Detroit brings uit against he drawing on the discus ion thus far. plant for fail ng to disclose workplace risks. They se k ful information about hose risks, as is required (in their view) by the governi g law. This is an easy case. Standing should be granted, even in the absence of an explic t sta ute authoriz ng standing. The plaintif s have shown both injury (nondisclosure of information undoubtedly rel vant o them) and redres abil ty, and no problem exist under the prudential requirements. 
1B. Cereal consumers bring suit against General Cereal for false and incomplet sta ements involving the nutrit onal content of o d. They se k ful disclosure and compensatory damages. Standing should be granted, even in the absence of an explic t sta ute. The case is lightly harder, but basical y the same as case 1A. The strongest argument against standing is 
246 If Congres al owed anyone to bring suit o require compliance with NEPA-not because of any specif cal y environmental interest but because of a general interest in the information at stake-there would probably be no Article I is ue. The strongest op osing argument would be that it is nec s ary to have a distinctly environmental interest in the backdrop, as in a case in which people located near a proposed causeway chal enge the failure to prepare an EIS. As NEPA now stands, an environmental interest is inde d a requirement, and this view is best justif ed as a reading of NEPA itself, perhaps informed by prudential considerations. 
1C. Tel vis on viewers bring suit against he American Broadcasting eralized, trig ering a prudential bar ier against standing. But since the plaintif s are unambiguously within the rel vant zone of interest , and since the dif erence from case 1A is only one of degre , standing is available under Akins. The clas of plaintif s is not so extremely large as to trig er any prudential bar iers. 
Company ("ABC"), complain g that ABC has failed to rate its programs adequately and thus failed to comply with the Tel com unications Act of 19 6. As in example 1B, the strongest argument against standing is that he on prudential grounds. If the plaintif s consi t of tel vis on viewers as such-which is to say the vast majority of Americans- tanding should probably be denied for that reason. The case would be dif erent if brought by parents of scho l age children, a more limited group whose members fal squarely within the zone of interest protected by the Tel com unications Act. The case would also be dif erent if the plaintif was an organization particularly interested in the content of tel vis on program ing; in that case, it would closely res mble 1B, and standing should be granted. 
OSHA that firms in Il inois have not be n required to disclose workplace risks. In the face of OSHA inaction, the cit zens in New York and Connecticut bring suit, contending that he information would help them in their capacity as cit zens; if they learn about workplace risks, then they wil know more about how to vote and about what polit cal activ ties would be most worthwhile. Standing should be denied. The plaintif s do not fal within the zone of interest protected by the Oc upational Safety and Health Act. 
2B. Cit zens for Safe Workplaces ("CSW"), a Washington, DC organization, brings uit against OSHA, contending that it has failed to require disclosure of workplace risks in Detroit. CSW has no members in Detroit, but its members include many people interested in promoting workplace safety and workers in various ta es. CSW se ks disclosure of the information on the ground that CSW could use that information in its various educational and polit cal activ ties. This is a hard standing case. The best argument against CSW is that CSW does not include Detroit workers and therefore is not within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute, a conclusion that could be fortif ed by invoking the prudential bar ier to generalized grievances. Because CSW would use the information in activ ties directly related to workplace safety, however, it stands out from the public at organilarge, and CSW should be permit ed to bring suit. This conclusion is consi tent with the analysi of NEPA in Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute.247 zation based in California, at acks the adequacy of an EIS produced in connection with a nuclear power plant o be built in Mas achuset s. The organization contends that an adequate sta ement would be xtremely helpful in its polit cal and educational activ ties. This is also a hard standing case, is highly generalized and that only those in Mas achuset s, with environmental interest at stake, should be permit ed to bring suit. Probably the bet er conclusion, however, is that informational standing should be granted on the theory that he plaintif s are wel within the zone of interest protected by NEPA; Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute sup orts this conclusion.248 failure to provide adequate information about its performance in con ection with the Safe Water Drinking Amendments of 19 6.249 They se k the rel vant information, which they contend is rel vant o their behavior as consumers of water in the local area. This is an easy standing case; it is akin to case 1A above. 
5A. A reporter for The Washington Post brings uit against he Department of Health and Human Services, complain g that his work has be n hindered by the government's unlawful failure to require disclosure of certain practices under the Medicaid sta ute. The plaintif contends that he rel vant information would be xtremely valuable in his profes ional activ ties. Standing should probably be denied on the ground that reporters are not within the zone of interest protected by the Medicaid sta ute. people, brings the same suit as in 5A, contending that it ne ds the informa5B. The Gray Panthers, a group dedicated to the welfare of elderly 247 Se 901 F.2d 107, 12 -24 (noting that, even under the more liberal standing requirements used in NEPA-related case , a "right o specif c information under NEPA has o far be n recognized for standing purpose only when the information sought relates to environmental interest that NEPA was intended to protect"). to an interest within the zone of interest protected by [NEPA]"). tle XIV of the Public Health Service Act, regulating drinking water). 
248 Se id. at 12 (sta ing that standing is granted to those who have suf ered "[an] injury 249 42 U.S.C. ? 30 j-21 (19 4 & Sup . I 19 6) (outlining ad itional requirements to Tition in order to perform its various public interest activ ties and in order to promote the wel -being of its members. Standing should be granted because members who are unambiguously within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute. 
5C. A daughter of an elderly woman rec iv ng Medicaid brings the same suit as in 5A, contending that she would like to se the rel vant information in order to ensure that her mother is being treated in ac ordance with those of a benefic ary of the Medicaid program, and the child of a benefic ary has a distinct and not merely ideol gical interest in the problem. On the 5B) and a large number of people might reasonably claim that hey are interested, financial y or otherwise, in the legality of the government's behavior under the Medicaid sta ute. Clearly, Congres could grant standing in this case if it chose to do so, but if there is no expres grant, then standing should probably be denied on the ground that he case is omewhat closer to 5A than to 5B. 
How does al this bear on standing in general? Several important points are clear. So long as there is an injury, Congres can grant standing to plaintif s even if their injuries are very widely shared. Whether there is an injury depends largely on what he law says. In ad it on, whether the case involves information or something else, there is no redres abil ty problem even if an agency, having lost on the legal question at is ue, might have discretion to do what it orig nal y di on some other ground. Thus a majority of the Court has repudiated the plurality opin on in Lujan insofar as it concluded that here would be a serious problem with redres abil ty.250 novel egal interest and to give people the power to bring suit o protect those interest in court. Congres might, for example, give veryone an interest in information of a certain sort (as it di in both FOIA and FECA, and might do in other contexts as wel ); Akins plainly says that his is consti utional. If Congres can do that, perhaps it also has a great deal of ro m to 
create novel interest that do not involve information. Perhaps Congres could give al cit zens a property interest in the continued existence of ena property interest in clear skies above the Grand Canyon, a property interest hat exist regardles of whether the cit zens in question actual y vis t he Grand Canyon?251 
would be unconsti utional because those who do not vis t he Grand Canyon lack an "injury in fact."252 The same might be said about he hypothesized Congres says that hey have an injury in fact, why should courts disagre ? Note that "existence value" is often treated as a kind of property interest for purpose of environmental valuation;253 it is now conventional in contingent valuation studies to consider the amount hat people are wil ing to pay in order to maintain a certain sta e of af airs. This very practice treats the continued existence of that sta e of af airs as a kind of property interest. Why can't Congres do the same thing? In any case, a property interest often is a cause of action in a certain sta e of af airs and grants that cause of action to al Americans, there ap ears to be no consti utional bar ier, especial y after the Akins Court's unambiguous holding that he obstacle to generalized grievances is merely prudential. to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that wil give rise to a case or controversy where none xisted before."254 Justice Ken edy joined the Lujan opin on only because in creating cit zen standing under the En 
251 People are often wil ing to pay a go d eal for the "existence" of certain environmental amenit es, and that existence value often plays a role in contingent valuation studies. 
252 Cf Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 ("[T]he plaintiff must have suffered an 'injury in ment). "option value"). 464 (D.C Cir. 1989) (upholding contingent valuation that al ows use of "existence value" and 254 Lujan, 504 U.S at 580. 253 Se supra note 251; se also Ohio v. United States Dep't of the Interior, 8 0 F.2d 432, dangered Species Act, Congres failed to "identify the injury it se ks to vindicate and relate the injury to the clas of persons enti led to bring suit."25 about he breadth of Lujan insofar as it shows that Congres may recognize an entirely new (and highly generalized) legal interest, one foreign to the court. After Akins, whether a deprivation of information counts as an injury (in fact!) depends on whether it is (al eged to be) against he law. And after least o the xtent hat Congres says this does not mat er. est ? Why, for example, is Congres not permit ed to give standing to al drivers to chal enge acts that increase the risk of ac idents on highways;256 or to give standing to parents of children in scho ls undergoing des gregation plans to al ow them to chal enge the grant of tax deductions to segregated scho ls;257 or to give standing to automobile purchasers and environmental organizations to ensure that he EPA enforces ta utory requirements for fuel economy standards?258 The best answer is that Congres is inde d permit ed to do thes things.259 To the xtent hat similar case have come out unfavorably to plaintif s, it is because the governi g sta utes, interpret d in the light of rel vant prudential requirements, reflect no ef ort by Congres to do so. Akins would not have had standing if Congres had enied him would probably not have had standing if FECA had merely incorporated the APA's tanding provis on. Denials of standing in case involving novel interest foreign to the xisting legal culture are therefore best understo d as interpreta ions of the underlying sta ute. Congres 's chal enge for the future-if it genuinely se ks to grant standing-is to think of imaginative (holding that he union had standing to chal enge the Memorandum of Understanding betwe n the United Sta es and Mexico regarding recognit on of oreign com ercial drivers' license ). the IRS's failure to fulfil its obligation to deny tax exempt sta us on racial y segregated scho ls failed to demonstrate a judic al y cognizable injury). 
258 Se supra note 140 and ac ompanying text. 19 8) (recogniz ng an aesthetic interest in observing animals). 
25 Id. 256 See International Bd. of Teamsters v. Pefia, 17 F.3d 1478, 1483-87 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 257 See Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 753 (1984) (holding that parents seeking relief for 259 See Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 445 (D.C. Cir. ways to create legal interest in the rights it intends to protect.260 With this 
Typical y information, once provided to ne or a few, is also provided are, and should be, granted standing to btain information; and to understand how al thes points bear on the general aw of standing. We have market and com and-and-control solutions by using information disclosure as a regulatory to l. Sometimes informational strategies at empt o improve the ordinary operations of markets by ensuring that workers and consumers are adequately informed. Init atives involving tobac o products, the nutri 
Sometimes information is required as part of moral suasion and in order to trig er polit cal safeguards. EPCRA and FECA are the chief examples here. to many or al ; and very frequently information is required as a way of protecting against a widely shared injury. In the polit cal context, the injury from nondisclosure may be suf ered by a large number of cit zens. After Congres has concluded that it ought not be. Nothing in the Consti ution forbids Congres from authoriz ng roups of cit zens to bring suit o btain information that hey believe is rel vant o their interest . Nor does anything in the Consti ution forbid Congres from granting cit zens a legal right to information and al owing them to vindicate that right in court. This holding-a crucial part of Akins-is a vindication of Justice Ken edy's highly sug estive concur ing opin on in Lujan, al owing Congres to create injuries quite foreign to the com on law. self, the injury-a lack of information-would have be n redres ed by a fa 
Things are more complicated with respect o redres abil ty. In Akins it260 Examples are briefly given above involving endangered species and vis bil ty. More particularly, Congres might say, for example, that Americans have a shared property interest in the continued existence of endangered species, an interest hat is violated whenever the federal government acts unlawful y under the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S C. ? 1531-34 strengthened by reference to the role of "existence value" in ordinary case of environmental valuation. I do not sug est hat Congres should o this as a mat er of policy; the answer to that question depends on context. vorable decre . The information itself ne d not have be n linked to any independent interest. Nor was it important hat he FEC might ultimately not be tied to a nonspeculative outcome. It fol ows that courts hould be careful and self-conscious about char cteriz ng the injury of which the explic t confronta ion, on the Court's part, with that important question. 
What about he prudential imita ions? When Congres has not explicitly granted standing to those who se k information, it is important o know there is no dif icult question about whether the plaintif s fal within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute. It is pos ible, however, to imagine case in which those who se k information are at empting to vindicate interest , economic or ideol gical, that have lit le to do with the sta ute's ubstantive goals. In such case , the prudential imits on standing are properly invoked Furthermore, if the plaintif is a member of a large group, or is hard to distinguish from other cit zens general y, the argument for invoking prudential bar iers is trengthened. We have xamined a range of pos ible case to se how this analysi might work. The simplest point is that if an injury is very widely shared, then there is reason to deny standing if the case is, with respect o the zone of interest test, otherwise in equipoise. eral cel bration. It is the first case in a long while to place the law of standing on a solid foundation-an understanding of the particular sta utory and consti utional provis ons that are said to give rise to a legal y cognizable injury. But here is a more particular point, involving the relationship of information to regulatory law. In the same period in which the American economy increasingly has become based on the production and exchange of information, American government has increasingly at empted to control public and private conduct-not via com and-and-control regulation, but by requir ng disclosure of information. And in the same period in which informational regulation has become a hal mark of American government, informational standing has increasingly emerged as a central problem in admin strative law. There is nothing consti utional y problematic about a congres ional judgment hat a deprivation of information counts as legal y cognizable injury. The question is whether Congres has made that judgment. In the area of informational standing, as in the law of standing enerand boundaries, of modem regulatory government. 
This UTC 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. Ed. I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman, E. Donald Elliot, Joseph Feller, Elizabeth Garrett, John Graham, Robert Hahn, Lisa Heinzerling, Jeffrey Knight, William Pederson, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, Jonathan Wiener, and participants in a work in progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School for valuable comments on a previous draft. I am also grateful to Robert Hahn for organizing two panel discussions at the Brookings-American Enterprise Institute - Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, where I learned a great deal from the comments of my co-panelists - at the first session, Boyden Gray, Carol Browner, and Edward Warren, and at the second, Christopher DeMuth, Lisa Heinzerling, and Jonathan Wiener. Brooke May provided superb research assistance. Thanks also to Robert Gasaway and attorneys at the Environmental Protection Agency for providing valuable information. 
B. The (Early)Life ofan Idea .................................................. 342 
D. Particulatesand Ozone in Court.......................................... 347 V. EVALUATING THE NEW NONDELEGATION DOCTRINE ........... 349 A. Is This a NondelegationDoctrineatAll? ............................ 349 
Safeguards........................................................................ 349 
AdministrativeLaw ............................................................... 356 
Means) .................................................................................... 359 VI. OPTIONS, FUTURES, AND CLEAN AIR ....................................... 361 A. A Twenty-first Century EPA: Ceilings,Floors, and "BenefitsAnalysis"........................................................ 362 
Protection......................................................................... 367 

Status Quo Revisited........................................................ 370 
Minimalism ...................................................................... 372 C. Congress: Safety andIts Cost............................................... 376 CONCLUSION............................................................................................. 379 The American people are suffering from what can be called "a syndrome of paranoia and neglect" about potential dangers to their health, safety, and the environment. This leads to a paradox that is becoming increasingly recognized. Large amounts of resources are devoted to slight or speculative dangers while substantial and well-documented dangers remain unaddressed. -John Graham' The last third of the twentieth century is not too late a time for turning the rule of law and the non-delegation doctrine into effective and useful legal tools for minimizing injustice from improper discretionary power. -Kenneth Culp Davis2 
This Article deals with two linked questions. The first involves the future of the Clean Air Act.' The particular concern is how the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") might be .encouraged, with help from reviewing courts, to issue better ambient air quality standards, and in the process to shift from some of the anachronisms of 1970s environmentalism to a more fruitful approach to environmental protection. The second question involves the role of the nondelegation doctrine in American public law, a doctrine that shows unmistakable signs of revival. I will suggest that improved performance by EPA and agencies in general, operating in tandem with a new approach to judicial review, would make it altogether unnecessary to revive the nondelegation doctrine. Indeed, the nondelegation doctrine would emerge as a crude and unhelpful response to existing problems in modern regulation, even a form of judicial usurpation. Far better responses are available. 
In issuing and revising a national ambient air quality regulation under the Clean Air Act, EPA should provide a detailed "benefits analysis." To this end, it should undertake two tasks. First,it should AND LIVES SAVED: GETrING BETrER RESULTS FROM REGULATION 183,183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 
(1969). 
specify the range of benefits that it believes are likely to result from the regulation, along with a specification of the range of benefits that it believes would result from at least two reasonable alternative approaches, one stricter and one more lenient. In the process EPA should identify the residualrisk left under the competing regulatory regimes; it should also acknowledge scientific uncertainty, to the extent that uncertainty exists and requires guesswork. This proposal is an effort to strengthen the role of sound science in environmental protection. 
Second, EPA should explain why it believes that the chosen rule is preferable to the less and more stringent alternatives - why the set of benefits to be received from the selected rule justify that rule, whereas the set of benefits to be received from the less and more stringent rules do not. In the process it should explain why the residual risk left by the selected rule is acceptable, while the residual risk left by the less stringent rule is not. This proposal is an effort to strengthen the role of democratic forces in environmental protection.4 
If necessary, reviewing courts should require EPA to perform these tasks. Taken together, the two proposals should increase the level of consistency across regulations, reduce the power of wellorganized private groups, and diminish the risks associated with both insufficient and excessive environmental regulation. If EPA has undertaken the two tasks, and carried them out in a reasonable way, judicial review is at an end; courts should uphold EPA's decision. 
Ideas of this kind have potentially broad implications, extending well beyond the Clean Air Act and even EPA, to the work of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA"), the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration as well. They would mark a key moment in the movement toward a system of environmental protection that is at once more democratic and better informed. At the same time, they would accelerate the continuing shift from 1970s environmentalism and indeed 1970s regulation in general, away from recognizing the existence of problems of safety and health and toward assessing their magnitude, in such a way as to reduce both regulatory paranoia and regulatory neglect, and to put a premium on the acquisition of information 
understanding that benefits, but not costs, may be taken into account in issuing primary standards. The question of costs is taken up later. See infra Section VI.C. 
CIRCLE: ToWARD EFFECTIVE RISK REGULATION (1993), and NEIL GUNNINGHAM & PETER GRABOSKY, SMART REGULATION: DESIGNING ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY (1998). 
If agencies undertook tasks of this kind, there would be little point to the recent resurgence of interest in the nondelegation doctrine. The sensible impulses that underlie that interest - impulses that involve accountability, deliberation, and sound policymaking - can be handled through other means, a point that casts a more general light on the proper role of the nondelegation doctrine in American public law. I suggest that the proper role of that doctrine consists in statutory construction that imposes floors and ceilings on agency action, and in a set of "nondelegation canons" that prevent agencies from acting without clear congressional authorization. Taken together, judicial requirements of this kind would constitute a form of "democracypromoting minimalism"' in the distinctive context of administrative law - and a partial step toward a better and more sophisticated approach to environmental protection. These are the basic claims that I will attempt to defend in this Article. 
B. 
The Clean Air Act may well be the most important of all environmental statutes. Its effects include a wide range of beneficial consequences for human health and well-being and high costs on the private sector. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates overall compliance costs at $0.5 trillion.7 The Act's claim to success rests on enormous improvements in ambient air quality and corresponding health benefits. EPA estimates that the Act prevents at least 45,000 deaths annually and that it also prevents a minimum of 13,000 heart attacks and 7,000 annual strokes! On a standard (though not undisputed) view, the benefits of the Act, ranging between $5.6 trillion and $49.4 trillion, far exceed its costs.9 
SUPREmE COURT (1999), on the general topic ofjudicial minimalism. 
STATES: EVALUATING THE SYSTEM 130 (1998). 
sensitive to contentions assumptions, and hence the "bottom line" numbers should be taken with many grains of salt. See RANDALL LUrrER, AN ANALYSIS OF THE USE OF THE EPA'S BENEFIT ESTIMATES IN OMB's DRAFT REPORT ON THE COSTS AND BENEFITS OF REGULATION (1998) (urging the use of plausible alternative assumptions and asserting that EPA's benefit calculations are inflated); see also Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,107 YALE LJ.1981 (1998) (urging that costs per lives saved are inflated, also because of contentious assumptions). Though coming from different directions, Lutter and Heinzerling both argue, convincingly, that characterization of both benefits and costs can shift dramatically with small changes in assumptions, an argument that much bears on the central claims of this Article. See Randall Lutter & Christopher DeMuth, Ozone and the Constitutionatthe EPA, ON THE ISSUES, July 1999, at 3. 

The Act has nonetheless been subject to telling criticism. The foundation of clear air regulation consists of EPA's issuance of nationally uniform ambient air quality standards;" but in light of the extraordinary diversity of the fifty states, it is not clear that the idea of national standards can be rationally defended." In addition, both lower courts and EPA seem to think that the standard-setting process does not and cannot involve consideration of costs.12 But does it make sense, or is it even feasible, to say that national standards will be founded on an assessment of benefits alone, conducted in a cost vacuum? 3 If an improvement in ambient air quality would produce health benefits that are small but not trivial, isn't it clear that the improvement is justified if compliance costs are trivial, but not if the costs are extremely high? There is reason to think that at least in some cases, an understanding of costs has affected EPA's decision about appropriate standards - but that the cost-benefit balancing has been left implicit and free from public scrutiny and review. 4 
Perhaps the largest question involves the criteria by which EPA decides whether one or another level of regulation is (in the statutory phrase) "requisite to protect the public health."15 For most pollutants, air quality at various levels is not either "safe" or "not safe"; there are diminishing degrees of risk associated with diminishing degrees of exposure. On what basis is a particular level of residual risk said to be the appropriate one? What judgments do, or should, enter into that conclusion? EPA has been criticized for sometimes suggesting, in an unhelpful and conclusory fashion, that it chooses the "safe" level, as if this were solely a technocratic judgment and as if "safety" were an onoff switch, 6 when its decision about permissible levels rests instead on a series of political, scientific, and economic judgments and compromises. 
There are two problems with this state of affairs. The first involves democratic deliberation. 7 If EPA does not give a clear sense of the range of adverse effects, and if it does not say why one set of such effects calls for regulation and another does not, the public and its representatives are not informed of the nature of the underlying questions, and they are unable to evaluate the choices actually made. Under EPA's articulated position, a purely technical issue (would a certain level be safe?) is sometimes substituted, at least publicly, for the real and more complicated ones (what level of safety is appropriate in light of all the relevant factors? why should one level of regulation be preferred to another?). 
The second problem involves sound regulatory policy. Any proposed national standard could be loosened or tightened, and the question is whether the agency has chosen the optimal, or at least a reasonable, regulatory "point." Without a clear and (to the extent possible) quantified presentation of the expected environmental benefits of the various alternatives," there can be no assurance that the agency has chosen that point, rather than one that is too strict or too lenient. 
C. 
In its extraordinary decision in American Trucking Ass'ns v. EPA,9 the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit responded to this last concern in the strongest possible terms. It held that as interpreted by EPA, the key provisions of the Clean Air Act - those that give EPA authority to issue national air quality standards - represent an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.10 The decision announces the birth of a new nondelegation doctrine, one with potentially large implications for regulatory policy. Under the new doctrine, open-ended statutory terms will be invalidated unless agencies are able to specify the governing legal criteria - to discipline their own authority through narrowing interpretations. 

EPA from considering costs, and my basic proposal does not challenge that prevailing view. I do, however, raise some doubts about it below. See infra Section VI.C. 
97-1441,1999 WL 979463 (D.C. Cir. Oct. 29,1999). 

The new nondelegation doctrine is remarkable for many reasons. First, the Supreme Court has not used the doctrine to invalidate a federal statute since (or for that matter before) 1935,1 and hence any such decision by a court of appeals is reasonably taken to mark a fresh departure. Second, the new doctrine does not require Congress to legislate with clarity. It says instead that if Congress has not been clear, agencies must act on their own, to set out limits on their own legal authority. Third, there now appears to be a genuine doctrine in place; American Trucking represents no isolated decision, but the culmination of a line of lower court cases, one of which was a similar decision about the Occupational Safety and Health Act.' The decision therefore signals a distinctive approach to judicial review of agency action. Fourth, the doctrine is conspicuously responsive to what the court of appeals saw (and often sees) as a general problem in federal regulation: the difficulty of knowing why an agency chooses one level of regulation rather than another that is somewhat higher or somewhat lower. 
The new doctrine raises a number of questions. The narrowest (though far from unimportant) issue has to do with the fate of EPA rulemaking with respect to national ambient air quality standards ("NAAQS"). What, if anything, can EPA do in the future? The question is significant both because of its consequences for implementation of the Clean Air Act and because of its implications for regulatory policy in general. On its face, the American Trucking decision would seem to draw into serious constitutional question not only EPA's ozone and particulates regulations, but also a wide range of other regulations by EPA, and indeed a wide range of decisions by many other agencies involved in the protection of health and welfare (and other areas as well; consider the Federal Communications Commission). And what, exactly, is the relationship between the new doctrine and ordinary judicial review to test whether agency action has been "arbitrary" or "capricious"? An especially large question, and the central focus here, has to do with how American Trucking exposes continuing problems with the design and implementation of environmental regulation as a whole and the Clean Air Act in particular, a statute whose key provisions seem to depend on implausible assumptions, and under which EPA has sometimes hidden crucial questions of value with uninformative platitudes. 
In this Article, my most general goal is to understand current difficulties with environmental policy, the Clean Air Act, and EPA promulgation of ambient air quality standards, and to see how EPA and courts might perform a constructive role in making things better rather than worse. My simplest claim is that EPA should undertake the two tasks identified above; it should specify the range of benefits that it believes will follow from the regulation it seeks to impose, including a discussion of the benefits from more lenient and more stringent alternatives and a treatment of the residual risks under the various regulatory regimes. It should also explain why it believes that the chosen regulation is preferable to the alternatives. 
Steps in these directions would satisfy the legitimate concerns of most critics of EPA's performance under the Clean Air Act and also of the court of appeals in American Trucking. Such steps also have broad applicability and would represent a new departure of their own in administrative law, covering the activities of EPA under a wide range of statutes and also the activities of (for example) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Steps of this sort would not amount to a nondelegation doctrine, new or old. But they are designed to promote both rule-of-law values and sound regulatory policy, in a way that should respond to growing understandings about current problems in environmental policy and the administrative state. 
I have three more particular goals. The first is to reject the nondelegation doctrine, both old and new, as a way of ensuring better and more transparent policy analysis by EPA and other agencies. That issue raises large questions about democratic accountability and about the appropriate role of courts in reviewing agency action. I suggest that although the new doctrine has considerable appeal, this is not really a nondelegation doctrine at all, and the relevant goals would be better accomplished through a form of more conventional (but better informed) judicial review of agency action. The Clean Air Act is hardly unconstitutional, for it is possible to generate an interpretation of the Act that imposes both "floors" and "ceilings" on agency action. 
My second goal is to propose a contemporary role for the nondelegation doctrine in American public law. I claim that the doctrine is properly held in reserve for extreme cases - that it serves as a genuine, but judicially underenforced, constitutional norm - and that it operates as a legitimate tool of statutory construction. More importantly, I contend that the doctrine is not so much dead as relocated. Its current home can be found not in cases invalidating open-ended grants of authority, but in the many decisions using various "clear statement" principles to discipline legislative and administrative action.z3 When courts require Congress to speak clearly in order to authorize an agency to raise a serious constitutional problem, or to apply a statute extraterritorially or retroactively, they are applying a narrower and more targeted version of the nondelegation doctrine a version that requires Congress to focus, with particularity, on certain especially sensitive questions. By requiring congressional rather than merely executive deliberation on those questions, the various "clear statement" principles operate as a nondelegation doctrine in another guise. As such, the principles are easily defended, for they promote the key functions of the nondelegation doctrine without carrying the risks of the old and new versions. 
My third goal is to discuss possible improvements in the operation of the Clean Air Act, at the legislative, administrative, and judicial levels, improvements that might respond to various concerns about EPA performance, including the concerns expressed in American Trucking. I attempt to explain how the Act seems based on the (false) assumption that pollutants generally have "safe thresholds," and how this assumption has seriously impaired both regulatory policymaking and democratic deliberation. I also suggest that the Act should be interpreted, or if necessary amended, to allow and require EPA to engage in "health-health tradeoffs" - and also to take account of costs in setting national standards. In particular, I emphasize that EPA should engage in more specific and quantitative assessments of the hazardous effects of pollution at various levels, so as to increase the transparency of its decisions. It could even make sense for EPA to move in the direction of the "quality-adjusted life years" approach, designed to provide a concrete sense of the benefits of regulatory alternatives.2 4 Under such an approach, EPA would attempt to specify the range of "quality-adjusted life years" likely to be saved by a regulation, and it would also indicate the degree of savings that would justify a regulation. But because of the harmful side effects of aggressive judicial review, courts should play only a secondary and catalytic role - embodied in certain recent and quite innovative procedural developments in administrative law, above all the "remand without invalidation." As we will see, this procedural route is administrative law's newest species of minimalism, indeed a form of democracy-promoting minimalism.2 The central point is that EPA should undertake such inquiries on its own. 
for a catalogue. See also 'WilliamN. Eskridge, Jr. & Philip P. Frickey, Quasi-Constitutional Law: Clear Statement Rules as ConstitutionalLawmaking, 45 VAND. L. REv. 593 (1992) (discussing clear statement principles in general). 

This Article comes in six parts. Part II deals with the Clean Air Act and in particular with the artificiality of the inquiries that it appears to make central to EPA's task. Part III explores the old nondelegation doctrine, the development of the new nondelegation doctrine, and the use of the doctrine in American Trucking and related cases. Part IV evaluates the new doctrine, explains why the Clean Air Act is constitutionally unproblematic, and suggests an alternative approach. Part V discusses the proper approaches to the Act from Congress, EPA, and reviewing courts. Part VI is a brief conclusion. 
Overall, the benefits of the Clean Air Act since its enactment in 1970 clearly outweigh the costs. -J. Clarence Davies and Jan MazurekO Congress should not preclude decisionmakers from considering the economic costs and benefits of different policies in the development of regulations. 
Most environmental initiatives of the past seemed expensive and questionable at the time, and today every one of them appears a bargain in retrospect. Looking back on the present a few decades hence, society will consider every environmental program running now to have been a bargain, and wish more programs had been started sooner. 
-Gregg Easterbrook -Kenneth Arrow et al.V 
The Clean Air Act was enacted in 1970. Though many hundreds of pages in length, some of them mind-numbingly specific and detailed, 9 the Act offers two remarkably brief provisions designed to set the statutory program in motion. 

HEALTH, AND SAFETY REGULATION: A STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES 6 (1996). 
ENVIRONMENTAL OPTIMISM 210 (1995). 
plant entitled to emit sulfur dioxide and its permitted emissions level (a flavor: 13,570 tons for the Colbert plant, generator number one, in Alabama; 15,430 tons for the Armstrong plant, generator number two, in Pennsylvania), see Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7651(c) (1994), alongside an exceptionally specific program for the granting and trading of emissions rights, see 42 U.S.C. § 7651(b). 
The first of these provisions, and the central focus here, involves national primary ambient air quality standards.' Here EPA is asked to set standards "the attainment and maintenance of which in the judgment of the Administrator," based on air quality criteria documents "and allowing an adequate margin of safety, are requisite to protect the public health."31 The second of these provisions involves national secondary ambient air quality standards, which EPA must set at levels "requisite to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects associated with the presence of such air pollutant in the ambient air."'32 "Welfare" is defined to include "effects on soils, water, crops, vegetation, manmade materials, animals, wildlife, weather, visibility, and climate, damage to and deterioration of property, and hazards to transportation, as well as effects on economic values and on personal comfort and well-being .... I For secondary standards, involving welfare rather than health, there is no provision for an "adequate margin of safety." But the secondary standards are anticipated to be more stringent than the primary ones; notice in particular the statutory emphasis on plant and animal life. 
These provisions have three especially noteworthy features. First, they seem at first glance not to contemplate any consideration of cost in the standard-setting process.' Primary standards are based on health, apparently to be assessed in a cost vacuum, while secondary standards are based on welfare, also apparently to be assessed without regard to cost. This is not at all an inevitable reading of the relevant provisions; perhaps the level "requisite to protect the public health" and "welfare" is a function of cost, not only benefit; but the prevailing interpretation is otherwise.35 Second, the standards are fully national - even though political judgments about air quality vary greatly from state to state, and even though the effects of improved air quality (on the cost and benefit sides) are highly variable from one state to another. Finally, both provisions appear to contemplate the existence of "safe thresholds." The basic idea is that EPA should ensure that air is "safe" and that public welfare is "protected." 
we could imagine pollutants for which the evidence indicated a point 
of "no risk" or "de minimis risk." At least in theory; it is possible to construct a dose-response curve for which risks effectively vanish at a certain defined point. But for most pollutants, there are diminishing degrees of risk, associated with diminishing degrees of pollution. 6 "Safety" is not an off-on switch; it is a matter of degree. When it is said that a certain level of pollution is "safe," what is really meant is that the residual risk is acceptable or tolerable - not that there is no risk at all. Consider, for example, this commendably direct testimony from the Chair of EPA's Scientific Advisory Committee's panel on ozone and particulates, unambiguously confessing the impossible nature of the task imposed on EPA by the Act: 
Based on information now available, it appears that ozone may elicit a continuum of biological responses down to background concentrations. It is critical to understand that a biological response does not necessarily imply an adverse health effect. Nevertheless, this means that the paradigm of selecting a standard at the lowest-observable-effects-level and then providing an "'adequate margin of safety"' is not possible. It further means that risk assessments must play a central role in identifying an appropriate level3 7 
How might we explain the enactment of provisions that seem at once so vague, rigid, and artificial? Much of the answer lies in the distinctive political dynamic of environmental debates in the late 1960s and early 1970s, in which citizens wanted air to be "safe" and politicians who failed to respond were at great risk." We might even describe the result as "1970s environmentalism," a form of thinking that accomplished a great deal of good, by producing rapid decreases in pollution levels, but that also seems increasingly anachronistic, even counterproductive. In the 1970s in particular, politicians would proceed at their peril if they asserted that "safety" could be compromised by other goals3 9 At the same time, politicians were affected by, and doubtless catered to, the pervasive psychological urge for certainty, as confirmed by evidence that people are willing to pay a great deal for "no risk" and much less for "substantially less risk."' Thus, for exam36. See, e.g., LANDY ETAL, supra note 13, at 55-56,78-79. ple, people are willing to pay more for a reduction of a risk from 0.1 to 0.0 than from 0.3 to 0.1.41 The idea that the Clean Air Act would produce "safety" rather than "reduced risk" made it far easier to support and far harder to challenge. 
Undoubtedly Congress believed that it was delegating to EPA the power to be reasonable rather than unreasonable, and in any case the Act allowed various safeguards in the event that compliance proved to be excessively costly.42 The most important safeguard has consisted in a form of (implicitly authorized) civil disobedience on the part of all relevant actors, including EPA. The result has been a complex program for nonattainment areas43 and a number of illuminating episodes; thus EPA was simply not prepared to shut down automobile traffic in Los Angeles, a step that would have been necessary to produce compliance with national air quality standards.' 
All of these points have created serious difficulties for EPA in practice. The first problem has to do with expense. For nonthreshold pollutants,45 it seems both natural and sensible to assess further reductions in terms of their cost. If, for example, the expense of reducing sulfur dioxide from 0.3 ppm to 0.2 ppm is trivial, then the reduction is almost certainly worthwhile (unless the dose-response curve has a most peculiar shape ). Even if there is little direct evidence of adverse human health effects at 0.2 ppm, this is likely to be because of the limited data, rather than because of an absence of such effects. But matters look very different if the cost would run into the tens of billions of dollars. When benefits are highly uncertain, it is peculiar to say that EPA cannot consider cost, especially since health gains are almost inevitable as permissible exposure levels decline.47 
ration gasoline in the Los Angeles area). 
exposure level above zero. 
to 0.2 ppm, notwithstanding health benefits from a reduction from 0.4 ppm to 0.3 ppm. 
not to reduce the particulates standard further than it did, since some data indicated possibly significant benefits from further reductions. See infra app. tbl.11. 
In light of this point, some critics have suggested that some kind of cost-benefit balancing inevitably occurs at EPA.' At least publicly, EPA denies this claim 9 Consider Administrator Browner's suggestion: 
Costs of meeting the standards and related factors have never been considered in setting the national ambient air quality standards themselves ....[T]he focus has been entirely on health, risk, exposure and damage to the environment .... And the American public deserves to know whether the air in its cities and counties is unsafe or not; that question should never be confused with the separate issues of how long it may take or how much it may cost to reduce pollution to safe levels. Indeed, to allow costs and related factors to influence the determination of what levels protect public health would be to mislead the American public in a very fundamental way5 
Only insiders know for certain whether EPA does in fact consider costs in issuing national ambient air quality standards 1 But consider, by way of contrast and as a possible clue, the Administrator's explanation of the 1979 revision of the ozone standard: 
The Clean Air Act, as the Administrator interprets it, does not permit him to take factors such as cost of attainment or attainability into account in setting the level of the standard; the standard is to be one that will adequately protect public health ....[He] recognizes... that controlling CO to very low levels is a task that can have significant impact on economic and social activity. This recognition causes [him] to reject as an option the setting of a zero-level standard ....However, it is public health, and not economic impact, that must be the compelling factor in the decision.52 Considerationof Cost in Setting NationalAmbientAir QualityStandards,in To BREATHE FREELY: RISK, CONSENT, AND AiR 223,227-29 (Mary Gibson ed., 1985). See also the suggestion in Farber, supranote 11, at 315-18, about the distinctive "slippage" between law and reality in the context of environmental law. 
some evidence of cost consideration. On EPA's own numbers, more stringent regulation might have provided $4 billion in increased benefits. See infra app. tbl.11. If these benefits were possible, why did EPA not require greater stringency, if not because of some cost consciousness? 
Standards and Announcement of Public Meetings, 45 Fed. Reg. at 55,072. 
This explanation, difficult to follow though it is, is most naturally taken as a suggestion that despite the nominal irrelevance of cost, costs do matter in the context of standard-setting for nonthreshold pollutants. 
The second problem has to do with federalism. The Act requires uniform national standards; but in practice, EPA authorizes a considerable amount of variation among states. For example, there is little question that the exceedingly high costs of attainment will, for many states, produce frequent violations of national requirements - and this has in fact turned out to be the case5 Several decades after the initial issuance of ambient air quality standards for ozone, for example, over 50 million people live in areas that are frequently in violation of national standards? 4 Smaller numbers - but still many millions of people live in nonattainment areas for other pollutants. 
The upshot is that national standards have mostly served not as real law, but as targets or aspirations6 - flexible goals to which the federal government can point without, however, insisting on compliance unless or until it is reasonable. This aspirational quality of national standards has led Congress to enact an increasingly complex set of provisions for nonattainment areas, provisions that anticipate compliance in certain areas over a period of many years and that, in practice, therefore recognize the existence of reasonable variations across states5. 7 Indeed it is contemplated, by the 1990 revision of the Act, that one of the nation's largest urban areas, Los Angeles, will not be in compliance until 2010 at the earliest5. 
This point leads to a more general one, bearing on cost-benefit balancing as well as on federalism. EPA's official position that standard-setting is cost-blind is complemented by explicit statements to the effect that cost, efficiency, and feasibility are relevant in making 
provisions at 42 U.S.C. §§ 7501-15, especially at § 7511. 
choices about compliance.5 9 In a way these statements are puzzling, for the Supreme Court has held that cost, and infeasibility, are irrelevant to EPA's decision whether to approve state implementation plans.' But EPA appears to acknowledge that state implementation plans will themselves consider costs, and also that cost will be relevant in setting schedules for compliance.61 
Finally, EPA must make hard choices about how safe is safe enough, an important question in light of the artificiality of the idea that air is either "safe" or "unsafe." EPA's choices involve not merely the facts, but also evaluative judgments about acceptable degrees of risk. A central question has to do with the ingredients of any judgment that a certain risk is too high. There are many important questions here, which include:6' *The size of the population at risk, that is, whether 100,000, a million, or tens of millions of people are at risk.63 *The nature of the population at risk - for example, whether it involves a large number of children, whether only elderly people are affected, whether those affected have a preexisting condition, such as asthma.' An important question is whether any "lives saved" number would involve young people or old people; there is less need for a policy that would (say) increase life expectancy by one year for those over 80 than for a policy that would increase life expectancy by sixty years for those under 10. This point suggests that EPA might reasonably concern itself not with lives saved, but with life-years saved, a point to which I will return.6 *The likelihood of harm for particular members of the affected population, that is, whether the likelihood of incurring harm is 1 in 1,000, 1 in 10,000, or 1 in a million.' Thus, for example, the plurality of the Supreme Court held in Industrial Union Depart59. See Clean Air Hearings,supra note 50, at 282-83 (statement of Carol M. Browner, Administrator, EPA). 

1998) (outlining EPA's "Common Sense Implementation Plan"). 
curiam). 
CLEAN AIR Acr 275-76 (1983) (discussing lead). The importance of considering population size is stressed in JAMES T. HAMILTON & W. KIP VISCUSI, CALCULATING RISKS? 91-108 (1999). 

Administrator, EPA). ment v. American Petroleum Institute ("Benzene Case")67 that OSHA may regulate only "significant risks," and that a risk of one in a billion could not count as significant.' OSHA now concludes that a lifetime annual risk of 1.64/1,000 would count as significant. 9 But undoubtedly the importance of addressing such a risk will depend on other factors, notably including the size of the affected population. oThe severity of the risk - for example, whether it involves cancer or mortality risks, or increased hospital admissions, bronchitis, respiratory symptoms, lost work days, or what EPA calls minor restricted activity days." 
Although EPA considers all of these questions in issuing national standards,71 it has developed no clear guidelines to discipline its judgment about when one or another level of regulation is appropriate. It has not said, for example, that if 100,000 people face a cancer risk of 1/1,000, regulation is presumptively desirable, but if 10,000 face a 1/1,000 chance of minor respiratory problems, regulation is presumptively not desirable.7 2 A reading of EPA's voluminous documents on the major air pollutants provides an enormous amount of data, but little information on the answers that would trigger a decision to increase or decrease regulation. As we will see, all of the various points noted above might reasonably be turned into a kind of global figure, for example "quality-adjusted life years," designed to quantify the various benefits from regulation.73 
One final note: An obvious and important question has to do with the distributional effects of national ambient air quality standards. Who bears the costs? Who receives the benefits? Full information is not available. But an early study finds that under the Act, poor people, and African Americans, are net gainers, whereas wealthy people, and whites, are net losers74 - perhaps not a shocking finding in light of the fact that many of the adverse effects of air pollution are concentrated in large cities. 
In sum: The Act has produced many improvements in air quality, but the questions about federalism, cost-benefit analysis, and the concept of "safety" raise serious concerns about the Act and about EPA performance. As we will see, these criticisms have implications for the constitutionality of the Act and the resurgence of the nondelegation doctrine, as well as for more general concerns of democracy and accountability. 
In 1971, EPA issued six national standards, governing ozone, particulates, sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and total suspended particulates IV' In 1978, EPA issued a seventh standard, involving lead; it did so as a result of a court order.76 These seven regulations amount to the centerpiece of EPA's regulatory system for the control of national ambient air quality. 
Of course it would be extremely surprising if the standards originally adopted in 1971 and 1978 turn out to survive new scientific evidence, and many people have urged that adjustments are desirable, in the direction of both tightening and loosening existing requirements. Congress has thus created an "agency-forcing" mechanism designed to require EPA reconsideration of primary and secondary standards. Under the Act, EPA is required to review the relevant criteria and standards at least once every five years, and to revise them "as appropriate" under the statutory guidelines.' EPA is specifically required to consider, and to explain any significant departures from, the recommendations of the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee ("CASAC"), an independent committee established specifically in order to advise the Administrators on air quality criteria and standards.78 A great deal of time and expense is necessary to respond to new scien74. See Henry M. Peskin, EnvironmentalPolicy and the Distribution of Benefits and Costs, in CuRRENT IssuEs IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLIcY 144, 147-59 (Paul Portney ed., 1978). 
the agency can show that without such rules, people will face serious risks of one kind or another; the "remand without vacating" approach makes best sense when the agency may well be able to justify its action on remand. Both of these ideas are designed to ensure that rules that are highly likely to be reasonable are not struck from the books, in a way that could produce serious problems. Properly understood, they do not allow agencies to proceed with inadequately justified rules if it appears unlikely that those rules could be lawfully explained, or if it appears that little will be lost with invalidation. 
Hence we arrive at an appropriate approach to these cases, one with general application: The rules should be held unlawful, and remanded to the agency; but they should not be vacated, at least when the agency can show (a) that it may be able to generate a justification that will satisfy judicial review, and (b) that invalidation of the rule may generate significant risks (by, for example, allowing people to be exposed to nontrivial dangers, or by preventing the agency from initiating a program for reducing such risks)?'° After the agency attempts to justify its regulation on remand, its decision may be appealed to the court, which can evaluate the new justification and uphold or invalidate the regulation as appropriate. An approach of this kind seems especially sensible for the particulates regulation, which is designed to counteract what, on a reasonable reading of the evidence, count as quite serious risks to life and health. The problem with invalidation is that it would prevent the agency from beginning implementation and require the agency to start largely from scratch, a process that may require years or more of rulemaking activity. A remand without invalidation would allow the agency to proceed if (as appears quite possible) the regulation can be adequately defended by reference to the criteria I have outlined. Things are more difficult for ozone, because the risks are far lower, and because nonregulation may actually produce health benefits; 1' but here as well, a remand without invalidation would probably be the best way to proceed. 
It would be possible to object that the technique of "remand without invalidation" creates unfortunate incentives for administrators, above all because it permits the continued legality and even the enF.3d 1129,1135 (D.C. Cir. 1995); ChemicalMfrs. Ass'n, 28 F.3d at 1268; Checkosky, 23 F.3d at 462-65; Allied-Signal, Inc. v. NRC, 988 F.2d 146,150-51 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (announcing that court will not vacate rules because of inadequacy in agency reasoning if agency has a serious possibility of correcting the deficiency on remand and vacation may be disruptive); Mid-Tex Elec Coop., 822 F.2d at 1132-34. 
the fact that California made quite similar decisions not less than a decade ago. See James M. Lents, A Review of NationalOzone and ParticulateMatterAir Quality StandardsIn Light of Long-Standing CaliforniaAir QualityStandards,11 TUL. ENViL. L.J. 415,421-23 (1998). forcement of rules that have been found to be inadequately justified (and that may not ultimately survive review). The enforcement of these rules may cost millions and even billions of dollars. If so, isn't invalidation preferable? To be sure, a system in which inadequately justified rules are invalidated would create more pressure to produce adequate justifications in the first instance. But the proper response to this concern is not to invalidate all inadequately justified rules, but to restrict the "remand without invalidation" technique to special circumstances, above all (a) to rules that might well turn out to be valid (b) in conditions in which invalidation would produce serious problems for the legitimate policies that underlie the rules in question. The court of appeals for the D.C. Circuit has made considerable progress in drawing the necessary lines.' 
There is a broader point in the background here. The techniques of remand without invalidation, and of allowing interim rules, can be seen as a form of administrative law "minimalism," akin to judicial minimalism in constitutional law generally." 3 Such techniques do no more than is necessary to resolve a case. Indeed, these forms of minimalism are democracy-reinforcing insofar as they attempt to ensure that agency decisions are based on grounds that are both transparent to the public and sufficient to justify the regulation in light of statutory criteria. 
A difficult question, not addressed thus far, is raised by a particular claim with respect to EPA's ozone regulation: that ground-level ozone has health benefits, and that these benefits were not taken into account by the agency. There is evidence that ozone reduces the risk of both cataracts and cancers.3" If taken into account, the health benefits of ozone at current levels may well be roughly equivalent to the health costs. But EPA refused to consider those health benefits. In an interesting application of "health-health" analysis, the court of appeals held that the refusal was unlawful. 5 
In general, it is right to say that agencies should be required to take account of the health problems sometimes produced by regulation de302. See Davis County, 108 F.3d at 1457; AMA, 57 F.3d at 1135; Allied Signal, 988 F.2d at 150-51 (announcing that a court will not vacate rules because of inadequacy in agency reasoning if agency has a serious possibility of correcting the deficiency on remand and vacation may be disruptive). 

(per curiam). signed to reduce health problems. This kind of health-health tradeoff can take many different forms.' In typical cases, the regulation of one risk, like that associated with asbestos, may give rise to further risks as a result of the substituted products. The most adventurous claims for "health-health" comparisons arise when a costly regulation imposes health risks simply by virtue of its cost2l If a regulation produces less employment and more poverty, it may result in worse health as well. But these are adventurous claims, because they depend on contentious projections about the disemployment effects of particular regulations. 
For the ozone rule, the argument for taking health-health tradeoffs into account seemed especially insistent, for the claim was far from indirect, and there was nothing speculative or abstruse about the causal chain. If ozone protects against cancers and cataracts, it is possible that a regulation of ozone will cause serious health problems. The text of the Act is quite ambiguous on the point, and the court was wrong to say that it unambiguously required the agency to address the beneficial effects of air pollutants.RE But the court was right to hold that even if it was ambiguous, the agency interpretation was unreasonable. The rule was properly found inadequately justified on this ground, and it may well be that after remand, the agency will be unable to explain any failure to take account of the effects of ozone in combating cataracts and cancer. 
There is of course a commonality between the approach taken by the American Trucking court and the approach I am suggesting. Where the American Trucking court said that the ambient air quality standards provisions of the Clean Air Act are unconstitutional unless EPA imposes limits on its own discretion, I have argued that ambient air quality standards are valid if, and only if, EPA is able to generate a "benefits analysis" that operates to constrain EPA discretion and to promote interregulation consistency. The goals of the two approaches are quite close. The disadvantage of the American Trucking approach is that it involves unnecessary, even reckless, use of the Constitution - and does so in a way that threatens to raise too many questions about too many statutes. By contrast, the approach I have suggested has firm roots in the APA and in existing doctrine, and promises to CASS R. SUNsTEIN, Health-HealthTradeoffs, in FREE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JuSTICE 298, 298-317 (1997). 
improve regulatory practice without calling for an excessive judicial role. 
Should Congress amend the national ambient air quality provisions of the Clean Air Act? This is not the place for an extended discussion of that question; but the analysis thus far suggests three possibilities. 
As emphasized throughout, a crucial defect of the national ambient air quality provisions is that they seem to assume that whether air is "safe" can be assessed solely on the basis of the facts. The truth is that the facts might be able to show the degree of risk (at least within a range), but they cannot show whether any particular degree of safety is "safe enough." Whether or not pollutants lack safe thresholds, "the paradigm of selecting a standard at the lowest-observable-effects-level and then providing an 'adequate margin of safety' is not possible."3" 9 The result of the statutory framework is to misframe the key question and also to give EPA little guidance for answering and asking that question. As we have seen, EPA has greatly struggled with the resulting difficulties. 
Congress should amend the statute to identify the factors for EPA to consider in making the judgment about appropriate national standards. Congress might offer substantive guidance by saying, for example, that EPA must consider risk severity, size of affected population, and likelihood of adverse effects at various exposure levels. On the procedural side, it might require EPA to identify, to the extent possible, the nature of the risks that it is reducing, and at the same time to attempt to quantify the relevant risk reductions. The strongest argument against an amendment to this effect is that it is unnecessary; if EPA moved in the directions suggested above, it would essentially be interpreting the current statute as if it contained instructions of exactly this sort. But an amendment of this kind would at least provide a clear legislative signal, and move EPA judgments in the direction of greater transparency. 
Particulate Matterand Ozone: HearingsBefore the Subcomm. on CommercialandAdmin. Law of the House Comm. on theJudiciary,105th Cong. 89 (1997) (prepared statement of George T. Woolf, Former Chairman, EPA's Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee). 
We now know that significant cost savings can be achieved by using more flexible, market-oriented instruments, such as tradable pollution permits rather than uniform national requirements?10 Sometimes, however, EPA does not choose such instruments even when it is legally authorized to do so.31 It would make sense to amend the statute to require EPA, wherever feasible, to use economic incentives rather than a "command-and-control" approach? 2 
It is clear that an approach of this kind could save substantial resources, and if the instruments are properly chosen, it should do so without at the same time compromising air quality goals."3 An effort to encourage EPA to select less burdensome alternatives could send a desirable signal to attempt the least-cost methods of obtaining regulatory goals, and might in addition spur creative experimentation. 
A possible lesson of EPA experience with national standards is that EPA should be required or at least permitted to consider costs when setting such standards. Indeed, it is not entirely clear that the statute should be construed to forbid cost-benefit analysis from EPA, 14 though lower courts have unanimously concluded otherwise.1 5 If the Supreme Court does not reject the lower courts' view, it is worth giving serious consideration to a statutory change. 
The basic reasoning here is straightforward. If a reduction from 0.08 to 0.07 would be a trivial expense, surely it should be required; if it would cost billions of dollars, there had better be good grounds to believe very substantial health benefits would follow. A possible argument to the contrary is that national standards operate as aspirations, not ordinary law, and aspirations, at least, should be set on a health-only basis - not because there is a magic place where air quality is "safe," but because it is valuable to obtain, and use, a technocratic judgment that people should have air quality of a certain specified sort 16 The problem is that it is impossible to assess "safety" in a cost vacuum. In general, cost-benefit analysis should be followed, acknowledging that it will raise some hard questions of value.317 
The best argument against an amendment to require cost-benefit analysis is that the statute, complex as it is, actually embodies a better accommodation of costs and benefits than would a statute that required cost-benefit analysis at the level of standard-setting.31 On this view, the optimal system is one in which EPA makes an initial, purely health-based judgment, and then the process of implementation allows costs to play a role at various stages, emphatically including an expectation that implementation will not be immediate and will in fact be a product of a continuing inquiry into whether compliance is worthwhile, P things considered.1 9 A possible virtue of this state of affairs is precisely the aspirational quality of the health-based standard, setting a target against which various state performances can be measured. The aspirational quality can also contribute to technology316. See the quotation from Administrator Browner, supra text accompanying note 50. Administrator Browner goes on to say: 
While cost-benefit analysis is a tool that can be helpful in developing strategies to implement our nation's air quality standards, we believe it is inappropriate for use to set the standards themselves. In many cases, cost-benefit analysis has overstated costs. In addition, many kinds of benefits are virtually impossible to quantify - how do I put a dollar value on reductions in a child's lung function or the premature aging of lungs or increased susceptibility to respiratory infection? CleanAir Hearings,supra note 50, at 282 (statement of Carol M. Browner, Administrator, EPA). Ironically, the Regulatory Impact Analysis required by President Clinton engages in monetization of just this kind. See generallyinfraapp. 
can be found in recent testimony of Richard Revesz. See Clean Air Act Authorizations: HearingsBefore the Subcomm. on CleanAir, Wetlands, PrivateProperty,and NuclearSafety, 106th Cong. (1999) (Testimony of Richard L. Revesz), availablein LEXIS.COM, Legislation & Politics Library, U.S. Congress Folder, Federal Document Clearing House Congressional Testimony File. 
A Case Study of the CleanAirAct, 16 PACE ENVT'L L. Rnv. 15 (1998). Pedersen argues that a purely health-based standard can force technological innovation, see id. at 23-24, and also stimulate and focus public debate, see id. at 22-23; he ends with the interesting suggestion that EPA should be required to set standards "tight enough to protect against all clearly demonstrated health or welfare effects," but that EPA should be allowed to consider costs and technical feasibility in choosing the "margin of safety," id. at 30. 
forcing, an important and often highly desirable phenomenon in environmental protection,3" and a phenomenon to which cost-benefit analysis is, at least in practice,321 unlikely to contribute. 
In the abstract, it is hard to know whether this pragmatic argument is valid.31 What is clear is that the statutory scheme, pragmatically defensible as it may be, is far from transparent, and provides a set of confusing signals to the American public. 
CONCLUSION 
Whenever an agency issues a regulation designed to diminish risks to health, safety, or the environment, it should attempt to identify the gains sought by the particular regulation it has chosen, and it should compare these gains to those under at least two reasonable alternative regimes, one stricter and one more lenient. In this light, the most serious problem with EPA's performance in issuing national air quality standards is that it usually fails to explain, in simple, concise terms, its decision to require a particular level of ambient air quality. Sometimes EPA acts as if it were pursuing "safety" and ensuring "safe levels," without sufficiently acknowledging that for most pollutants, the serious question is what degree of safety. To its credit, EPA invariably offers extensive discussions of the underlying data, demonstrating that there is a genuine health risk at current levels. But to the extent that it provides an explanation of its particular choices, the discussion often involves little more than evidence of nontrivial adverse effects at those current levels - evidence that may well argue for a reduction from current levels, but does not by itself call for any particular regulatory standard. 
In this Article, I have argued that EPA (and other agencies involved in similar tasks) should offer a detailed "benefits analysis." The central goal of this approach would be to create a kind of federal common law of environmental protection, generated in the first in320. Technology-forcing is not desirable if the costs of the forcing exceed the benefits if, for example, the new technology contributes little to air quality, but substantially increases prices and diminishes wages. 
benefits) of new technological developments, and indeed this issue is discussed in the particulates and ozone regulatory impact analysis. See RIA, supra note 70, ch. 11. The problem is that government is likely to have very little information about the cost of technological innovation, and industry is likely to overstate those costs by a significant amount. See W. Kip Viscusi, FATAL TRADEOFFS 161-80 (1993) (discussing substantial overstatement of compliance costs). 
in a FederalSystem -And Why It Matters,54 MD. L. REV. 1226 (1995), a staunch and longtime defender of cost-benefit analysis for the Clean Air Act, who acknowledges the pragmatic possibility. stance by administrative agencies, and designed to promote consistency and rationality in the protection of health and safety. I have also defended a form of democracy-promoting minimalism for administrative law - the particular form of minimalism that is embodied in the remand, often (and increasingly) unaccompanied by invalidation. 
The Clean Air Act should not be held unconstitutional, and EPA should not be required, on pain of constitutional invalidation, to come up with a "generic unit of harm" to encompass population affected, severity, and probability. The new nondelegation doctrine is a large mistake. On the other hand, ordinary judicial review should require any national ambient air quality standard to be accompanied by an adequate explanation of why that level, rather than one more or less stringent, has been selected. By itself, this requirement calls (to the extent feasible) for a high degree of quantification from EPA; it also bears on the performance of other regulatory agencies entrusted with the task of protecting health, safety, and the environment. It calls for invalidation, and not merely remand, where the agency is unable to offer an explanation of its choice of one level of regulation rather than another. A requirement of this kind would mark a key moment in the shift from the rigidity and simplicity of 1970s environmentalism toward a new and more promising approach - one that places a high premium on assessing the magnitude of problems, ensuring consistency across regulations, limiting interest-group power, acquiring better information, and authorizing democratic control of regulatory choices. 
My principal claim here is that both courts and EPA should construe the Act so as to prevent regulation of small risks and so as to require regulation of substantial risks - and EPA should explain, as quantitatively as possible, what must be shown in order for a risk to qualify, or not to qualify, as substantial. It is excessive, a form of rhetoric, to say that on EPA's view, it is entitled to choose any level between zero risk and a level slightly below "London's Killer Fog." But it is not a form of rhetoric to think that if EPA has not limited its own discretion by speaking in less conclusory terms, the Clean Air Act raises problems for both regulatory policy and democratic selfgovernment. The ultimate goal of the forms of the democracypromoting minimalism that I have endorsed here would be to ensure better policy analysis and greater transparency of decision, in a way that should simultaneously promote democratic, economic, and air quality goals. 
APPENDIX not to be exceeded more than once per year. 36 Fed. Reg. 8186, 8187 (1971). b. September 13, 1985: EPA retains the primary standard and revokes the secondary standard. 50 Fed. Reg. 37,484 (1985). c. August 1, 1994: EPA announces its decision to retain the current primary standard for carbon monoxide. There is no secondary standard for carbon monoxide. 59 Fed. Reg. 38,906,38909-11 (1994). a. October 5, 1978: EPA promulgates standards for lead at the level of 1.5 jig Pb/M3. 43 Fed. Reg. 46,246 (1978). b. November 5, 1997: EPA publishes final rule for lead, 62 Fed. Reg. 59,813, 59,813-14 (1997), but withdraws it on Dec. 23, 1997, due to adverse comments, 62 Fed. Reg. at 67,009. c. January 20, 1999: EPA issues final rule. 64 Fed. Reg. 3030, 3030-31 (1999). (Note: The following tables are taken verbatim from the EPA's 
Regulatory Impact Analysis, as noted in the text.) rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
Estimates are incremental to the current ozone NAAQS (year = 2010) Ozone Health: 
*1.Mortality Hospital Admissions *2. all respiratory (all ages) all respiratory (ages 65+) pneumonia (ages 65+) COPD (ages 65+) 620 1 60 180 400 70 50 20 10 10 10 290 
Low- to Highend Est. 
0-80 300 -300 2,330 - 2,330 870 - 870 260 -260 130 - 130 29,840 - 29,840 60 -60 650-650 1-1 0-80 0-250 0 -530 0-90 0 -60 0-20 0 -20 0-20 0-20 0-400 
Max High-end 
Est. 120 420 1,570 600 200 180 42,070 90 920 2 110 340 690 120 80 30 20 20 20 530 rounding. 
long-term exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ENDPOINTV327 *7. Lower Respiratory Symptoms *8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms shortness of breath asthma attacks *9. Work Loss Days *10. Minor Restricted Activity Days ("MIRADs") $2.50 per household per jig/m3 *See the Benefits TSD for citations (U.S. EPA, 1997a). 
Annual PM,, (pgm) Daily PM., (pgm) 
*L Mortaity332: short-term exposure rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. TABLE 6: OZONE: NATIONAL ANNUAL MONETIZED HEALTH 
BENEFITS ESTIMATES333 Estimates are incremental to the current ozone NAAQS (0.12 ppm, 1-hour) (billions of 1990 $; year = 2010) 
ENDPOINT $0.370 $0.004 $0.029 $0.014 $0.004 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0.003 $0.300 $0.870 $0.110 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0.000 - $0.380 $0.004 - $0.004 $0.029 - $0.029 $0.014 - $0.014 $0.004 - $0.004 $0.001 - $0.001 $0.001 - $0.001 $0 - $0.400 $0- $1.210 $0- $0.140 $0- $0.001 $0 - $0.001 $0- $0 $0 -$0 $0 - $0 $0- $0 $0 - $0 $0-s $0.570 $0.006 
$0 $0.010 $0.003 $0.002 $0.001 $0 $0 $0.011 $0.520 $1.640 $0.180 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 rounding. 
long-term exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ENDP *8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms shortness of breath asthma attacks *9. Work Loss Days *10. Minor Restricted Activity Days ("MRADs") $0.790 $1.400 $0 - $0 $0 - $0 $0 - $0 $0- $0.004 $0-$0.016 $0.056 $1.785 $0.020 $1.300 $2.400 
Annual PM2 , (pg/m3) Daily PM. (pg/m) 
Partial Attainment Scenario 
16 65 $83 $7.5 $90 
Low- to HigEhs-te.nd 15 65 $15 to $96 $4.3 to $8.1 $19 to $104 igh-end 
Est. 50 $99 $9 $107 rounding. 99TH PERCENTILE) SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ANNUAL MONETIZED 
HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS337 
Annual PM0 (pgm 3) 
rounding. 
rounding. 
Annual PM,. (pgm) 
*1. Mortality1: short-term exposure 150 360 340 6,800 rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ALTERNATIVES IN 2010 (1990 $)342 (high-end estimate) Annual Benefits of Partial 
(billion$) (A) 
Annual Costs 
of Partial Attainment (billion $) (B) 
Net Benefits 
of Partial Attainment (billion $) (A - B) 
Number of Residual Nonattainment Counties 19-104 5.5 8.6 10-95 partial attainment of the current PM, standard (PM, 501150, 1 expected exceedance per year). The results for 16165 and 15/50 are only for the high-end assumptions ranges. The low-end estimates were not calculated for these alternatives. 
control cost analysis. 0.7- 1.0 12 17 27 partial attainment of the current ozone standard (0.12 ppm, 1 expected exceedance per year). The results for 0.08, 5th max., and 0.08, 3rd max., are only for the high-end assumptions. The low-end estimates were not calculated for these alternatives. 
control cost analysis. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
on Law and the Good 
What ought tobe thecharacter of law ingood societies, and what role ought it toplay? There are several reasons why good society thinkers mightwant to take thesequestions seriously.The rule of law ingeneral constitutesa powerful check on tyranny?be it the tyrannyof leaders (elected or otherwise) or ofdemocraticmajorities. Constitutionalism,more specifically,plays a crucial role inany liberal regime in thatitnot only empowers government but also limits itand protects the rightsof citizens. But it is not only liberals who should take law seriously. Constitutional law,especially, is thecornerstone in thefoundation of thepolity, creatinga common set ofpolitical normsand values and thus thebeginningsof a commonpolitical identityF.inally, democratsmightwant toconsider therole of lawfrom an Aristotelian perspective: Law not only habituates us to certain typesof action (virtuous ones, in thegood regime) but, rightlyconceived and implemented,law can also encourage us tocriticallyengage itand thusrefinethecircumstancesof our own habituation.Law in liberaldemocratic polities, then,always entails a tension:Itmakes certain typesof libertypossible by constrainingothers. ?A.K. 
Expressive 
Cass R. Sunstein If I had known that not a single lunch counter would open as a result ofmy action I could nothave done differentlythanI did. If I had known violence would result, I could not have done differently than I did. I am thankful for the sit-ins if for no other reason than that they provided me with an opportunity formaking a slogan into reality, by turning a decision into an action. It seems tome that this iswhat life is all about. 
?James Miller. Democracy is in the Streets: From Port Huron to theSiege ofChicago. (NewYork,SimonandSchuster,1987)p. 52. We are all Expressionists part of the time. Sometimes we just want to scream loudly at injustice, or to stand up and be counted. These are noble motives, but any serious revolutionist must often deprive him self of the pleasures of self-expression. He must judge his actions by their ultimate effects on institutions. 
?Herbert SimonM.odels ofMy Life. (NewYork: 
Basic Books, 1991), p. 281. 
Actions are expressive; they carrymeanings. This is true for nearly everythingwe do, fromthemost mundane to themost signif icant.Thus, forexample, a lawyerwho wears a loud tie tocourtwill be signaling somethingdistinctiveabout his self-conceptionand his attitude toward others; so toowith a law professorwho teaches in blue jeans; so toowith a studentwho comes to class in a business suitW.hat can be said fornonverbal acts applies to purely verbal statementsas well. A bank presidentwho uses the terms"Miss" and "Mrs.," or who refers toAfrican-Americans as "Negroes," will be showingawide rangeof thingsabout his attitudesonmatters of gen der and race. So toowith a politician, say in theSouth,who uses the terms "Ms." and "African-Americans." 
In these and other cases, what the agentwill be communicating, or be taken tomean, may ormay not have a greatdeal todo with his particular intentions.In this sense, themeanings of actions are not fullywithin thecontrolof agents. Indeed, some agentsmay not even be aware of therelevantmeanings. Consider a foreignerw,hose for eign state is often signaled by obliviousness to the social meanings of his actions.What he says is verydifferentfromwhat hemeans. 
What can be said foractions can also be said for law.Many peo ple supportlaw because of thestatemenmtade by law, and disagree ments about law are frequentlydebates over theexpressive content of law. For example, much of thedebate over school segregation was also a debate about themeaning of laws calling for segregation. Plessy v.Ferguson1 asserted that such laws did not "mean" black inferiorityB;rown v.Board ofEducation1 tried to respond to this assertionwith some empiricalwork suggesting thecontraryO.r con sider debates over capital punishment.Many people who oppose capital punishmentwould be unlikely to shiftposition even ifevi dence showed thatcapital punishmentdoes have a deterrenteffect; theircomplaint ismostly about theexpressive contentof acts of cap italpunishment,not about the ineffectivenessof deterrence. So too formany people who endorse capital punishment. Such people would not be?are not?much moved by evidence thatcapital pun ishmentdoes not deter.Their primary concern is the symbolic or expressive contentof the law,not aggregatemurder rates. 
Much of thecontemporarydebate over hate speech regulation is similar. It is above all about the social meaning of such regulations. Do such regulations "mean" thatobjects of hate speech require spe cial paternalisticprotections, areweak, thin-skinned,and unable to take care of themselves?Or do they"mean" thatbigotry is utterly unacceptable in a liberal society? Debates of thiskind could not plausibly be focused on consequences, for the stakes are relatively low, not justifying the amount of time and energy devoted to them. In thisway debates over flagburning and debates over hate speech have a great deal in common; they are expressive in character. 
is often focused on the perceived social meaning of law. Thus the Endangered Species Act has a special salience, as a sym bol of a certain conception of the relation ship between human beings and theirenvi ronment,and emissions tradingsystemsare frequentlychallenged because theyare said to "make a statement" thatreflectsan inap propriate valuation of the environment. In the same way, mandatory recycling (as opposed to curbside charges, which seem far better from the economic standpoint) may well receive public supporton expres sive grounds.Outside of theenvironmental context, the samemay be trueofmandatory pro bono work (as opposed to a compulsory donation from lawyers who refuse to do suchwork). ^^^^^^J 
At theoutset it is importantto say thatwe might understand the expressive function of law in two differentways. First, and most straightforwardlyt,he law's "statement"may be designed to affect social norms and in thatway ultimatelytoaffectboth judgmentsand behavior.On thisview, an expressive approach to law isnot indepen dentof an assessment of social consequences; certainexpressions are favoredbecause theywill (ultimately)have good consequences. Here there is a prediction about the facts:An appropriately framed law may influence social norms and push Much of the contemporary debate over hate speech 
... isabove all regulation about the socialmeaning of such regulations.Do such regulations "mean' thatobjectsofhate speech 
require special paternalistic protections, are weak, thin-skinned, and unable to take care of themselves?Or do they "mean that bigotry is 
in a utterlyunacceptable liberal society? them in the rightdirection.For example, if the lawmandates recycling,perhaps it will affect social norms about the envi ronmentinaway thatisdifferentfromthe effectson norms of curbside charges.Or if the lawwrongly treatssomething?let a us suppose reproductivecapacities?as commodity,social normsmay be affected in a troublesome 
way. 
Sometimes thisclaim isplausible; pre vailing norms, like preferences and beliefs, are not a presocial given, but a product of a complex setof social forces, possibly including law. And law moti vated by norm-change will be my focus here.But sometimespeople supporta law not because of itseffectson norms, but because it is believed intrinsicallyvalu able for the relevant "statement" to be made. (See theopening epigraph froma 1960s protester.A)nd sometimes lawwill have littleor no effecton social norms. 
allowing market exchanges of goods and services?like pets and babysitting, for are not seen as mere com 
In this essay I explore the expressive function of law?the function of law in "making statements" as opposed to thefunctionof law indirectlycontrollingbehavior. I do so by focusing on theparticular issue of how legal "statements" might be designed to change social norms. I catalogue a range of possible (and inmy view legitimate)effortsto alternorms through legal expressions about appropriateevaluative attitudes. I also urge thattheexpressive functionof lawmakes most sense inconnection with effortsto change norms, and that if legal statementsproduce bad consequences, theyshould notbe enacted even iftheyseem rea sonable or indeednoble. Empirical questions loom throughouta,nd I do offerseveral empirical claims; butmy goal ismostly normative ratherthandescriptive or positive. 56 thereforeremainswhether the claimed effecton social normswill occur. It is fullyplausible, forexample, to say that,although a law thatpermitsprostitutionreflectsan inappropriatevaluation of sexu ality,any adverse effectof the law on social norms is so small as to be an implausible basis forobjection. 
A societymight identifythenorms towhich it is committedand insiston thosenorms via law, even iftheconsequences of the insis tence are obscure or unknown.A societymight, forexample, insist on an anti-discriminationlaw forexpressive reasons even if itdoes not know whether the law actually helps members of minority groups. A society might endorse or reject capital punishment because itwants to express a certainunderstandingof theappropri ate course of action afterone person has taken the lifeof another. ^H^ LAW AND THE ^^^^^^B The point bears on thecultural role of law,adjudication, and even of Supreme Court decisions. The empirical effectsof those decisions are highly disputed. If theSupreme Court says thatsegregation is unlawful, thatcertain restrictionson hate speech violate theFirst Amendment, or thatstudentscannot be asked topray in school, the real-world consequences may be much smaller than is convention ally thought.But theclose attentionAmerican society pays to the Court's pronouncements is connectedwith theirexpressive or sym The most conventional example involves legalmandates thattake theplace of good norms, by requiring certain forms of behavior throughstatutoryrequirementsaccompanied by significantenforce ment activity.In thearea of controlof industrialpollution, this is the usual strategy,as environmental law accompanies legalmandates with a large commitmentof enforcementresources. 
But there is a subtlerandmore interestingclass of cases, of spe cial importance for understanding the expressive functionof law. These cases arise when the relevant law is a signal or statement bolic character. 
I do not claim thattheexpressive effects of law, thus understood, are decisive or thattheycannot be counteredby a demon strationofmore conventional bad conse quences. In fact, I believe otherwise and in thatway endorse Simon's remark in the epigraph to this essay. But it cannot be doubted that the expressive function is a largepart of legal debate.Without under standing the expressive function of law, we will have a hard time ingettingan ade quate handle on public views with respect to, for example, civil rights,prostitution, theenvironment,endangered species, cap italpunishment,and abortion. 
IL The Expressive Function and Collective Action 
Problems 
Many social norms solve collective action problems. Some of these problems involve coordination; others involve prisoner's dilemmas. Norms solve such problems by imposing social sanctions on defectors.When defection violates norms, defectorswill proba bly feel shame, an importantmotivational force.The community may enforce its norms through informal punishment, themost extremeofwhich is ostracism. But themost effectiveuse of norms is ex ante.The expectation of shame?a kind of social "tax," some timesa very high one?is usually enough toproduce compliance. 
But sometimesprivateeffortsfailW.hen thisis so, thelawmight be enlisted as a corrective. In fact, the least controversial use of the expressive functionof law operates in thisway. Here thegoal is to reconstructexistingnorms and tochange thesocialmeaning of action througha legal expression, or statement,about appropriatebehavior. Insofaras regulatory law is concerned with collective action prob lems, this is a standard idea, especially in theenvironmentalcontext, but also in the settingof automobile safety,occupational safetyand health, andmany otherproblems as well. What isperhaps less stan dard is to see the law's role as correctingfor inadequate social norms. Law might eitherdo thework of suchnormsor insteadbe designed to work directlyagainst existingnorms and topush them innew direc tions.The latteridea isgroundedon theview thatlawwill havemoral weight and thusconvince people thatexistingnorms are bad. ... sometimes 
people support a law not because of its effectson norms, but 
because it is believed intrinsicallyvaluablefor the relevant "statement" to bemade. 
unaccompanied by much in the way of enforcementactivity.There is a large setof instances inwhich laws that (a) aspire to announce or signal a change in social norms are nonetheless (b) accompanied by littleenforcement activity. Consider, for example, laws thatforbid litteringand laws thatrequire people to clean up after their dogs. In many localities such laws are rarely enforced through the criminal law. 
But theyhave an importanteffect insignal ingappropriatebehavior and in inculcating theexpectation of social opprobrium and hence shame in thosewho deviate fromthe norm.With orwithout enforcementactiv ity,such laws can help reconstructnorms and the social meaning of action. Hence someone who fails to clean up afterhis dog may be showing disrespect or even contempt forothers;many,most, or all people may see thingsthisway; and theresultcan be largechanges inbehavior. Eventually therecan be norm cascades, as reputational incentivesshiftbehavior innew directions. It should be unsurprising to find that inmany places, people clean up after theirdogs even though this is not especially pleasant and even though the laws are rarely enforced. 
When legally-induced shiftsinnormshelp solve collective action problems, thereshould be no objection inprinciple. Here, then, is the least controversialcase for theexpressive functionof law. 
III. Norms InvolvingDangerous Behavior 
Often theexpressive functionof law isbrought tobear on danger ous behavior, including behavior that is dangerous only or princi pally to self.Of course all behavior creates risks?driving a car, walking on city streets,volunteeringformilitary serviceW.hen gov ernment is trying to change norms that "subsidize" risk-taking behavior, itmust do so because of a judgment thatwell-being will therebybe promoted. This judgmentmight be rooted in an under standing thatthe intrinsicvalue or utilityof theact is relatively low and thatreputational incentivesare thereal source of thebehavior. We are dealing, then,with classes of cases inwhich the danger accompanying choicemeans thatintrinsicvalue isnot high but risk takingbehavior persists because of social norms. ^^^^^^^^H^e^re^ ^as^e^ls^ew^h^e^re^, ^p^ri^va^te^e^f^fo^rt^sm^a^y^b^e^u^n^su^cc^e^ss^ful. In this light,lawmight attempttoexpress a judgment about theunderlying activityand do so in such a way as to alter social norms. Ifwe see norms as a tax or a subsidy to choice, the lawmight attempt to change a subsidy intoa tax,or vice-versa. In fact, this is a central, if implicit,goal behind much risk regulation.Educational campaigns often have thegoal of changing the social meaning of risk-taking activity.Going beyond provision of information,coercionmight be defended as a way of increasingsocial sanctionson certainbehavior. Through time,place, andmanner restrictionsor flatbans, forexam norm or goal. The prohibitionon vote-tradingis an example. So too with certaincomplex social bans on theuse ofwealth tobuy services or goods fromotherpeople. Some part of the intricatweeb of norms covering theexchange ofmoney among both friendsand strangersare connected with theprinciple of civic equality.Monetary exchange would reflectformsof inequality thatare not legitimate in certain spheres.Familiar objections to"commodification" are part and parcel of social norms banning theuse ofmoney. The claim is thatpeople ought not to trade (forexample) sexualityor reproductivecapacities onmarkets because market exchange of these"things" is inconsistent pie, the lawmight attempt tomake itseem weak to smoke, or to use drugs, or to engage inunsafe sex. 
Are such efforts illiberal or unaccept ably paternalistic? They should not be so regarded.Choices are a functionof norms forwhich individualagents are not respon sible and which, on reflection,many or most agentsmay not endorse. This is con spicuously so in the context of risk-taking activity involvingcigarettes,drugs, unsafe sex, and firearms.Much discussion of whether law should respect "preferences" or "choices" is confused by virtue of its silence on the matter of social norms. 
fact thattheydeplore them. 
Because information is the least intru sive regulatory strategy, it should be the Are sucheffortislliberal or 
unacceptably paternalisticiThey should not be so regarded.Choices are 
afunction ofnormsfor which individual agents are not and 
responsible which, on reflectionm,any ormost agents may not endorse. preferredoption.Whether more aggressive strategiesmake sense depends on thedetails. 
A complex network of social norms governs theacceptable uses ofmoney. This is so in two differentrespects. First: Some social norms impose sanctions on usingmoney as a reason foraction.Here people are not supposed to engage incertain acts if theirreason for doing so is financial gain. Second: Some social normsmake differ entkinds ofmoney nonfungible; theprevailing norms requirediffer ent kinds ofmoney tobe used fordifferentpurposes. These sets of norms raisemany complexities. They are also entangled with the expressive functionof law.They suggest, finally, that it is some times inappropriate to infergeneral valuations from particular choices, since those choices are a functionof norms thatare limited to thecontext inwhich theygovern. 
There isoften a connection between norms thatblock exchanges and ideas about equal citizenship. The exchange can be barred by social normsbecause of a perception thatwhile theremay be dispari ties in social wealth, the spheres inwhich people are very unequal oughtnot to invade realms of social life inwhich equality is a social 58 proscriptions are thinking in expressive terms.One of theirgoals may be to fortifyexisting social norms that insulate reproduction from the sphere of exchange. Or theirargumentmay be less instru mental: They may seek tomake a "statement" about reproduction without also seeking to affectsocial norms. 
Often decisions aboutmoney can be made throughprivatemech anisms thatdo not require special legal help. These mechanisms may be as simple as amental notation.They may bemore complex, takingtheformof differentbank accounts understood tobe used for differentpurposes. Social norms in families and small communities oftenfortifytheseeffortsw,ith certain formsofmoney being seen as "for a rainyday" or as basically untouchable. 
Law can also play a role. Some measures thatmight be seen as puzzling, or as objectionable paternalism,make more sense if they are understood as precommitment strategies reflecting diverse "kinds" ofmoney or as effortsto facilitatepeople's effortstoplace theirmoney indifferentcategories. As a facilitative strategy,con sider the IndividualRetirementAccount (IRA). IRAs, created by a complex set of legal provisions, allow people more easily to sepa rate theirmoney intodifferent"kinds." The Social Security system labor; inmany places, women who refuse to do so incur social sanctions and may even feel ashamed. The social meaning of a woman's refusalmay be a rejection of her appropriate role.Hence itmay signal a range of undesirable traits.In theareas of both race and gender, prevailing norms help constitute inequality. And here as elsewhere, collective action is necessary to reconstituteexisting norms. 
may be able to accomplish a great deal. 
With respect to thedivision of domestic labor between men and women, private effortsat normmanagement have played an importantrole. Individual acts thatare expressive incharacter?a refusal tomake dinner, for example?are an important part ofmodern feminism. But the expressive functionof law is often especially impor tanthere, and itcan move to the fore in public debates. If a discriminatory act is consistent with prevailing norms, there On one view, any effortat 
is norm management 
thisisa illegitimate; projectthatisofflimitsto government. But it ishard to see how thisargument 
be made might persuasive. 
on social norms are Effects not easily avoided; any systemofgovernment is 
likely to effectnorms, including creation of the basic systemsof contract, tort,and private property. will be more in theway of discriminatory behavior. Ifdiscriminatorsare ashamed of themselves, thereis likely to be less discrimination. The social meaning of an act of sexual harassmentwill have a great deal to do with theamount of sexual harassment.A large point of lawmay be to shiftsocial norms and socialmeaning. Consider in thisconnection thefact thatmany restau rantowners and inn-keepersactually supported theCivil RightsAct of 1964,which would have prevented them fromdiscriminating. How could people want thestate toact against them?The answer lies in thefact thatthe lawhelped shiftsocial norms and thesocialmean ing of nondiscrimination.Whereas nondiscrimination would for merly signal a willingness toact on a race-neutralbasis?and hence would 
trigger social norms that call for discrimination against blacks?it would henceforthsignal a willingness toobey the law,and hence fail to triggeradverse social norms. 
In Part IV, I dealt with cases inwhich social norms discourage cash payments. But social norms help constitute a wide range of qualitatively differentkinds of valuation, and these diverse kinds much affect behavior and the social meaning of behavior. These norms are omnipresent and are usually takenforgranted. Imagine, ismandatory, not optional, but itbecomes more intelligible ifwe understand thatpeople often like tohave help inputting theirmoney intodifferentaccounts with differentuses. 
V. Equality, Social Norms, and Social Change 
Norms of partiality are an importantpart of social inequality. Social normsmay requirewomen to engage inmost of domestic forexample, thatJohn treatsa beautiful diamond in the same way thatmost people treatfriends,or thatJanevalues a plant in thesame way thatmost people value theirchildren,or thatSandy values her car likemost people value artor literatureA. ntidiscrimination law is often designed to change norms so as to ensure thatpeople are treatedwith a kind of dignityand respect thatdiscriminatorybehav ior seems todeny. 
The point is not limited to race and sex equality. Consider, as an especially inter esting example, themovement for animal rights. Some people think that animals should be treatedwith dignityand respect, and not as if theyexisted solely forhuman consumption and use. This view is very much about social norms; itneed not entail the furtherclaim that animal life is infi nitely valuable. It is best takenas a recom mendation of a shift in norms governing the treatmentof animals, accompanied by a judgment thatthenewmode will have con sequences forwhat human beings do. The recommendationmay be based on theview that ifwe see animals (and nature) in this way, we will solve collective action prob lems faced by human beings inpreserving animal life importantfor human lives; it may be based on a noninstrumentaleffort to extend ideals of basic dignity to all liv ing things. 
VI. Constraints, Liberal and 
Otherwise 
What barriers should therebe to theexpressive functionof law? The simplest answer is:The same barriersas thereare to any other kind of governmental action. There is nothing distinctive to norm management thatrequires a special setof constraints. 
Thus, forexample, government should not be permittedto invade rightsw,hatevermay be our understandingof rightsT.he rightscon straints thatapply to government action generally are applicable here as well. If government tried to change social norms so as to ensure thateveryone is a Christian, itwould violate therightto reli gious liberty; ifgovernment tried to change social norms so as to ensure thatwomen occupy domestic roles, andmen do not, itwould violate theequal protectionclause. 
Quite apart from thequestion of rights,there is always a risk that effortsat normmanagement will be futileor counterproductiveW.e can imagine, forexample, thatwhen governmentattempts tomove social norms in a particular direction, itmay failmiserably. Nancy Reagan's "JustSay No" policy with respect todrugsmay well be an example. It is necessary to ensure that thosewho engage innorm 
Moreover, intentional norm management is a conventional and time-honoredpart of government.Of course we could imagine abuses, even unspeakable ones. But the proper response is to insiston awide range of rights-basedconstraintson themanage ment of social norms throughlaw. 
There is a final point.The social mean ing of lawwill constrain thepermissible contentof law.The meaning, setas it isby 
make social norms, may government effortsunsuccessful. Debates over criminal sanctions are strongly affectedby thisproblem. So-called intermediatesanctions forcrimi nal violations are oftenunpopular because theyare taken to "mean" somethingother thanpublic opprobriumW.hen a violator is told to engage incommunity service, he appears have "gottenoff,"even if the service is, to him,worse thana shortperiod in jail. Hence the social meaning of the lawmakes the law unacceptable to thecom munity at large. If intermediate sanctions are to be feasible, the norms thataccompany themmust shiftas well. 
The point is a general one. The meaning of legal statements is a functionof social norms, not of speaker's intentions.The govern ment may take a range of steps todiscourage teenagersfrom smok ing,but ifthose stepsmake smoking seem likea delicious forbidden fruit,theymay be counterproductiveM.easures designed todiscour age unwed parenthoodmay actually encourage unwed parenthood. This is simply a special case of thegeneral phenomenon of unin tended consequences. Of course, unintended effects?realized because of existing norms, or in theformof unanticipated changes inexistingnorms?may be good as well as bad. 
Conclusion 
There can be no doubt that law, like action in general, has an expressive function.Some people do what theydomostly because of the statement the actmakes; the same is true for thosewho seek changes in law.Many debates over theappropriate content of law are reallydebates over thestatementthatlawmakes, independentof its (direct) consequences. I have suggested thattheexpressive func tionof law has a great deal todo with theeffectsof law on prevail 60 management are trustedby thepeople whose norms are at issue.For this reason itmay be best forgovernment to attemptto enlist inter mediate organizations, so as to ensure thatpeople with authorityin relevantcommunities are participating in theprocess. 
Some people would go furtherthan this.On one view, any effort at normmanagement is illegitimate;this is a project thatisoff limits to government. But it is hard to see how this argumentmight be made persuasive. Effects on social norms are not easily avoided; any ing social norms. Often law's "statement" is designed tomove norms in freshdirections. 
Least controversially, lawmay attempt to generate norms that will solve collective action problems. The central point here is that from the standpoint of individual agents, norms are given rather than chosen, and agents would sometimes like norms tobe other thanwhat theyare.Often shifts innorms are a low-costmethod of achieving widely or universally held social goals?as value of choice stays constant while the the intrinsic 
debates over the Many appropriate contentof lavo are debates over the 
really statement that law makes, independenotfits(direct) consequences. 
reputationalconsequences of choice begin to shift.Far more controversial is theuse of law to fortifysocial norms involving the permissible use of money. A liberal society ensures a measure of sphere dif ferentiation,inwhich therealm ofmarkets and market thinking is not coextensive with therealms of politics and family life. 
Hence social norms regulating theuse of money are an importantpart of a well functioning liberal society. Sometimes law is used to fortifythose norms or to prevent them frombecoming atrophied. 
Bans on thesale of sexual and reproductivecapacities are an impor tantillustration. 
For purposes of legalpolicy, some of themost interestingcases of normmanagement throughlaw involve thecontrolof riskybehavior and thepromotionof social equality.Risky behavior is oftena prod uct of social norms thatpeople would verymuch like,on reflection, tochange.And with respect to risk,American societyhas witnessed dramatic changes inprevailing norms in the lastdecades. Cigarette smoking is themost dramatic example, but similar shiftscan be seen in theareas of alcohol use, drug use, seatbeltuse, carryingguns, and diet and exercise. Ifgovernmentsees prevailing norms as a taxon or a subsidy to choice, itmight seek to change norms as a way of changing choices. Certainly thepoint helps account forantidiscrim inationpolicy, where a goal is to alter norms associated with both taste-baseddiscriminationand rational stereotyping. 
Are effortsat normmanagement unacceptably paternalistic or illiberal? Inmany cases theyare not.As I have emphasized, norms are generally given rather than chosen. Sometimes people would like norms tobe changed; often theydo not have a considered view about which norms are best, but theywould, if theyreflecteda bit, wish norms to be somethingother thanwhat theyare.When this is so, it is entirely legitimateto use law to alter norms that(forexam ple) encourage people to shortentheirown lives, at leastwhen they do so in order to avoid reputational cost and without much in the way of increased intrinsicvalue. Certainly effortsat normmanage ment aremore legitimate iftheyhave a democratic pedigree.More generally, attention to the effects of social norms helps show that "choices" should notbe takenas sacrosanct. 
All this leaves open a number of questions. Among themost pressing are empirical ones. To what extent have shifts in norms been a functionof law?How can law be made effective in shifting norms?What variables account for effectivenorm-change? There are also important theoretical issues about constraints on norm man agement. It is particularly importanttodecide how tohandle situa tions inwhich lawsmotivated by expressive goals havemixed orbad consequences. I have suggested that legal "statements" producing bad consequences should not be endorsed. But my simplest sugges tionhere is thatwe begin tomake sense of law's expressive function ifwe attend to the role of law in themanagement of social norms. No systemof law can entirelyavoid thatrole; evenmarkets them much a creation 
of law?are selves?very agement. In thesecircumstances itisbest forgovernmenttoproceed exercises in norm man pragmatically and contextually,seeingwhich norms are obstacles to well-being, and using law when law is effective in providing 
Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor in theLaw School and Department ofPolitical Science of 
Endnotes 
Constitutionalism and Constitutional Failure* 
We are accustomed to thinkingof constitutionsas devices forcre ating and holding togethera political world. That customarymode of thoughmtakes a certain sense.After all,making andmaintaining a politics are central objectives of constitutionalism.They are not only partofwhat a constitutionostensiblydoes, but also partofwhat it should do, ormust do, if it is to succeed. But this sensible notion has taken on perverse forms,especially after theCivil War of the United States,where constitutional success has sometimes come to be viewed strictlyin termsof theperpetuation of a constitutionor a regime.1It is almost as if longevityitselfwere sufficientevidence of constitutional 
success. 
Such a view of thingsisunsatisfactoryh,owever, forreasons other thanthesimple fact thatconstitutionscan and do fail.Constitutional failure ismore than an empirical reality. It is also a theoretical necessity. But the theoreticalnecessity arises fromempirical fact. Constitutions are "made" things.The very facts thattheyappear on the scene at a particular time and displace existing formsof poli tics?perhaps even existing constitutions?subvert most claims to perpetuityas a constituentelement of any constitutionalregime.Of course, those factsneed not prohibita constitutionor constitutional order fromaiming at perpetuityB.ut theydomean thatthemanner in which constitutionsare born and justified leaves themnormatively defenseless against some formsof fundamental alteration or even displacement. Justas a constitutiondisplaces a prior constitutionor order, ittoomay be displaced under thecertaincircumstances. 
But constitutionalfailure isnot always so grand as thebreakdown of an orderor a constitution.Constitutional failurecan occur in sub characterof constitutionalism,which is insensiblewithout a theory or set of standards thatgive thepolitical world formand limits.Of course, the "character of constitutionalism" is a trickymatter, for constitutionalism ismultifaceted. For example, constitutionalism may aim at any of severalbasic objectives. Itmay takeas itspurpose themaking of a people, sustainingways of life,or creatingor autho rizingpolitical power.But constitutionalismarises inhistoryprimar ilyas an attemptto solve a persistentproblem inhuman experience: how to constrainand directpolitical power.2That is, it is fundamen tally,thoughnot exclusively, concernedwith theproblem of limits. 
The problemof limitspresentsitselftoWestern thought(aswe have inherited it) in the form of a dialogue between Socrates and 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Florida Law Review 
Founded 1948 
Formerly 
University of Florida Law Review VoLuME51 
SEPTEMBER 1999 
NUMBER 4 
IMPEACHMENT TO REFORM* 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
We have now had the second impeachment of a President in the Nation's history, and it is actually the first impeachment of an elected President. The previous impeachment concerned an unelected President and was politically inflected in obvious ways after the Civil War and the death of Lincoln.1 What might be done now, now that it appears to be over, is to see if we can make something good of it. Often in American history, when we have had a serious problem, there have been reform efforts that * Editor's note: Portions of this Lecture are reprinted with permission of the publisher, Georgetown University and Georgetown Law Journal. © 1998. Additional portions of this Lecture are reprinted with permission of the publisher, the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Pennsylvania Law Review. © 1998. This address was presented at the University of Florida Fredric G. Levin College of Law on March 19, 1999 as the annual Dunwody Distinguished Lecture in Law. To retain the speech's original character, it has been edited only sparingly. Footnotes have been added where material is directly quoted and where further readings might prove useful or interesting. A VHS copy of the Lecture is on file with the Florida Law Review. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to the faculty and students of the University of Florida Levin College of Law for their extraordinary kindness on the occasion of the annual Dunwody Lecture. This Lecture draws, at times very heavily, on two of my previously published papers: Bad Incentives and Bad Institutions, 86 GEo. L.J. 2267 (1998); and Impeaching the President, 147 U. PA. L. REv. 279 (1998). I draw on these papers, written well before the conclusion of the proceedings involving President Clinton, in order to explore some general lessons that might be drawn from those proceedings. The reader is asked to make allowances for a transcript of oral remarks. 
1, Cf generallyWHl/AMH. REHNQUIST, GRANDINQUESTS:THE HISTORICIMPEACHMENTS OF JUSTICE SAMUEL CHASE AND PRESIDENT ANDREW JOHNSON 245 (1992) (discussing the impeachment of Andrew Johnson). have made something bad into something better. It is quite early to get an historical sense of this astonishing set of events, but maybe it is not too early to have some preliminary reactions. I am going to propose two general thoughts and three particular thoughts. So there are really five thoughts, in sum. 
The first general thought is that Congress ought not to renew the Independent Counsel Act.2 There has been a kind of revisionist learning in the last weeks that this is an Act that should be salvaged in one form or another. My first suggestion is that the Independent Counsel Act should be allowed to die a quiet death in June 1999 when it is scheduled to expire. There are some general lessons that come from this suggestion. One has to do with the omnipresent danger of turning political disagreements into criminal charges-a danger which we saw realized under President Reagan when allegations of criminality on the part of the President and some of his top people were widespread. Oliver North went to jail. And, under President Clinton, we have seen the same thing. This is a pathology when political disagreements turn into criminal charges. 
The other general lesson has to do with the nature of liberty under law. And here, the suggestion is that one of the most important guarantors of liberty under law is that prosecutors have a wide range of possible targets and limited resources. Therefore, most of us are immunized from the prosecutorial gaze. It is not because there are not things that might raise an eyebrow once in a while, but because the prosecutor, who has a wide net and a limited budget, has to focus on really legitimate and extreme cases. At least, unless something has gone very sour. So the suggestion is one of the sources of liberty under law is the conventional set-up of the prosecutor's office, which creates a safeguard against abusive or individualized charges. 
Okay, that is about the Independent Counsel Act. 
On impeachment, my suggestion is that the Nation ought to adopt, as explicitly as we can, a kind of agreement that impeachment is generally, if not always, limited to large-scale abuses of distinctly public power. The suggestion is that both parties ought to adopt something like an arms control agreement-a kind of pact-that says that unless the President has abused authority in a large way-authority that he or she exercises by virtue of being President-then the political remedies, the ordinary ones, of hearings, soundbites, laws, and budget will be the ones that are used, not the impeachment process. This is a suggestion that there ought to be a norm of reciprocity, really, within the political process, in which Democrats and Republicans converge on a judgment that impeachment should not be used except in the most extreme possible cases. Now, that notion is intended to pick up on my belief that the impeachment of President Clinton was unconstitutional, a violation of the constitutional responsibilities of the House of Representatives. But those who reject that view might be able to agree on the proposition that impeachment should be limited to the most extreme cases on the theory, perhaps, that President Clinton's case was one of the extreme cases, for reasons I will get into. 
I now have three more minor suggestions. The first quick one is that the Supreme Court's decisions in Morrison v. Olson' and Jones v. Clinton4 were disastrous, and, in retrospect, astonishingly obtuse. If you read Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion in Morrison,he nailed the objections to the Act a long time ago. In Jones,the Court suggested that a civil action against the President could not possibly divert the President in any serious way. These decisions were disastrous and obtuse, but they were nonetheless correct; the remedy for them, therefore, is statutory and not constitutional. The recent rebellion against the Supreme Court is not born out by the nature of the cases. 
The second proposition is the saddest of the whole set. And, that is, we now have fresh reason to doubt the fashionable ideas that constitutional interpretation ought to be a responsibility of legislatures and that we ought to have some optimism that legislatures can carry out the task of interpreting the Constitution fairly. In reaction against, I think, the Warren Court's aggressive use of the Constitution, there has been a lot of suggestion, crossing political lines, that we ought to entrust our elected representatives, more than we have, with the job of thinking seriously about the Constitution's meaning. This is just one incident, and it is an unusual one, but it does supply some new grounds for skepticism about the notion that constitutional interpretation on the legislature's part can be immunized from partisan-even grossly partisan-considerations. This is the least happy note. 
My last ancillary suggestion is that it is not correct to say that the law of sexual harassment is broken. Many people have held the law of sexual harassment responsible for the events of the last two years. But, it does need to be fixed-in one smallish, but quite important, way. 
To orient discussion, let us think a little bit about what the founders of the Constitution tried to create, and how they tried to create it. We might think, as a kind of shorthand, that they had a picture of democracy which had a revolutionary feature: they wanted to combine a high degree of political accountability with a commitment to deliberation and reasongiving. They sought to ensure that outcomes would be supported by reasons, not just power, and that if public force was going to be used 

FLORIDA LAW REVIEW against someone or on someone's behalf, there ought to be a degree of reflection first. This notion was that we would have a deliberative democracy combining popular responsiveness with reason-giving. What the Framers added to that goal was an understanding of likely incentive effects of different institutions. And, at their most ingenious, what they sought to create were institutions that would have a realistic picture of human nature, and would use that in the service of the ideal of deliberative democracy. The notion of national representation, of which Madison was so fond, was designed to ensure a kind of separateness from the play of faction, so that representatives could engage in deliberative tasks. In Madison's words, this would allow our representatives "to refine and enlarge" the public view, rather than just replicate it.5 That is to suggest that we might think of the Constitution's structure as attempting to wed an ideal-that of a deliberative democracy-with some mechanisms which were attuned to incentive effects. What institutions will have what incentive effects on what people? 
Now, let us turn to the Independent Counsel Act, and think, in particular, about the incentives it creates for the most important actors in our system, such as political officials generally; the media; and the independent counsel, herself or himself. If you look at political officials generally, any party that is out of power is under tremendous pressure by virtue of the Act's existence to call for the appointment of an independent counsel when allegations of wrongdoing are made, and to draw attention to the independent counsel's activity orinactivity as the proceedings go on. Under the Independent Counsel Act, whenever a party is out of power, one or more members of that party have a tremendous incentive to call on the Attorney General to appoint an independent counsel, to ensure that serious allegations of wrongdoing are taken seriously by someone who is not in the President's pocket. It is no wonder that no matter whether that Congress is controlled by Democrats or Republicans, no matter which is in the majority or minority, a certain number of members of the party opposed to the president in office will spend a considerable of time calling for the appointment of an independent counsel. So much so, that the pressure to appoint an independent becomes for an administration nearly irresistible. Hence, it is the case that every administration since the Independent Counsel Act has been enacted has been subjected to an independent counsel investigation at least once.6 It is not as if corruption is high; it is that the incentive effect is created by the Act for members of the opposing party, and the ability to resist that pressure on the Attorney General's part is extremely limited. 

(1998) (providing an appendix detailing investigations under the subject Act). 
Politicians who think the appointment of an independent counsel would not be a good idea-it would be diversionary or such-are unlikely to resist their fellow Democrats' or fellow Republicans' pleas, because it makes them look soft on corruption or soft on the opposing party. So, the pressure for opposition and scandal-mongering is very hard to resist for members of the opposing party. If we look at the media in particular, the Framers hoped that the media would serve the interest of having a genuinely deliberative democracy. But in the current media, it is no news to say that there is a tendency for sensationalism. What is a little more interesting is to suggest the way in which the Independent Counsel Act feeds and aggravates that tendency, by diverting attention from problems such as the increase in asthma in the inner-cities to such problems as whether the Vice President made the phone call from the wrong office. The truth is that scandals sell, and newspaper people know that fact. They are under tremendous pressure to cover political scandals, even if they would like not to. 
I remember fairly early in the Lewinsky scandal, I had a call from someone at the WashingtonPost.And this was frustrating to get these calls about details of where someone was and where some piece of clothing was. So I said to the reporter, "Don't you wish you were working on something else? Do you ever get sick of this topic? It seems to be what you are spending all your time on." And she said, "I hate my job. I really went into this because I wanted to cover things that really mattered to people. But, if we don't do it, some other newspaper is going to. And, if they do, and we don't, we're going to be at a competitive disadvantage in the marketplace. The editors know that, and we're stuck." They are in kind of a race to the bottom with respect to competitive pressures. The independent counsel is not responsible for the tendency, but the Act tends to aggravate it, insofar as attention to complaints of criminal allegations tends to sell newspapers and attract viewers, and not doing that has the opposite effect. 
Let us think for a moment about the incentives faced by the independent counsel himself or herself. What got me thinking about this was not the Clinton administration's difficulties with independent counsels, but the Reagan administration's. In particular, the sad tale of Theodore Olson, the Assistant Attorney General ofthe Morrison and Olson cases. He was and is an extremely honorable person who defended President Reagan quite vigorously against allegations that the Justice Department had wrongly invoked executive privilege in connection with investigations of environmental policy. He testified very vigorously before Congress. Some members of Congress alleged, implausibly, that he perjured himself. Now, if you can name cases in which perjury before Congress has resulted in serious criminal investigation, you are an expert. If you can name cases in which people have perjured themselves before [VCO51L Congress, you just watch T.V. 
The number of cases in which people are subject to serious criminal investigation because of misstatements before Congress is either trivial or zero. Nonetheless, Olson faced several years of serious criminal investigation, spending millions of dollars of his own money to fend off an indictment which was, after those years of investigation, ruled meritless by the independent counsel herself. 
The problem is that from the standpoint of the independent counsel, you have one person to focus on and there are two options: indict or not indict. Not to indict looks like a waste of time, indictment looks heroic-a kind of Archibald Cox act. The distortion stems from the fact that the independent counsel, unlike most prosecutors, has one target rather than many and an unlimited rather than limited budget, which produces an incentive for zealotry. This is not a suggestion that any one of the independent counsels is dishonorable or part of a conspiracy or anything like that. It is a suggestion that the problems we have seen under the Act are a natural product of the incentive effects of the office of the independent counsel, which creates a kind of fixation on particular people and particular events with a kind of bias toward detailed investigation and, ultimately, indictment. 
Cases that ordinary prosecutors would spend no more than ten minutes on (or no time at all) become the occasion for weeks, months, years of investigation. For public servants generally, the Independent Counsel Act creates a bad incentive, too. Everyone who accepts a Cabinet-level post knows that the possibility is far from trivial that they will be subject to an independent counsel investigation and, ultimately, be indicted-even if they are like ordinary people or a little worse or a little better. The risk of a credible and specific allegation being made against anyone in the position to be appointed to the Cabinet is pretty high, and everybody knows that before the fact, which creates a disincentive to become a public official. It is not the worse thing in the world, but it is an adverse effect. 
Now, as a good Chicagoan, I am required by my contract to use the words "cost benefit analysis" in every talk, and to undertake a little cost benefit analysis. And, we would have to say that, on the benefit side, there is something rather than nothing. That is, the Act does deter official wrongdoing and it has punished genuine official wrongdoing. Judge Starr has found some and Judge Walsh did, too. So, it is not as ifthere is nothing on the benefit side. But the cost in terms of the incentives created for the independent counsel, the media, members of opposing parties, and prospective public servants is extremely high, and it would be very good to try to figure out a way to obtain the good without the bad. 
Now we probably do not have to be very adventurous to think about how to do that. For over 180 years of the Republic's history we have had serious investigations of wrongdoing on the part of high level executive branch officials. They came from the United States Department of Justice. Sometimes, in the extraordinary cases, the Department of Justice would, by regulation, create an independent counsel, and the system worked pretty well; it was not broken. The Watergate example, sometimes taken to be the strongest argument on behalf ofthe Independent Counsel Act, seems more to be the strongest argument against the Independent Counsel Act. The Watergate situation was handled not with an independent counsel statute but with some combination of ordinary Justice Department activity and political safeguards. You will recall that President Nixon had Archibald Cox fired-unlawfully, by the way. He was, by regulation, an independent counsel, and President Nixon replaced Archibald Cox with another independent officer, Leon Jaworski-who did his job well. The system worked plenty well enough without an Independent Counsel Act. 
There is no reason to mend rather than end this Act, because any version of the Act that results post-mending will continue the tendency, in one form or another, to abridge the safeguard provided by wide focus and limited funds, or to continue the trend to turn into criminal charges essentially political disagreements. There is no reason for the Nation to continue to face those dangers. If we go back to the old regime which worked plenty well enough, we will do just fine. So much for the Independent Counsel Act. 
What about impeachment? Well, if we want to come to terms with the constitutional words "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," 7 we would like to probably look at the matter in two different ways. If we have a Justice Scalia-like approach to the Constitution, we will want to do it from the standpoint of the original understanding. What did the Founders think in, say, 1789? If we have a different approach to the Constitution, we might look at the whole picture of our constitutional history to try to figure out the kind of implicit common law of impeachment that the Nation has followed. Let us do it both ways, briefly. 
If you look at the Constitution, the terms do not tell you a tremendous amount--'Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." Can we get anything out of that language if we try to transport ourselves in a time machine back into 1789? Well, maybe the keyword in the phrase is "or"-"Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." 9 
We might think to ourselves that these ambiguous terms, "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," ought to be understood by seeing what the Framers' defining central cases were. This is nothing like a decisive legal argument, but it is suggestive. If the Framers were thinking of "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors" you might think that they were thinking of things of the same kind and magnitude as treason and bribery. And, at the time of the Founding, there is no question that "treason" would mean basically what everyone today would think it means. 
There is also no question that "bribery" would not mean bribing an official to call traveling when it was very dubious in the last seconds of a basketball game. What was meant by "bribery" was something more like taking money from a foreign nation in order to do something different from what you would otherwise do, or going to members of the Electoral College and paying them to vote foryou. Those were actually the examples discussed at the time of ratification. When we think of "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors" we might think that what we are after is an abuse of the authority that people have in virtue of being in the relevant office. So you might think that if the President, in a time of war, decides to sleep eighteen hours a day because it is kind of scary and intimidating, that would be impeachable. Even though it is not a crime, it might qualify as a "misdemeanor" as it was understood in 1789. Or, ifthe President decides to use the CIA in order to harm his political enemies, there would be no "treason" and no "bribery," but there would be a largescale misuse of distinctly presidential power. 
That is kind of a glance at the text. If we look at the original understanding, at the time ofthe Constitutional Convention, we can fortify that view by noticing that the question, "What were the legitimate grounds for impeachment?", was debated in detail at the Convention itself. Contrary to what has been suggested, this was not an issue on which the Framers said little and left answers to posterity. They said a fair bit. A number of people in the constitutional Convention did not want impeachment at all. They claimed that this would be a recipe for factional fights, hence defeating the system of separation ofpowers, which could be ensured only if the legislature could not remove the executive. 
That was a strongly held position in the Convention. The key people who held it yielded by reference to examples of cases in which the President basically sold the country out during wartime. The swing votes agreed that treason and bribery would be legitimate reasons for removing a President from office. That is basically where the Constitution stood until September, which were the closing days of Constitutional drafting. 
At the last moment, George Mason, someone who had been persuaded to support impeachment, said that treason and bribery are too narrow. What if the President subverts the whole Constitution, ignores it, doesn't pay attention to it, doesn't do what the President's authorities are, or does something inconsistent with his distinctly presidential authorities? Shouldn't we allow discharge for "maladministration" also? Madison, at that point, said no, maladministration is too vague and too broad. That's no good. We need a more specific form of words. At which point the Framers put in the words "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors against the United States,"1 clearly signaling Mason's concern that you could have things that were like treason and bribery-offenses against the Nation as such, that did not qualify-that should be grounds for impeachment, too." 
The words "against the United States" were deleted by the Committee on Arrangement and Style, which had no authority to make substantive changes, and thought, it appears, that they were just eliminating redundancy. 2 It turned out to be an important act by the Committee on Arrangement and Style. In any case, it seems pretty clear that by the period 1789, 1790, and 1791, there was general agreement that the defining cases for impeachment, at least, were large-scale abuses of distinctly presidential authority. Thus, what President Clinton did, and some of what President Nixon was alleged to have done, do not fall within the cases that the Framers had in view, however egregious some or all of those things are. 
If we look forward and get a sense of our constitutional history, we will notice a remarkable fact: a tradition of forbearance and restraint on the part of both parties, even in an extraordinarily large number of cases in which something other than forbearance and restraint might have been expected. Here is an historically non-exhaustive list of cases. 
President Nixon, as noted, was alleged to have behaved dishonestly with respect to his tax obligations. Many Democrats concluded that that was not a legitimate basis for impeachment because it did not involve imncisluusdee othfapt raemsiodnegntitahle pgorowuenrd.sAfnodr itmhepyeascehlifn-cgonPsrceisoidueslnyt Ndeixciodne.d13not to 
President Reagan, it was alleged, sold arms unlawfully to the Contras, and there was extensive discussion of this. Vice President Bush, it was alleged, was also involved in the deal, in violation of the Boland Amendment, which expressly prohibited this kind of transaction. For all of the noise and fury over President Reagan's allegedly unlawful acts, there was no serious talk, at any point, of impeachment. There was an unwillingness to invoke the kind of artillery that would destabilize the Nation, even the face of allegations of unlawful transfers of arms to a nation with whom our relations were quite complex. 
It is clear that President Eisenhower lied to the country, very prominently, at least twice. Once he lied in connection with the downing of a U.S. airplane over Russia, which Russia claimed was a spy plane. Eisenhower said that it was not; he knew that it was. It turned out that he had to agree that it was, eventually, because the evidence was 
(1966). 

(1998). overwhelming. He also lied to the country about transferring arms to an unfriendly nation in return for the release of hostages. He said that it did not happen. It did-the documents are crystal clear. 
President Roosevelt transferred arms to England under the precursor of the "Lend-Lease" program which became a statutory program. This was an unlawful program in which Roosevelt transferred the arms to England in such a way as to concern the Secretary of Defense about what the Secretary of Defense thought was, this is a quote, "illegality and deception." 14 There was no serious talk, even when the facts came to light, that President Roosevelt should have been impeached. 
President Kennedy, in addition to his sexual misconduct, was romantically involved with someone who was romantically involved with at least one high-level member of the Mafia. 5 Now that goes beyond sexual recklessness. That puts the activities of the Justice Department at risk. Nonetheless, even the people who knew it did not think that this was legitimately impeachable. 
In context of the Vietnam War, maybe the largest social upheaval since World War ]I, President Johnson was subject to tremendous criticism. He lied to the country on numerous occasions about how things were going and about what was planned. However, not even his fiercest detractors undertook a serious impeachment effort. 
President Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus during the Civil War. The courts told him that that was unconstitutional. He basically ignored what the courts told him to do, thereby continuing to suspend the writ of habeas corpus. Even his detractors did not come close to suggesting that this violation of the Constitution's habeas corpus clause was a legitimate ground for impeachment. 
Now, I do not mean to suggest, by any means, that any of these cases were appropriate cases for impeachment. I do not think any of them were. What I mean to suggest, instead, is that there has been a kind of national convergence, a tacit, case-by-case common law notion that impeachment should be reserved only for the most extreme possible cases of abuse of distinctly presidential authority. 
How ought we to think of the impeachment of President Clinton in this light? The most obvious conclusion is that there was only one legitimate impeachment article: the one claiming the President misused his presidential power to get his staff and so forth to lie on his behalf. That is the only article that comes within the ballpark. The allegations of perjury ofNeutrality,1935-1941, 3 BuFF.J. INr'LL. 413, 486 (1996-97). 
1997) (reporting that Judith Campbell met Kennedy through Frank Sinatra, became Kennedy's lover, and was "involved in Kennedy's secret dealings with the Mafia"). and obstruction ofjustice, while quite serious and severe-these are, after all, felonies, and are nothing to laugh at or trivialize-are not legitimate bases for impeachment, even though they are legitimate bases for criminal punishment. 
To the suggestion that this means the President of the United States can continue to serve if he or she is a felon, the answer is: absolutely. That is our Constitution. The Constitution does not make the President removable for the commission of a felony; it makes the President removable for "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors, ' 16 and those are not the things at issue. 
To the suggestion that this means the President can continue to serve, even if he has violated the rule of law, the answer is the most obvious proposition in the whole debate-that Presidents frequently have violated the rule of law. President Truman seized the steel mills, President Johnson probably violated the law several times in connection with the Vietnam War, while President Roosevelt and President Eisenhower certainly violated the law. Violations of the rule of law do not make out an impeachable offense. 
Maybe the deeper problem is that it is going to be very hard in practice to distinguish this impeachment from other imaginable grounds for impeachment that will arise in the future. This is not to say that what President Reagan did is worse than or better than what President Clinton did. It is only to say that reasonable people go both ways on that issue. So long as we have reasonable people going both ways on that issue, this impeachment, as a precedent, threatens to undo our common law understanding of what the legitimate grounds for impeachment are, and what the nature of the standard is. 
The upshot of all this is that there are two ways to read the recent events, and either, for the purposes just suggested, would be good enough. One way-the preferred way-is to say that this is like the impeachment of President Johnson, which historians have found a partisan matter in which those who resisted impeachment were heroes. Of course, this is not to say that President Johnson did not violate the law-he did. He fired a Cabinet head in violation of a statute. Nonetheless, that was a partisan impeachment, and a highly destabilizing event where the impeachment device was used as a political tool. The best notion is that the Clinton impeachment was illegitimate and ought not to be repeated. 
An alternative reading-which Republicans in favor of impeachment seem to be converging toward-is to say that this was a legitimate impeachment because of the very unusual and genuinely egregious nature of the President's misconduct in connection with the criminal justice system. What is unusual about this view is that the President committed quite serious crimes in the course of activities which frequently place ordinary citizens at risk. This does not endanger the general principle that impeachment is generally for cases of large-scale abuse of distinctly presidential power. All this means is that this-President Clinton's particular crimes of perjury and obstructing justice-is one thing that does not fall within "generally." In other words, it is a narrow exception to the Senate prerequisite. 
You will have noticed that I prefer the view that this was an unconstitutional impeachment to the second view, that this was a legitimate, but narrow, case of impeachment. But either will do the trick for the future. Either will work for posterity. Those are the main propositions. Here are three littler ones. 
Number one: It has become very popular to blame the Supreme Court for causing all of this. It has become popular to blame the Supreme Court on the theory that none of this would have happened if the Court had struck down the Independent Counsel Act in Morrisonv. Olson, or if the Supreme Court had not allowed the civil action to go forward in Jonesv. Clinton. Justice Scalia is not a gloater, but he must have been something like the most gratified man in Washington to hear people who do not normally like Justice Scalia quoting him and admiring him for his prescience. And his dissenting opinion against Morrisonwas really on the money about the nature of the Independent Counsel Act and the incentives it creates. The problem with the claim that the Supreme Court was wrong in Morrisonis, in my view, that it is not very easy to come up with a constitutionalargument that legitimates the invalidation of the Independent Counsel Act. 
At the time of the Founders, it is not at all clear that the people thought that all prosecution needed to be under the arm of the President. Indeed, at the time of the Founding, and for about a hundred years afterwards, U.S. District Attorneys were not in law or in fact under the power of the President of the United States. It was only about a hundred years later that the Department of Justice was created and started centralizing everything. The notion that prosecutorial authority must, by virtue of being prosecutorial, be under the President's arm, finds no good home in the Constitution's original understanding. Now, maybe we could come up with an argument that would not be based on the original understanding, but that would suggest that the Independent Counsel Act should be doomed on constitutional grounds. Maybe the argument would have roughly the form that the Independent Counsel Act abridges liberty because of the narrow focus and unlimited budget. But that has a kind ofjerry-built quality, of the sort that the Warren Court has been reasonably criticized for using to invalidate legislation. And the Supreme Court's reluctance to invalidate an act of Congress made a certain intuitive sense: we do not want people who are investigating the highest officials in the land to be subject to discharge by the highest official in the land. 
The notion that that reasonable judgment by Congress is constitutionally illegitimate seems extremely adventurous. So this is my suggestion: Justice Scalia had the policy right, but he did not have the Constitution right. And the proper remedy, as Justice Scalia often says, for an objection of this kind, is political and not constitutional. The same thing might be said about Jonesv. Clinton.After all, there are some immunities in the Constitution-the Speech or Debate Clause, for example, gives Congress immunity with regard to speeches on the House floor; but there is no express presidential immunity from civil suits. 
If I may, I will just tell you alittle bit of an exchange I had when I was testifying in Congress.17 The members of Congress were extremely upset about the notion that the President could not be punished for these possibly criminal activities until he was out of office-which is my view. Congress, meanwhile, is protected against any kind of action for speeches and debates on the floor. There is nothing foreign to our traditions, in order to serve the public, of creating certain protections against civil and criminal actions. There is nothing new about that. Congress, itself, benefits from that. Indeed, there are several implied immunities in the Constitution. I am sure that you know about them. But they often come from thinking that the relevant officer cannot possibly perform hisjob ifthe relevant officer is not going to be immune. 
As disastrous as Jones v. Clintonturned out to be, it is a pretty unusual case. And the notion that the President cannot perform his job if he is subject to civil actions seems odd. Most people, probably some in this room, have performed theirjobs while being subject to civil actions. There is nothing completely disabling about a civil lawsuit. The Supreme Court rightly resisted the claim to build up from an ambiguous constitutional text an immunity that certainly is not there and that is not a necessary implication from it. As in Morrison v. Olson, the proper remedy to the policy problem-which Justice Breyer uniquely identified-is statutory, not constitutional. Congress should, it seems to me, pass a law saying that while the President is in office, he or she cannot be subject to civil actions, but the statute of limitations is not going to bar suits that are brought the day after he or she leaves. That is not to protect the President. That is not our concern. It is to protect the country, which is the same theory that underlies the narrow account of the legitimate grounds for impeachment that the Founders adopted and that I have tried to emphasize here. 
A further point is that many people have suggested that Congress ought Judiciary, Subcomm. on the Const. (Nov. 9, 1998) (statement of Cass R. Sunstein). [Vol. 51 to-and, if encouraged, will-take its constitutional obligations quite seriously. And we ought not to think of the judiciary as uniquely invested with power to think about the meaning of the Constitution. But in this, the most public encounter between our elected representatives and the Constitution of the United States, there were many troubling features. Many members of Congress repeatedly suggested that any crime or violation of the oath of office or violation of the "take-care" clause calls for impeachment, even though the Constitution unambiguously says otherwise, and even though many people, including members of those representatives' own staffs, were told that the Constitution expressly says otherwise. 
The overwhelming majority-and the word "majority" states it too weakly-of constitutional law teachers believed that President Clinton committed possibly felonious acts, but not impeachable acts. The overwhelming majority of Constitutional Law teachers may have been wrong-and this would not be the first time. But the vote in the House of Representatives split, astonishingly, along partisan lines, and the witnesses before the House Judiciary Committee consisted of a handpicked group of people. You had to search very far and wide to find nine constitutional scholars who thought President Clinton's impeachment was legitimate. Congress searched far and wide and found nine, and they opposed those nine to the hundreds of others who disagreed. The best way to predict members' judgments about the constitutional issue was looking at party affiliation. Nothing else was nearly as good-geography, law degree, gender, race-nothing else was nearly as good as party affiliation. 
My fellow llinoisan, Congressman Hyde, the Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, consistently argued that this was a process mandated by the Constitution, and that the Constitution required its continuation-as if anything in the document meant that the process had to continue as long as possible. There is nothing in the document supporting that judgment. This is not a reason to give up on the notion, that constitutional interpretation within the Congress ofthe United States should play a larger role and have a bigger place. But it does provide some new basis for skepticism about the possibility that it can be done on either side in good faith. 
What about the law of sexual harassment? Many people have urged that the two culprits are the Independent Counsel Act and the law of sexual harassment. In my view, that has half of the picture right, because there is nothing to blame in the law of sexual harassment. Jones's own case was a tough one, and the District Court, rightly or wrongly-but certainly not unreasonably--dismissed the case. This does not suggest that the sexual harassment law is out of control, or a basis for crazy lawsuits. On the contrary, if anything, it is just the opposite. But there is one problem, and it is not trivial. 
The problem that turned up is that in any case involving a sexual harassment allegation, it is apparently open to the plaintiff, at least in some trial courts, to undertake fairly extensive discovery about the consensual sexual activity of the defendant. That is bad for two reasons. One reason is that it opens up to public view activities that may well have a legitimate claim to secrecy. The other problem with this is that it creates a tremendous weapon to extract settlements. Now we do not know the magnitude of the problem, but from talking with trial judges, I, at least, have a sense that this is not a trivial problem. It happens. 
What might be done about it? Well, the first notation is let us not overreact. There are two sides to the story. Sexual harassment cases generally involve no witnesses, and the only way the plaintiff can prove that this happened was to show that there was a pattern. Moreover, the only way that he or she, usually she, can prove that there is a pattern, is to try to get other instances before the trier of fact. So, if you say that you cannot ever inquire into activities that the defendant says were consensual, you may insulate defendants from accurate charges. Again, there are two sides to this. 
What might be done? Well, here are two tentative suggestions about how to fix this not huge, but not trivial, problem. One is to have secret proceedings to make sure everything is sealed. The other is to condition certain questions on the part of the plaintiff on a prima facie showing that her case has merit or that the activity she wishes to discover was not consensual. 
It is time, now, to conclude. My first suggestion is that the Independent Counsel Act should be permitted to expire. It serves as a case study in the law of unintended consequences. This, after all, was a statute designed to increase trust in government, yet it has had exactly the opposite effect. The way high-level illegality ought to be handled is through the ordinary procedures of the Department of Justice, which is filled with civil servants who know what they are doing. Furthermore, the great run of cases can be entrusted, and the exceptional cases can be handled, as in the Watergate era. 
The second proposition is that, with respect to impeachment, it is very important that the nation converge, regardless of what we think about the impeachment of President Clinton, on the proposition that impeachment of a President is exceedingly rare, and is generally, if not exclusively, reserved to high-level misconduct on the President's part. It involves the misuse of authority that he or she has by virtue of being President. That tracks the original understanding of the Clause and our practices since the Constitution was ratified. 
I ha-ve also suggested that we ought not to blame the Supreme Court in Morrisonand Jonesv. Clinton;the Court did what it was supposed to do, and there are statutory remedies for the problems created by these cases. There is fresh reason to be uncertain about whether Congress can be trusted to interpret the Constitution fairly. At the same time, the law of sexual harassment, while hardly the culprit, has a problem-a problem that I have a hunch can be fixed, pretty reasonably. 
One final note: After most scandals in our history, what we try to do is devise institutions so that the underlying conduct that created the scandal cannot occur again. I think that is the unbroken pattern of our scandals. This one has a unique feature: Everybody agrees that the President's underlying conduct was very bad. But the primary focus on both sides is to try to figure out institutional remedies that will assure the country that the institutional problems that accompany the scandals will be alleviated. This is a scandal where primary attention is not on the activity by the individuals who caused the scandal, but the institutional mechanisms that made it take the form it did. I think that is wise. 
My final suggestion is that the way to make some progress on that is to return to the Founders' aspiration to have a deliberative democracy. Such a democracy is not overrun by passions of the moment, but instead, weds an understanding of that aspiration with some judgments about the likely incentive effects of different governmental institutions. 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 
Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? 
Cass R. Sunsteint 
INTRODUCTION did not rely on the ordinary or original meaning of legal texts. On the contrary, they thought that statutes should be construed in accordance with the spirit of the age, defined by reference to the Nazi regime. They thought that courts could carry out their task "only if they do not remain glued to the letter of the law, but rather penetrate its inner core in their interpretations and do their part to see that the aims of the lawmaker are realized."2 
that a law forbidding "sexual intercourse" between Germans and Jews is not limited to coition .... 
A broad interpretation is ... 
appropriate in view of the fact that the provisions of the law are meant to protect not only German blood but also German honor. This requires that in addition to coition, all such sexual manipulations-whether actively performed or passively tolerated-that have as their aim the satisfaction of one partner's sex drive in a manner other than the completion of t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Saul Levmore, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for valuable comments on an earlier draft. Participants in the Symposium at the University of Chicago Law School offered a great deal of help; I am especially grateful to Frank Easterbrook and Frank Michelman. Brian Lehman provided superb research assistance and excellent comments as well. 
See Ingo Mfiller, Hitler's Justice: The Courts of the Third Reich 80-81 (Harvard 1991) (Deborah Lucas Schneider, trans) (discussing the adoption of a "teleological method" of interpretation, which "encouraged judges to identify a particular ideological meaning and intent underlying a given law and then use this 'intent' to undermine the wording of the law as such"). Compare the intriguing discussion of the formalism of Italian courts under fascism in Guido Calabresi, The Story of Italy: The Modern Italian Legal System (Yale/Video nd) (manuscript on file with U Chi L Rev). 
2 72 EntscheidungendesReichsgerichts in Strafsachen 9 (1939), translated in Mifiler, Hitler'sJusticeat 101 (cited in note 1). coition, must cease between Jews and citizens of German or related kinds of blood.' 
A lower court went so far as to conclude that kissing could take "the place of normal sexual intercourse" and therefore violate the statute, in such a way as to justify a two year jail sentence.4 
After the war, the Allied forces faced a range of choices about how to reform the German legal system. One of their first steps was to insist on a formalistic, "plain meaning" approach to law. "[S]uch laws enacted in the Hitler period as had not been voided were to be interpreted in accordance with 'the plain meaning of the text and without regard to objectives or meanings ascribed in preambles or other pronouncements."'5 
Now consider the following cases: not be used if, after appropriate tests, it is "found by the Secretary to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal."6 The Secretary seeks to allow use of a color additive, even if it is carcinogenic, if the lifetime risk of cancer is equal to or less than one in nine million. This is nine times less than the risk of getting cancer from eating, once every two hundred fifty days, a single peanut with the lawfully permitted level of aflatoxins, and also nine times less than the risk of getting cancer from increased air pollution as a result of spending seventeen hours every year in Denver rather than the District of Columbia. Has the Secretary violated the Delaney Clause?7 Secretary of Labor, in issuing standards dealing with toxic materials, "shall set the standard which most adequately assures, to the extent feasible, on the basis of the best available evidence, that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard dealt with by such standard for the period of his working life."8 The Secretary issues a regulation controlling benzene at a level of one part benzene per million parts of air, claiming that there is no safe threshold for benzene. Is the regulation lawful? include an article that is "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.""0 It is clear that the Congress that enacted the Act did not believe that tobacco counted as a "drug." Can the FDA regulate tobacco products as such?" B. 
It is not easy to define the term 'Tormalism,"2 partly because there is no canonical kind of formalism. My principal concern here is with formalism as an approach to statutory construction, though I will also touch on formalism in the law of contract and constitutional law. The focus throughout will be on formalism as an interpretivestrategy. 
For present purposes, let us understand formalist strategies to entail three commitments: to promoting compliance with all applicable legal formalities (whether or not they make sense in the individual case), to ensuring rule-bound law (even if application ofthe rule, statutory or contractual, makes little sense in the individual case), and to constraining the discretion of judges in deciding cases. Thus understood, formalism is an attempt to make the law both autonomous, in the particular sense that it does not depend on moral or political values of particular judges, and also deductive, in the sense that judges decide cases mechanically on the basis of preexisting law and do not exercise dis29 USC § 655(bX5) (1994). 
For the Court's answer, see IndustrialUnionDepartment v American PetroleumInstitute, 448 US 607, 614-15 (1989). 
10 21 USC § 321(g)(1)(C) (1994). 
nFor the court's answer, see Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp v FDA, 153 F3d 155, 176 (4th Cir 1998). 
1 Consider H.L.A. Hart, The Concept ofLaw 123 (Clarendon 2d ed 1994): All rules involve recognizing or classifying particular cases as instances of general terms, and in the case of everything which we are prepared to call a rule it is possible to distinguish clear central cases, where it certainly applies and others where there are reasons for both asserting and denying that it applies. ... This imparts to all rules a fringe of vagueness of "open texture" .... This aspect of law is often held to show that any elucidation of the concept of law in terms of rules must be misleading. To insist on it in the face of the realities of the situation is often stigmatized as "conceptualism" or "formalism." cretion in individual cases. Formalism therefore entails an interpretive method that relies on the text of the relevant law and that excludes or minimizes extratextual sources of law. It tends as well to favor judicial holdings that take the form of wide rules rather than narrow settlements of particular disputes. 
Because formalism downplays the role of extratextual sources, it generally denies courts four relevant powers: to make exceptions to the text when those exceptions seem sensible or even necessary; to allow meaning to change over time; to invoke "canons" of construction to push statutes in favored directions; and to invoke the purposes of the legislature to press otherwise unambiguous words in certain directions. Thus understood, formalism stands opposed to "equity," in the form of a willingness to extend or limit the reach of the applicable text, and also to "purposive" approaches to legal terms; 3 it is opposed to dynamic (as distinguished from static) conceptions of meaning; 4 it is opposed too to the use of canons of construction, at least if they are based on controversial arguments of policy. Frederick Schauer is a prominent academic defender of formalism; 5 on the current Supreme Court, Justice Scalia is its most enthusiastic proponent. 6 
There is certainly no canonical form of antiformalism, and those who reject formalism can offer many different competing approaches. But the antiformalist tends to insist that interpretation requires or permits resort to sources other than the text, and the antiformalist tends as well to support judgments that take the form of narrow rather than wide holdings.' The antiformalist is less worried about the exercise of discretion in individual cases and is more concerned about avoiding the kinds of rigidity that can lead to injustices and mistakes. Thus the antiformalist might contend that courts legitimately invoke purposes, or background principles of various kinds, to push statutes (or contracts) in what seem to be sensible directions. There is obviously a relationship between the debate over formalism and the debate over rules and standards, a relationship that will inform the analysis through"No one denies that terms take their meaning from context. It is possible to favor the ordinary meaning of the text over the law's apparent purposes without denying the dependence of meaning on context, though of course this view raises complexities. 
" Compare William N. Eskridge, Jr., Dynamic Statutory Interpretation 48-80 (Harvard 1994) (arguing the opposite). 
"See, for example, Frederick Schauer, Playing By the Rules (Claredon 1991). Schauer's version of formalism is highly qualified. 
See Antonin Scalia, A Matterof Interpretation:Federal Courts and the Law (Princeton 1997). 
" See, for example, Cass R. Sunstein, One CaseAt A Time: JudicialMinimalism and the Supreme Court (Harvard 1999). out. Ronald Dworkin is a prominent antiformalist; i5 on the current Court, Justice Breyer is an outspoken critic of formalism. 9 
The real question is "what degree of formalism?" rather than "formalist or not?"'° It is hard to find anyone who believes that canons of construction have no legitimate place in interpretation, or who thinks that literal language should always be followed no matter how absurd and palpably unintended the outcome. No antiformalist thinks that judges interpreting statutes should engage in ad hoc balancing of all relevant considerations. The real division is along a continuum. One pole is represented by those who aspire to textually driven, rule-bound, rule-announcing judgments; the other is represented by those who are quite willing to reject the text when it would produce an unreasonable outcome, or when it is inconsistent with the legislative history, or when it conflicts with policy judgments of certain kinds or substantive canons of construction. 
No sensible formalist claims to have offered a complete theory of legal interpretation. Formalist interpretation involves terms that are, or seem, unambiguous. And no formalist should deny that background principles of various sorts are ubiquitous; language has no meaning without such principles, and hence formalism becomes a feasible project only when and because there is agreement on the content of the governing principles. It is another question how the formalist would or should handle terms that are, or seem, unclear, like "equal" or "unreasonable."' Every formalist knows that in many cases it will be necessary to look beyond the text to interpret a statutory term, and to do so self-consciously. The formalist's goal, in such cases, is to develop approaches to interpretation that will push the law in rule-like directions, denying much discretion to judges who will subsequently act on the spot.2" 
" See his discussion of Tennessee Valley Authority v Hill, 437 US 153 (1978), in Ronald Dworkin, Law's Empire 20-23 (Harvard 1985). See also James Traub, Talk of the Town, New Yorker 35 (June 2, 1997) (reporting Dworkin's discussion of the rule involving basketball players going onto the floor during a fight). 
" See Stephen Breyer, On the Uses ofLegislativeHistory in InterpretingStatutes,65 S Cal L Rev 845 (1992). 
"This suggestion is strongly supported by the comparative analysis in Robert Summers and Neil McCormack, eds, InterpretingStatutes:A comparative study (Dartmouth 1991). The analysis shows that while there are significant differences among nations, none is committed to literal language in all cases, and all give text a kind of priority. 
Of course cultural understandings might render these terms unambiguous. 
This is part ofthe appeal of formalism in constitutional law. See Scalia, A Matterof Interpretationat 37-47 (cited in note 16). Of course a judge who places a high premium on fidelity to precedent can accomplish the goal of making law more predictable and rule-like, even though such a judge may lack a formalist theory of interpretation. For present put 
In this Article I ask whether a good defense of formalism must be empirical-whether it must depend on factual assumptions and claims. With some qualifications, my answer is "Yes." Formalism should be defended pragmatically, with close reference to the likely performance of various institutions, and in terms of its consequences; it is not easily defended by reference to quasi-theological claims about the nature of law, legitimacy, or democracy. In this sense a good defender of formalism can and (in my view) had better be a legal realist too.' This is not because notions like legitimacy are unimportant--on the contrary, they are extremely important-but because they cannot, without a great deal of empirical supplementation, tell us whether to be formalists or not. And it may indeed be possible to defend formalism in realist terms, as, for example, Lisa Bernstein has done in certain contexts in commercial law.24 
More specifically, I claim that formalism, as an approach to statutory interpretation, must be defended by empirical claims about the likely performance and activities of courts, legislatures, administrative agencies, and private parties. To know whether formalism is good, we need to know three principal things: * whether a formalist or nonformalist judiciary will produce more mistakes and injustices; " whether the legislature will anticipate possible mistakes or injustices in advance, and whether it will correct them after they occur, and do so at relatively low cost; and " whether a nonformalist judiciary will greatly increase the costs of decision, for courts, litigants, and those seeking legal advice, in the process increasing the costs associated with unpredictability. 
To identify these questions is to say that the ultimate issue is what interpretivestrategy will create lower costs of decision and poses I am discussing theories of interpretation and not judges who emphasize precedent as formalists. 
" In the same general spirit, see William N. Eskridge, Jr., Textualism: The Unknown Ideal?, 96 Mich L Rev 1509 (1998) (reviewing Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation(cited in note 16), and exploring the practical consequences of textualism); Richard A. Posner, Bork and Beethoven, 42 Stan L Rev 1365, 1368 (1990) (criticizing Bork for his failure to supply .convincing reasons" why society should want judges to adopt originalism). See also Calabresi, Story of Italy (cited in note 1), which is in the same category insofar as it depicts formalism as a pragmatic approach to concrete institutional problems. 
" See Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable EmpiricalBasis of Article 2's Incorporation Strategy:A PreliminaryStudy, 66 U Chi L Rev 710 (1999); Lisa Bernstein, MerchantLaw in a Merchant Court:Rethinking the Code's Search for Immanent Business Norms, 144 U Pa L Rev 1765 (1996). costs of error (the reference to "costs" should not imply economic reductionism; the term is a placeholder for the real-world difficulties-in terms of unpredictability of outcomes-that might follow from one or another interpretive strategy). In a legal system in which the legislature is extremely careful before the fact, and highly responsive to judicial interpretations after the fact, formalism might well make sense, especially if a nonformalist judiciary would create confusion and make blunders of its own. By contrast, a nonformalist approach would make sense in a legal system with an excellent judiciary and a legislature that is both careless and inattentive. 
The principal qualification to my basic thesis-that formalism must be defended empirically--comes from the fact that without normative claims of some kind, it is impossible to know what counts as a "mistake" or an "injustice" in interpretation, and hence the idea of "error costs" seems dependent on the antecedent theory of interpretation, in which case the theory cannot be chosen on the basis of an (antecedent) inquiry into error costs.' I discuss this issue in more detail below.26 For now let me suggest that people who disagree about what counts as an "error" should also agree that the case for formalism depends largely on the capacities of relevant institutions, and in particular on the capacities of courts and legislatures. Through agreement on this point, it may be possible to bracket many of the normative debates and to make a great deal of progress by-investigating empirical questions. At the very least, it will be possible to see through some prominent but quite implausible arguments for and against formalism (involving, for example, legitimacy, Article I, or separation of powers) and to see the issues on which a choice among interpretive methods really depends. 
Indeed, I hypothesize that it is disagreement over the underlying empirical issues-not over large concepts of any kindthat principally separates formalists and nonformalists. Of course, decisive empirical evidence is not easy to find on such questions, partly because of the difficulty of controlling for confounding variables. But by recognizing the empirical issues as such, we would have a better sense of what we are disagreeing about,itself a large gain. And with more research, we could learn 
There is an analogy here with debates over cost-benefit analysis. Many people can agree that cost-benefit analysis makes sense, but they may disagree, sharply, over what should count as a cost or a benefit, and how much various things that count should be allowed to count. By itself,the idea of cost-benefit analysis is empty; the question is whether it can be specified in such a way as to command, and deserve, widespread support. 
See Section IV.E. a great deal more about the underlying questions. Of course empirical evidence cannot by itself yield any normative conclusion; the question is whether the normative background is sufficiently shared, so that certain findings would lead apparent antagonists in the same general direction. I believe that this is the case here, and that with imaginable empirical findings, both formalists and antiformalists should be flexible enough to move in the direction of their apparent adversariesY This is the great hope of empirical research: to soften legal and political debate by showing that disputes about values are often disputes about facts, at least in the sense that certain answers to factual questions can make it unnecessary to resolve disputes about values. 
I should emphasize that I do not actually defend formalism here.' The important point involves not the conclusion, but the identification of the grounds on which formalists and antfformalists might sensibly disagree. Thus my suggestion to those who are attracted to either Justice Scalia's or Ronald Dworkin's approach to legal interpretation is this: Doesn't the choice between the competing approaches depend on predictive judgments about which a great deal remains to be learned? Don't the relevant disagreements turn, in large part, on those judgments? 
Let us distinguish between two phenomena that go under the term "formalism." The first is captured in the pretense that all or most legal terms can resolve hard cases. This pretense is illustrated by (for example) the view that the term "liberty" necessarily includes freedom of contract, or that a requirement of "equal protection" necessarily prohibits (or for that matter requires) affirmative action. The problem with this species of formalism is 
In this way I suggest that the debate over legal interpretation is not so different from the debate over (for example) the minimum wage: If the minimum wage really does substantially increase unemployment, those who endorse it should be prepared to rethink; if the minimum wage has no adverse effect on employment, those who condemn it should be prepared to rethink. 
" Nor do I mean to suggest, via the title, that any side bears the burden of proof. For clarification, I might add that while formalism captures part of the territory, I believe that it is an inadequate approach to statutory and constitutional interpretation in the United States. In statutory interpretation, I would favor a presumption in favor of that species of formalism that emphasizes the natural meaning ofstatutory terms, taken in their context; but I would allow the presumption to yield where the result is absurd or where background principles, constitutional or otherwise, argue in favor of pressing the text in particular directions. Cass IL Sunstein, An Incompletely Theorized Conviction, 112 Harv L Rev (forthcoming 1999). Constitutional law seems to me to have an even larger nonformalist tendency, and properly so, because it has so many common law characteristics. But a defense ofthese propositions would go well beyond the current discussion. that it is dishonorable, a kind of fraud. The relevant legal terms have many possible meanings, and a language lesson is insufficient to justify the choice. But a second possible species of formalism is entirely honorable. On this view, statutory terms should be understood in accordance with their ordinary meaning in the relevant community. When there is such an ordinary meaning, nothing is fraudulent about this approach to legal interpretation. The question is whether it is good, not whether it is fraudulent. 
What we might call "the new formalism" is an intriguing blend of realist and formalist arguments. 9 It amounts to an embrace of formalism because of the good effects that formalism has. Formalism might, for example, increase predictability for all concerned, in the process greatly decreasing the costs of decision. Clear rules in the conflict of laws might be good because they promote planning; a textualist approach to statutes might produce greater clarity in the law. Some of these pragmatic and empirical points appear, for example, in Justice Scalia's argument on behalf of the original meaning of legal texts."0 
I think that this is a genuinely new formalism,"' sharply distinguished from the old, which was, at least in its selfpresentation, not at all empirical and pragmatic in character. At least in public law, the principal defenses of formalism-and the principal challenges to formalism-have been abstract and conceptual, and have not depended on empirical claims at all. These are the arguments that I wish to reject. I believe that the conceptual arguments are best taken as pragmatic arguments in disguise; that claims about "legitimacy" are really consequentialist claims about what system of interpretation is likely to have good effects. Those who wish to defend formalism should move from (unhelpful and question-begging) abstract conceptual arguments to (more promising and tractable) concrete empirical claims. 
I will say much more about these issues below. For the moment let us try to locate the less abstract grounds on which for 
This is the tendency in, for example, Bernstein, 144 U Pa L Rev 1765 (cited in note 24); Adrian Vermeule, LegislativeHistory and the Limits ofJudicialCompetence: The Untold Story of Holy Trinity Church, 50 Stan L Rev 1833, 1885-96 (1998) (arguing that problems in judicial competence make legislative history an unhelpful source for statutory interpretation). See also Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for A Complex World (Harvard 1995), which, when stripped of its libertarian foundations, seems to me a policy-oriented, insistently instrumental argument for rules as the best way of minimizing the sum of decision costs and error costs. 
See Scalia, A MatterofInterpretationat 44-47 (cited in note 16). " Of course the old formalism was sometimes embraced on more pragmatic terms. malists and antiformalists might be disagreeing. The law of contract is the place to start. 
A major task of contract law is to develop default rules, even in cases in which the contract seems clear. Consider, for example, a case in which an employee complains that he has been fired without any showing of cause. If the contract says nothing about whether employment is "for cause" or "at will," the court will have to write an implied term, applying a default rule that governs such situations. Indeed, the need for default rules is even more pervasive than it seems. No term, contractual or otherwise, has meaning in isolation; meaning is always a function of both culture and context. When a contractual term seems clear and selfsufficient, and to require no resort to default rules, it is only because there is general agreement on the relevant culture and the relevant context. The same is true for statutory interpretation. 
Good formalists do not deny this point; formalism is a doomed enterprise if it is an effort to give meaning to terms apart from cultural understandings and context. Law can never be autonomous or rule-bound in that sense. Every term requires interpretation. Thus the cases described in the Introduction above32 seem to involve "plain" meaning only to the extent that there is general agreement about the governing background understandings. And when culture and context change, a term that once seemed vague ("equality") may become clear, and a term that once seemed clear ("carcinogenic," "psychopathic") may become vague. 
In the law of contract and statutory construction, default rules fall in several categories. Some such rules are marketmimicking. Here the goal is to replicate what the parties would have done if they had made specific provision on the point. In the law of contract, whether an employment agreement is for cause or at will might be determined by asking what the parties would have done if they had made an explicit provision on the termination of employment. The key question, "What would the parties have done?," is an empirical one. There is an analogue in statutory construction. If, for example, we do not know whether the Endangered Species Act' applies outside the territorial boundaries of the United States, we might construe the statute by asking how Congress would have resolved the issue if it had done pre 
See text accompanying notes 6-11. 
W16 USC §§ 1536 et seq (1994). cisely that. The notion of "imaginative reconstruction" in statutory construction embodies this understanding of the interpreter's task.' 
Other default rules are information-eliciting. The point of such rules is to put on the person most likely to speak the obligation to obtain a clear statement one way or the other. Hence information-eliciting default rules are sometimes described as "penalties.' Such rules attempt to ensure that both parties (and also the courts) will have information at the time the contract is made; they counteract the risk of strategic nondisclosure. Suppose, for example, that a court does not know if the parties would have made an employment contract at will or for cause. The court might want to impose before-the-fact incentives that would encourage the parties to speak unambiguously, both to one another and to the court. It is reasonable to think that if the court wants to do this, it should hold against the employer-that is, it should say that contracts are presumed to be for cause, on the theory that the employer is most likely to make suitable corrections if this provision does not fit the needs of the parties. The key questions here as well are empirical in nature: Who is most likely to make an explicit provision on the subject? At what cost will they do so? 
It is also possible to imagine information-eliciting default rules in the area of statutory interpretation. For example, a court might conclude that statutes should be presumed not to apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States-if it believes that this approach is most likely to elicit a clear statement from Congress-so that all parties (and the courts) are informed, in advance, of the relevant outcomes.' It should be clear that an information-eliciting default rule can serve formalist goals by decreasing uncertainty and judicial guessing games. The empirical 
See, for example, Richard A. Posner, Statutory Interpretation-inthe Classroomand the Courtroom, 50 U Chi L Rev 800, 817 (1983) ("[Tlhe task for the judge called upon to interpret a statute is best described as one of imaginative reconstruction. The judge should try to think his way as best he can into the minds of the enacting legislators and imagine how they would have wanted the statute applied to the case at bar."). See also Richard A. Posner, The Problems of Jurisprudence273 (Harvard 1990) ("When confronting unclear statutes, judges ... have to summon all their powers of imagination and empathy in an effort... to place themselves in the position ofthe legislators who enacted the statute that they are being asked to interpret. They cannot only study plain meanings; they must try to understand the problem that that the legislature faced."). 
See Ian Ayres and Robert Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts:An Economic Theory of DefaultRules, 99 Yale L J 87 (1989) (introducing the concept of penalty default rules). 
' See, for example, EEOCv Arabian American Oil Co, 499 US 244, 248 (1991) (employing such a rule). questions for statutory default rules are: Which party is in the best position to obtain an explicit provision? What is the cost of doing so? 
These points raise the question how a court should choose between a market-mimicking and an information-eliciting default rule. One possibility is to ask whether the court is confident that it can generate a good rule of either kind. If a court knows that the parties to a contract would have agreed on some term X, it seems plain that the court should simply adopt that term; there is no need to try to elicit the relevant information. But if a court has no idea what the parties would have done, and if it has a good idea how to allocate the burden so as to elicit a clear statement, an information-eliciting default rule seems better. Thus, for example, an at will background rule would make a good deal of sense if a court was clear that this is the rule that these parties, or most parties, would accept. But if a court is unsure what the parties would do, and f it has confidence about which party would be in a good position to obtain a clear statement, it should adopt an information-eliciting default rule. If the court has no idea what term employers and employees would choose, it might adopt a waivable for cause rule, on the theory that this rule will force employers to come up with a different result if that seems desirable. But ff the party in the best position to obtain an explicit provision can do so only at very high cost, perhaps a marketmimicking default rule would be better. 
This inquiry into judicial confidence about potential default rules can be understood as a simple way of asking a more systematic question about how to reduce the costs of decision and the costs of errors. (As noted, we should not be too reductionistic here; decision costs and error costs differ from one another, and they include costs of qualitatively diverse kinds.) Decision costs can be understood as the costs of finding out what the law is-a cost faced by courts (attempting to discern the legal rule while deciding the case) and by ordinary citizens (having to invest resources in figuring out the content of the law). Error costs involve both the number of mistakes and the magnitude of mistakes. On some empirical assumptions, a market-mimicking default rule would minimize the relevant costs; on other assumptions, an information-eliciting rule would do so. An independent point involves the variabilityof mistakes. It is possible, for example, that a nonformalist judiciary will produce highly variable, even random errors, while a formalist judiciary will produce the same number and magnitude of mistakes, but in a way that involves no variability and a great deal of predictability. 
HeinOnline -- 66 U. Chi. L. Rev. 647 1999 
These ideas can help guide the selection of default rules. If a court deciding a contract case knows that a certain background rule is what the parties would have chosen, it has (by hypothesis) discovered the right rule and perhaps at low cost. If a court is unaware of the market-mimicking rule, but if it knows what rule will elicit clear statements from the parties, it can impose (at low cost) a rule that will produce the right outcome. When the court lacks confidence in either kind of default rule, it might ask in which rule it has comparatively greater confidence, and choose that one. In the law of contract, an error can be defined as an outcome different from what the parties would have chosen if they had made explicit provision on the point; this simple definition can work for the vast bulk of cases. 7 Courts that do not care about what the parties would have done, and that look instead to the objective meaning of contractual terms, should be taken to be saying that this method of interpretation is most likely to minimize decision costs and error costs. 
Much the same can be said about statutory interpretation, though there are disanalogies as well as analogies. Begin with the suggestion that when in doubt about the meaning of an ambiguous term, courts should presume in favor of the outcome that Congress would have reached if it had done so expressly.' Suppose, for example, that one linguistically plausible outcome would produce an extraordinary outcome, one that would risk absurdity. Courts would do well to presume that the absurd outcome was not intended; the presumption could be rebutted by showing something in the context or background to suggest that Congress would have reached that result if it had been explicit on the question at hand. This would be a kind of market-mimicking approach. But if courts have no idea how to understand the term-if the term is ambiguous and if no one can say what resolution Congress would have reached-courts might adopt an interpretation that would impose on those most likely to obtain a clear statement the obligation to do precisely that. Consider, for example, the idea that statutes and treaties will ordinarily be construed favorably to Native Americans." This idea can be defended by reference to the fact that such statutes and terms are nearly "In some cases, an error may be defined differently, as when some public policy concern suggests that party autonomy is not the foundation for the outcome. This would require a different analysis. 
"This suggestion is controversial, to be sure, and qualifications will be introduced as the discussion proceeds. Note that it does not mean that courts should interpret otherwise clear terms by asking about Congress's subjective intentions. 
"See Montanav Blackfeet Tribe, 471 US 759, 766-68 (1985). dictated by Congress, which is therefore in the better position to get the terms that it wants. 
There are, however, some special complexities in the statutory area. First, it can be very hard--even harder than in contract law-to know who is in the best position to obtain a clear statement one way or the other. Partly because of this difficulty, statutory default rules tend, in practice, to be based on considerations of public policy,40 not on allocating the burden to the "best eliciter." 
It is also possible to doubt the analogy between the contract law question ("what the parties would have done") and the statutory question ("what Congress would have done"). In the law of contract, there may be agreement on what counts as a mistake: doing something different from what the parties would have done.4' This is much less clear in the context of construing statutes; many people think that ambiguous terms should not be understood by asking what Congress would have done.42 Perhaps the question is irrelevant or only part of the picture. And perhaps any judgment about what counts as an "error" is an artifact of the theory, and hence it may be impossible to know whether we have an error at all unless we have first selected the appropriate theory. I will return to this question below. 3 For now let me suggest that where statutes are genuinely ambiguous, an understanding of what Congress would have done is at least a reasonable place to start the analysis. Those who reject this view ("imaginative reconstruction") even as a starting point might ask why they do so, and whether empirical questions are relevant to their judgment; I take up this question below. 
A final point is that in statutory interpretation, as in contract law, the default rule may have an "endowment effect" and thus tend to stick. The preferences of relevant actors may not be entirely independent of the legal rule. If the background rule is that statutes do not apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States, those who favor the statute in question may " See the excellent discussion in Jane S. Schacter, The Confounding Common-Law Originalismin Recent Supreme Court StatutoryInterpretation:Implicationsfor the Legislative History Debate and Beyond, 51 Stan L Rev 1 (1998) (discussing the large role judicially crafted policy norms play in Supreme Court statutory interpretation). 
"'In contract law, however, formalism might be defended not as getting what the parties would have done, but of getting clarity for the parties and the courts, in a way that minimizes the sum of error costs and decision costs. 
" See Frank H. Easterbrook, Statutes' Domain, 50 U Chi L Rev 533, 534 (1983) (arguing that courts should refrain from acting in situations of statutory ambiguity even when they know what Congress would have done). 
' See Section IV.E. demand a high "price" to give up their presumptive right, whereas if the background rule is against application, those who favor the statute may demand a much lower "price." Thus background rules can affect the judgments, beliefs, and preferences of the parties to contracts and the parties to law, a phenomenon that much complicates the idea of "market-mimicking." 
Thus far the discussion has involved genuine default rules. But some interpretive rules are based on public policy and inalienable;they are, in that sense, far more than mere default rules. Constitutional law amounts to the equivalent of inalienable default rules for statutory interpretation; of course Congress is not permitted to contract around constitutional requirements. These points are pretty obvious, but a less obvious point is in the background: There is a continuum from "other things being equal" default rules to "superstrong" default rules, which require an especially clear statement from the parties or from Congress, to genuinely inalienable default rules. 
An understanding of default rules helps to reveal the empirical dimensions of any dispute over formalism. As noted, a central formalist goal is to reduce the burdens of on-the-spot decisions, above all by eliminating the need for the exercise of discretion in particular cases, and by making sure that law is as rule-like as possible, in a way that promotes predictability for parties and lawmakers alike.44 Thus we can find formalism in the set of ideas most closely associated with Justice Antonin Scalia. But consider Scalia's vivid response to the charge of formalism: "[O1fcourse it's formalist! The rule of law is about form."4" This is an emphatically formal response to the charge of formalism; it amounts to a defense of a formal approach not by reference to considerations of democracy, policy, or anything else, but by reference to an "is," which is taken as an unanalyzed given-here, what the law "is about." Plainly this way of defending formalism is unsatisfactory. Formalism cannot be justified by an "is"; it must be justified by reference to something outside itself (as Justice Scalia is obvi"See Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions, 110 Ethics (forthcoming 1999) (evaluating ex ante and ex post burdens). 
"Scalia, A Matter ofInterpretationat 25 (cited in note 16). ously aware).46 The trick is to identify what the justification might be. 
The discussion thus far provides several clues. Perhaps formalism can operate as a kind of massive or global default rule, one that operates, on the whole, either as a good marketmimicking default rule or as a good information-eliciting default rule: More precisely, a formal approach to interpretation might produce simple, clear rules (in the law of contract and the law of statutory interpretation) that reduce the costs of both decision and error. Formalism might reduce decision costs if it is relatively easy for people in a formalist system to know what the law is. Formalism might reduce error costs if it leads to fewer and less damaging mistakes than any alternative (again defining mistakes provisionally and, in cases of ambiguity or genuine doubt, as outcomes that deviate from what the enacting Congress would have done), and if any mistakes are corrected, quickly and at low cost, by the parties or by Congress. 
It should be at once apparent that these propositions will depend on empirical issues. Suppose, for example, that a judge who rejects formalism can (at low cost) generate excellent marketmimicking default rules; suppose, that is, that a judge can temper contractual or statutory language in such a way as to discern what the relevant parties (to the contract or in the legislature) would have done. If this is so, the case for formalism is much weakened. But suppose-by contrast-that judges can generate information-eliciting default rules, formalist in character, that work extremely well in creating good ex ante incentives for contracting parties and for Congress. If this is so, the case for formalism is greatly strengthened. And to know which of these alternatives holds, we need to know a great deal about likely institutional performance and about underlying facts. Think, for example, of the famous case of Church of Holy Trinity v United States4,7 where the Court appeared to reject a formal approach in favor of one based on legislative "intention."48 If Congress would 
See id at 31-34. This is denied in Ernest J. Weinrib, Legal Formalism:On the Immanent Rationalityof Law, 97 Yale L J 949, 951 (1988) ("Formalism postulates that law is intelligible as an internally coherent phenomenon.'). I believe that Joseph Ra's response is convincing. See Joseph Raz, Formalism and the Rule of Law, in Robert George, ed, NaturalLaw Theory 309 (Clarendon 1992). 
143 US 457 (1892). 
"But see Scalia, A Matter of Interpretationat 18-23 (cited in note 16) (referencing Holy Trinity as an example of the "danger" of using legislative intent as an interpretive standard); Vermeule, 50 Stan L Rev at 1863-77 (cited in note 29) (arguing that judges are not competent to derive legislative intent from legislative history, as exemplified by Holy Trinity). Compare Eskridge, 96 Mich L Rev at 1517-19, 1533-35 (cited in note 23) (arguing have corrected any problems emerging from a formal approach, and would have done so costlessly, the argument for formalism, in cases of that kind, seems greatly strengthened. (A legislative correction does not of course mean that the court was wrong.) 
To get hold of the resulting debates, and to understand more concretely what formalists and nonformalists are disputing, it is necessary to make some further distinctions. First consider the problem of statutory ambiguity, a problem that arises when Congress uses a term that is reasonably understood in several different ways. Every sensible formalist is aware that when a statute is ambiguous, it is necessary to consult something other than the text. Here there is no dispute between formalists and nonformalists. A consistent formalist might appeal to background principles of various kinds, like the rule of lenity (counseling courts to construe criminal statutes narrowly) or the nature of the federal system (often said to require courts not to allow national law to preempt state law). An analogy can be found in Justice Scalia's suggestion that substantive due process should be understood by reference to tradition, understood at the lowest level of generality.49 The advantage of an approach of this kind is that it promises to contain judicial discretion on the spot, by requiring courts to use rules where text is unclear. Nonformalists are likely to be skeptical of the overall value of these second-best efforts to constrain decisional discretion. 
A second problem involves the problem of statutory generality, which arises when Congress uses a broad term that appears to cover the case at hand, but that may produce unreasonableness or absurdity in doing so. Here the formalist wants to understand the term in the general sense suggested by its literal meaning; the nonformalist tends to disagree, finding in excessive generality a genuine interpretive puzzle. Consider Wittgenstein's famous example: "Someone says to me: 'Shew the children a game.' I teach them gaming with dice, and the other says, 'I didn't mean that sort of game.' Must the exclusion of the game with dice have come before his mind when he gave me the order?" ° The cases described in the Introduction51 are possible cases that formalism is indeterminate in Holy Trinity because the statutory terms are ambiguous). 
MichaelH. u GeraldD., 491 US 110, 127 n 6 (1989). 
' Ludwig Wittgenstein, PhilosophicalInvestigations 33 (Blackwell 1963) (G.E.M. Anscombe, trans). 
" See text accompanying notes 6-11. of excessive generality-problemsin which the text appears to run in one direction, but in which the collective speaker is not likely to have had the particular application in mind, and would likely have been aghast at that application. 
In their modern incarnation, formalist approaches to interpretation tend to share a number of positive and negative features: " insistence on using the text as the exclusive or principal source of interpretation; " a belief that the original or ordinary understanding of the text is what governs (acknowledging that in some cases the text will be ambiguous); " a refusal to make exceptions to the ordinary meaning of terms, even where the outcomes were probably not intended and indeed seem far afield from the concerns of the enacting legislature; * where text is unclear, a search for second-best approaches to constraining judicial discretion; " an insistence that when the text is ambiguous, courts should follow the understanding of the agency entrusted with its administration; " a refusal to consult legislative history; " caution about the ideas of legislative "purpose" and legislative "intention"; " unwillingness to invoke policy arguments of various kinds, involving, for example, the consequences of one or another approach; 2 and • attention to canons of construction that help in limiting judicial discretion and in uncovering meaning, and also to canons that reflect a distinct constitutional commitment or otherwise give clear signals to Congress, but not to canons of interpretation that are not time-honored or that embody controversial judgments about public policy. 
One way to approach the resulting debate is to ask whether formalism can be justified in the same terms as any of the various kinds of default rules. Perhaps formalism, as an approach to statutes or contracts, can be understood as a kind of global market-mimicking approach, one that accurately divines Congress's instructions in particular cases (understood, controversially, as "' But see Schacter, 51 Stan L Rev 1 (cited in note 40) (collecting striking evidence of the use of policy arguments by the Supreme Court). "what Congress would have done if it had decided the question"), or that does this at least as well as any alternative, while at the same time minimizing decision costs. This would be a strong argument for formalism. 
But it is not clear that this is true; whether it is depends on underlying facts. It should be clear by now that on certain assumptions, formalism should ensure low decision costs and relatively low error costs. Perhaps formalist judges can reach decisions quickly, and perhaps they will do as well as anyone else, or better than anyone else, in reaching the right result (if the criteria of rightness are as stated, a point taken up below). But are the assumptions accurate? In general, formalism should indeed reduce the costs of decision, but this is not inevitable (text may cause a lot of confusion too,53 and in some cases study of legislative history might, at least in theory, reduce the costs of decision), but it might also increase the number and seriousness of errors. If nonformalist judges are perfect-if they could, without error or high cost, examine all of the legal materials to uncover what Congress really meant by a statutory term-they would do much better than formalist judges. 
Consider, for example, the Delaney Clause problem presented in the Introduction.' If literal interpretation of the Delaney Clause was a blunder-because Congress would not have wanted courts to ban the agency's action--nonformalist judges will probably do better. Now it is possible that as a guide to actual congressional judgments, formalism is superior to any other approach; if formalism is fairly accurate though crude, and if alternative approaches produce numerous misreadings, then formalism might be best. And even if nonformalist judges can arrive at good answers, they are likely to sacrifice predictability. Perfect nonformalist judges will not be able to let people know the law in advance. Where predictability is especially important-such as in areas involving commercial and criminal law-formalism might be favored. 
See, for example, Eskridge, 96 Mich L Rev at 1516-22 (cited in note 23) (examining the problems of textual coherence by reference to Holy Trinity). 
See text accompanying notes 6-7. 
There is of course a question whether this is the appropriate test. To say that the text binds, but the unenacted intention does not, requires an argument, likely with large empirical dimensions. Article I is insufficient; the question is what the text means, and Article I does not tell us that. To say that the text is binding, but the unenacted intention is not, is probably to say that the consequences will be better if we proceed accordinglythat is, predictability will be increased, judicial discretion will be reduced, mistakes will be more readily corrected ex post or ex ante, and so forth. These points are discussed below. See Section IV.D. 
But these issues are hard to resolve in the abstract. An important empirical question involves the relative competence of formalist and nonformalist judges and likely legislative reactions. Excellent nonformalist judges would be best of all. On the other hand, moderately competent formalist judges would be better than incompetent nonformalist judges, and may even be better than moderately competent nonformalist judges. At least we are now in a position to see the empirical questions that might separate those who accept and those who reject formalism as a market-mimicking default rule. 
More Information? 
It seems most straightforward to defend formalism as a massive or global information-eliciting default rule. Perhaps formalism is likely to produce greater clarity from Congress, precisely because it ensures that statutory language will be understood by reference to its terms. Thus the notion that statutes will be taken in their "plain meaning" might be understood as a way of encouraging Congress to speak unambiguously. Knowing that courts will not correct mistaken applications, Congress (and interested groups hoping to win in court) should take greater care before the fact. Indeed, formalism might even be seen as a close cousin of the nondelegation doctrine, a doctrine grounded explicitly on the notion that courts will require Congress to speak with some degree of clarity."6 (The nondelegation doctrine is in turn related to the idea that some statutes and some contracts are void for vagueness; this is also an information-eliciting idea.) If legislators know in advance that courts will not ask "what Congress would have done," and will instead take legislation at its word, then Congress will be penalized by careless language, with the result that Congress will speak more clearly, and no one will have to guess what it "would have done." 
On this view, formalism is an information-eliciting default rule, in a way that has two salutary consequences. First, it requires the most knowledgeable parties to disclose relevant information to all participants in the political debate, thus making judgments informed rather than ignorant. Second, it discloses information to courts, which might otherwise be forced to guess about what Congress would have done if it had decided the is"For the classic, and lonely, applications of the nondelegation doctrine, see Panama Refining Co v Ryan, 293 US 388 (1935); SchechterPoultry Corp u United States, 295 US 495 (1935). sue-a guess that might be wrong, and a guess whose very nature requires an increase in the costs of decision. 
Or consider the debate over the use of legislative history. One defense of ignoring the history is that it puts pressure on the legislature to focus on the text of the statute, and not to rely, in case of contest, on nuggets placed in a committee report. The result is a kind of information-eliciting rule, one that-if it works well-will put appropriate burdens on Congress to write law, and will create a strong incentive to do exactly that. The Chevron principle,57 counseling courts to defer to administrative interpretations of ambiguous statutes, can be understood in similar terms. A hoped-for consequence of the Chevron approach is to force Congress to speak with clarity; if Congress knows that the executive (often its institutional rival) will be empowered to resolve ambiguities, perhaps there will be more clarity where clarity matters. In this sense, Chevron itself can be seen as a kind of nondelegation doctrine. It is therefore possible to imagine an argument that would defend formalism on the ground that it serves the same good functions that information-eliciting default rules serve in the law of contract. 
For the reasons suggested above, this would be a largely empirical argument. The question is whether Congress can respond, ex ante or ex post, to a formalist regime, and whether it can do so at relatively low cost. If a formalist judiciary does not in fact elicit information from Congress-if Congress is relatively unresponsive to the formalist signals-the case for formalism, as a global information-eliciting default rule, is much weakened. 
From the discussion thus far, the question whether it is right to approach statutes in formalist fashion seems to depend on three principal questions: 
L How much, if any, additional inaccuracy (however defined) would be introduced by a nonformal approach? If courts would blunder a great deal, or introduce irrelevant considerations of policy or principle, the case for formalism is fortified. , Chevron USA, Inc v NaturalResourcesDefense Council, Inc,467 US 837, 866 (1984). nonformal approaches, and how, if at all, would Congress respond to those incentives? Would judicial formalism encourage Congress to legislate more clearly? Would Congress correct the problems of excessive generality, at least after the fact? a nonformal approach, taking uncertainty to include the need for litigation and the difficulty of planning? How bad would such uncertainty be? What would be its cost? Here the inquiry is into the size of decision costs associated with formal and nonformal approaches. 
From these questions, we have a research agenda that could keep a lot of people busy. It is possible, for example, to imagine state-by-state comparisons (what has happened with more, or less, formalist state courts?), area-by-area comparisons (do some areas of law, for example tax, see a high or low degree of formalism, and with what consequences?), and general national studies across time (how often does Congress overrule formalist, or nonformalist decisions? Is Congress responsive to formalist signals?). 
We can now obtain a better understanding of debates over formalism in constitutional law. Here, too, decision costs and error costs are highly relevant. Justice Scalia, for example, thinks that use of the original understanding of the text will simplify constitutional inquiry (a point about reducing decision costs); he also believes that the fabric of rights enjoyed by Americans is more, not less, likely to be at risk from nonformalist approaches (a point about error costs).' In his view, serious "gaps" in rights protection will be filled by democratic arenas. A very different constitutional formalist, Akhil Amar, believes that the constitutional text, rightly understood, will protect an ample category of rights, and hence that those who believe in these rights have nothing to fear from his species of formalism (a point about error costs).59 Antiformalists suggest, by contrast, that the constitutional text leaves many indeterminacies (a point about decision costs), and also that constitutional formalism would result in an 
Scalia, A MatterofInterpretationat 37-47 (cited in note 16). 
"See generally Akhil Reed Amar, The Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction (Yale 1998). unacceptably narrow category of constitutional rights (a point about error costs).' 
Now it is unlikely that empirical inquiry will resolve all of the relevant debates in the constitutional domain, partly because there is so much disagreement in that domain about what counts as an error, and partly because any judgment to that effect may well be theory-dependent. (Does it count against an interpretive method that it leads to a rejection of Roe v Wade?6' Griswold v Connecticut?2 Craig v Boren?") But there are important empirical issues here too. For example, the argument for formalism in constitutional law would be strengthened if it could be shown that if courts using that method would not protect certain rights, the democratic process would do so instead. The argument against formalism would be strengthened if the opposite could be shown. Many debates over Roe v Wade, in fact, turn on that question.' 
From the discussion thus far, I speculate that other things being equal, formalism is likely to hold sway in democracies that have a competent, highly responsive legislature, and that less formal approaches will be found in democracies in which the legislature is incompetent, inattentive, or both. 5 The speculation is no more than that, but it is supported by some evidence from the corporate field, where formalism is more likely when legislatures are attentive, and also by comparing statutory interpretation in England with that in the United States." 
See generally Ronald Dworkin, Bork's Jurisprudence,57 U Chi L Rev 657 (1990). "410 US 113 (1973). 
381 US 479 (1965). 429 US 190 (1976). 
See, for example, Gerald Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope: Can CourtsBringAbout Social Change? 173-265 (Chicago 1991) (arguing in part that political and legislative movements prior to Roe may have been at least as significant a factor in realizing the right to an abortion as Roe itself). 
w These comments are restricted to democracies. In the case of Nazi Germany, the nonformalism came from a judiciary that did not insist that anything be codified in actual law, and that simply implemented the Nazi program, whether or not it had legislative support. The Allies' insistence on formalism should be taken as an effort to inculcate ruleof-law values. The nonformalist approaches I am discussing here are entirely consistent with the ideal of the rule of law; they operate only in cases of ambiguity or excessive generality. 
66 I draw in this Section on the extremely illuminating discussion in P.S. Atiyah and Robert S. Summers, Form and Substance in Anglo-American Law: A ComparativeStudy of LegalReasoning,Legal Theory andLegal Institutions(Clarendon 1987). 
English law is far more rule-bound and formalistic than American law. The British Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges. For their part, English judges tend to treat statutes as rules, generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In England, lawmaking and law interpretation are far more rigid than in the United States, where judges tend to avoid formalism, and to allow themselves to depart from general language in the process of confronting particular cases. 
Institutional differences between England and America help explain the different methods. Laws in England are drafted by an Office of Parliamentary Counsel, a highly professional body that consists of skilled authors of laws. The Parliamentary Counsel is concerned to ensure a uniform style of drafting. The Counsel is also closely attuned to the methods of English judges. The judges' practice is itself uniform and relatively simple. In a parliamentary system, the government and the legislature are allied, and the high degree of party control means that there is a high level of homogeneity in England at the lawmaking stage. Moreover, and critically, Parliament revisits statutes with some frequency, and it fixes mistakes that are shown as such when particular cases arise.' 
The situation in the United States is very different. There is less centralized drafting and hence less uniformity in terminology. Although in America the Office of Legislative Counsel does help with much drafting, there is less professionalization in the production of statutes. In America, the drafters of legislation are multiple and irregularly coordinated. Except in rare cases, the party system no longer provides a great deal of coherence, and the executive and legislature are hardly aligned. Congress appears only intermittently aware of the judges' interpretive practices, which are themselves not easy to describe in light of the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits, on just this point, within the Supreme Court. It would be wrong to say that Congress is entirely oblivious to judicial decisions interpreting statutes.' But Congress is not in the business of responding rapidly and regularly to particular cases in which interpretations, literal or otherwise, tend to misfire. Hence both ' There have been interesting recent changes in English practice, with legislative history now playing a role. See Eskridge, 96 Mich L Rev at 1542 (cited in note 23). 
" See Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretationat 151-53, 259, 262, 295-96, 316-22 (cited in note 14) (citing instances where Congress overrode Supreme Court interpretations ofstatutes). lawmaking and law-interpreting practice are very different from what they are in England. None of this suggests that England or America has the optimal system of interpretation in light of its own institutional characteristics. But it does suggest that the two legal systems are highly responsive to their distinctive institutional features. 
Compare in this regard the interpretation of law by administrative agencies, which are the first-line interpreters of a wide range of regulatory statutes. Of course agencies must decide whether or not to be formalists. Should courts allow them to be? 9 An implication of the analysis thus far is that the answer is "Yes." For the most part, courts should allow agencies to choose whether to be formalists, as a way of reducing overall costs of decision and overall costs of error. 
The place to start is with Chevron USA, Inc v Natural Resources Defense Council,0 which has emerged as the most important case about legal interpretation in the last thirty years. Chevron holds that where statutes are ambiguous, courts should accept any reasonable interpretation by the agency charged with their implementation."' Chevron appears to rest on the suggestion, central to legal realism, that the decision how to read ambiguities in law involves no brooding omnipresence in the sky but is an emphatically human judgment about policy or principle. Chevron concludes that, where underlying statutes are ambiguous, Congress should be taken to have decided that agencies are in a better position to make that judgment than courts. Agencies are in that better position because, Chevron emphasizes, the President is generally in charge of their policy judgments, and hence agencies have a kind of democratic pedigree, certainly a better one than the courts. 
Seen through the lens of Chevron, the debate over formalism might be understood very differently in the context of the twentyfirst century, whose public law would pose as a central question: What are the views of any agency charged with implementation of this law? As against modern formalists, we might urge that administrative agencies should be authorized to reject the "text" in situations where common law judges would not be so authorized, at least when there is no evidence of a considered legislative judgment against the agency's interpretation. An especially im" I borrow here and adapt an earlier discussion. See Cass R. Sunstein, JusticeScalia's DemocraticFormalism, 107 Yale L J 529, 550-55 (1997), reviewing Scalia, A MatterofInterpretation(citedin note 16). 
78467 US 837 (1984). ,Id at 842-45. portant point here involves the agency's hierarchical and centralized character. The hierarchical structure eliminates much of the unpredictability and variability that could come from nontextual courts. 
On this view, the choice between formalist and nonformalist interpretation should generally be made by the relevant agency, which would be permitted to balance the relevant, largely empirical issues as it sees fit. The agency is in a good position to know whether the additional uncertainty introduced by purposive or dynamic interpretation is worth the candle. Thus courts should defer to nonformalist administrative agencies. It follows that the easiest case of those referred to above 2 involves the Delaney Clause. Courts should have allowed the FDA to make exemptions for de minimis risks (as they did not73); a nonformalist FDA should have been permitted to ensure that the statute did not generate an unreasonable result, one that could not be characterized as an actual judgment ofthe enacting Congress. 
Why might anyone disagree with these judgments? The best answer lies in the empirical judgments that underlie any embrace of formalism. It would be possible to believe that armed with the right incentives, Congress would correct any problems produced by literalism, and also that agencies are subject to parochial pressures, so as to weaken the suggestion that they have a comparative advantage by virtue of their democratic pedigree and technical ability. Perhaps agencies are worse than courts, simply because they are vulnerable to factional influences. To the extent that this is true, the argument for judicial use of the text against nonformalist agencies is strengthened. And to the extent that Congress will provide correctives to the problems created by formalism, there is much less need to allow agencies to proceed nonformally. I believe that in general nonformalist agencies are unlikely to abuse their discretion and that legislative responses to the problems introduced by formalism would be too little, too late. 4 But these issues require further empirical study. 
See text accompanying notes 6-11. 
See, for example, PublicCitizen u Young, 831 F2d 1108, 1122 (DC Cir 1987); Les v Reilly, 968 F2d 985, 989 (9th Cir 1992). 
' The Delaney Clause, not amended until 1997, is itself an example. See The Food Quality Protection Act of 1996, Pub L No 104-170, codified at 21 USCA §§ 346 et seq (1997). 
and Legitimacy 
It would be possible for some formalists (and some antiformalists) to respond to the arguments I have made thus far in the following way: The analysis has not addressed the most fundamental concerns. No good formalist should be persuaded by it. The real case for formalism depends on constitutional considerations, or legitimacy, or democracy. Contingent institutional judgments, with an empirical cast, are entirely beside the point. In a metaphor: Bentham could not persuade Kant of the correctness of some course of action by showing that utilitarian arguments favor it. That is not what Kant is concerned about." So too for the suggestion that empirical arguments can settle the choice among interpretive methods. 
This problem raises the question whether it is possible to defend formalism without reference to empirical issues-whether there is an analogy to a deontological position on formalism's behalf. I do not believe that there is any such analogy. There are important questions about legitimacy and democracy, but they cannot be brought to bear on the choice among interpretive methods without resort to empirical claims. But these questions require discussion. 
Formalism might be defended by reference to the Constitution. On this view, the Constitution sets up certain procedures for the making of law, and certain things-canons, policy concerns, "equity," legislative intentions-are not the law. Under Article I, the text is the law. 
The problem with this suggestion is not that it is wrong but that it is irrelevant. To be sure, the text is the law, and we can agree that policy judgments, and intentions standing alone, do not represent the law. Something does not become the law because Congress intended it to be the law. But the question here is how to decide what the text means. The fact that the text is the law does not establish whether its meaning is to be assessed by looking at subjective intentions (at what most members of Congress intended it to mean), by examining canons of construction (as in the idea that text should not lightly be understood to raise constitutional doubts), or by understanding text in light of traditional equitable concerns. If meaning is to be established by " I am grateful to Frank Easterbrook for pressing this question at the Symposium. looking at the objective meaning of the words, rather than anything within the minds of the legislators, this is not because the Constitution says so-it does not-but because that approach leads to the most sensible system of interpretation, for reasons akin to those I have discussed.76 
A second nonempirical defense of formalism might rely on a judgment about the nature of law, or in other words, on a claim about law's ontology. Do we not-it might be asked-have to decide what counts as "law" first, before we start to ask empirical questions? After all, a presidential seizure of the steel mills does not count as lawful, or as law, even if it would be good, all things considered, to allow the President to seize the steel mills. Perhaps a formalist approach stems from a (nonempirical, preempirical) conception of what allows something to count as law, and perhaps that conception precedes anything of the kind I have suggested here. 
For present purposes the simplest answer to this objection is that the debate between formalists and antiformalists cannot be resolved by asking about the nature of law, because any answer is unhelpful on this particular debate. Consider the three cases with which this Article begins. 7 In each of them, people could go either way without making a contestable claim about the nature of law. Those who think that courts should not understand literal language to produce highly unreasonable outcomes need not venture a theory of what makes something "law." Nor need their adversaries. Those who think that legislative history is relevant do not need to say anything controversial about the nature of law. Those who emphasize "purpose," or traditional canons of construction, offer no disputed account of "law." Both formalists and antiformalists agree that courts should not understand a statute to mean whatever they think that a good statute would say, and this agreement may indeed have something to do with a theory of " It would be possible to argue that the constitutional text, read in light ofits history, argues in favor of one or another approach to statutory interpretation. For the formalist, this view raises two problems. First, the history seems to argue against formalism; the framing generation did not embrace formalism. See Eskridge, 96 Mich L Rev at 1523-26, 1529-31 (cited in note 23). Second, resort to the history, as an authoritative guide to the text, requires an argument ofsome kind, and that argument must be, roughly, the sort of empirical argument I have discussed here. All I mean to suggest is that the Constitution by itself does not support, or undermine, formalism; the real issues lie elsewhere. 
See text accompanying notes 6-11. law's ontology. 8 But the disputes I am discussing have a different character. 
Some people defend formalism on emphatically nonempirical grounds, claiming that formalist approaches stem from the right theory of political legitimacy. Here, I think, are the most serious questions about the argument I have been making. 
Frank Easterbrook, for example, claims that for 'the textualist a theory of political legitimacy comes first, followed by a theory of interpretation that is appropriate to the theory of obligation." 9 He offers what he takes to be "two major strands" of the relevant account. According to the first, the "fundamental theory of political legitimacy in the United States is contractarian," and without some kind of formalist approach, "a pack of lawyers is changing the terms of the deal, reneging on behalf of a society that did not appoint them for that purpose."" The second kind of account is based on an answer to the question why judges should be obeyed. On Easterbrook's view, judges deserve obedience only because they are adhering to the Constitution. 'When form comes from evolving institutions and ideas, then the living must decide by elections .... Nothing beats textualism in court, because nothing else is capable of supporting a judicial veto."8 ' 
But these arguments fail to show that the idea of legitimacy supports textualism. Those who seek to invoke intentions, or equitable considerations, or canons of construction, or evolving, widely held social understandings can also claim the mantle of political legitimacy;82 we cannot know if they are wrong without 8 Actually I do not believe that this is the case. I think that the empirical and institutional issues I have discussed are crucial here too-that these issues precede ontology all the way down. This is a pragmatic claim, suggesting that what makes something qualify as law turns on the consequences, or the cash-value, of allowing it to qualify as law. Thus, for example, the Constitution is binding for a set of (loosely speaking) pragmatic reasons, not because of anything about the nature of law. The Constitution is binding because it is a good constitution and because we are much better off if we take it to be binding. But for present purposes it is not necessary to accept these more controversial claims. 
" Frank H. Easterbrook, Textualism and the Dead Hand, 66 Geo Wash L Rev 1119, 1119 (1998). Easterbrook is speaking of textual interpretation of the Constitution, but I believe that what he says is the most lucid account of how textualism might be supported nonempirically for statutes as well. 
Id at 1121. ' Id at 1125. 
The most famous effort to justify a form of constitutional review that is not textual in Easterbrook's sense is self-consciously based on the ideal of democracy. See John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust:A Theory of JudicialReview (Harvard 1980). In statutory construction, it is possible to imagine analogies. See, for example, Cass R. Sunstein, After the Rights Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatory State (Harvard 1990) (offering arguknowing a great deal more about institutional performance. Nor does judicial review become "legitimate" by virtue of the fact that it is based on the text of a document two centuries old. The "legitimacy" of judicial review, like the legitimacy of the Constitution itself, is a complicated question, one for which the bare fact of the "text" is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition. Nor is it clear how the notion of a social contract can show that formalism is a uniquely legitimate approach to interpretation. The signatories to the relevant text are all long dead, and to say that nonformalist judges are reneging on some "deal" seems to me no more than a metaphor. In what sense did any of us agree to that particular "deal"? Ifwe are to be held to "it"-and the real issue is how we establish its terms-this is because it is good for us to be held to it, not because we agreed. 
What underlies Easterbrook's argument, I think, is not a notion of contract, but one of democratic self-government. He thinks that the Constitution can claim support in popular sovereignty, and so too for what emerges from "elections," whereas judicial "reneging" lacks anything like popular support. And to the extent that Easterbrook is connecting the idea of legitimacy with democracy, and seeing these as linked to debates over interpretation, he is certainly on finm ground. Some methods of interpretation would indeed be illegitimate (though to see why, some empirical questions would probably have to be answered as well). 
The problem here is that the ideal of democratic selfgovernment does not by itself justify formalism. Many antiformalists are enthusiastic democrats too. They might invoke legislative history on the ground that judges should consult the will of the representatives of the people, rather than dictionaries or their own judgments, to determine what vague words mean. They might think that canons of construction should defeat literal language, on the ground that those canons have support within the norms and traditions of the public as revealed over time, or otherwise have a good democratic pedigree-as loose, general language from an occasionally inattentive Congress in, say, 1992, does not. This does not mean that the antiformalists are right. It means only that the ideal of democracy, or political legitimacy, cannot by itself support formalism. That ideal must be supplemented by a set of institutional and empirical claims. With certain findings about institutional capacities and performance, ments in this vein); Jfirgen Habermas, Between FactsandNorms: Contributionsto a DiscourseTheory ofLaw andDemocracy (IfflT 1996) (William Rehg, trans). formalism would be more legitimate than nonformalism; with contrary findings, the opposite would be true. 
In his remarks at the Symposium, Frank Michelman went further. He criticized formalism itself on grounds of legitimacy. He claimed that formalism is illegitimate. In his view, formalism could be legitimate only if certain democratic preconditions were met-only if law had, in its genesis and susceptibility to revision, a kind of strong democratic pedigree because (for example) it was made by free and equal citizens. Because law does not, in our society, have this pedigree, formalism is illegitimate. I agree with much of Michelman's argument, and I think I accept his conception of political legitimacy, but I also think that he neglects some important institutional questions. To be sure, formalism has, under his assumptions, a serious legitimacy deficit. But from the standpoint of legitimacy, things may be worse, not better, if courts go in nonformalist directions. Judges may, for example, push statutes in directions that increase the legitimacy problem (if, for example, they conclude that statutes should generally be construed narrowly and in conformity with the common law). Michelnan's effort to show that formalism is illegitimate disregards comparative institutional questions that, I have suggested, are crucial to the choice. 
For example, suppose that if people do not like the outcomes they get from a formalist system of interpretation, they will elect legislators who will give them better outcomes. If this is trueand it is an empirical proposition-then there is an argument for formalism: Perhaps formalism will create a set of dynamic incentives for genuine self-government, and, in the process, for better law. Perhaps it will lead citizens to elect representatives who do what they want them to do. If this is an empirical possibility, there is a good argument for formalism. In sum, defenses of formalism that speak to the nature of law, or to questions of legitimacy, are tacitly based on some empirical projections, and they stand or fall on those projections. 
A possible response would underline a serious problem mentioned but not resolved to this point: How do we know if there has been an interpretive error at all? It seems reasonable to say that any identification of an "error" depends on an interpretive account of some kind, and thus that any assessment of whether there are errors, and error costs, is fatally circular. Perhaps errors cannot be identified before the theory of interpretation is already in place. If this is so, then we cannot choose among alternative approaches by examining errors and their "costs"; whether there is an error depends on what theory has been chosen. Textualism offers a theory by which to tell whether there have been errors; so too do certain nonformalist accounts. We cannot decide which account is right by asking which account produces more errors. By suggesting that we assess errors by asking "what Congress would have done," I have loaded the dice from the start. 
There is an important point and much truth here. The simplest reply is that even if an inquiry into errors is theorydependent, people with different theories might be brought to agree on the right interpretive method, if the empirical findings turn out one way rather than another. If legislatures are highly responsive and if antiformalist courts produce unpredictability and arbitrariness, the case for formalism is greatly strengthened. Suppose, for example, that in the area of taxation, the legislature will anticipate possible problems produced by general language, and that it will promptly correct problems that emerge after the fact; suppose too that in that area, nonformalist courts will make the rules of taxation hard to predict and also arbitrary on any view. By contrast, the case for formalism would be undermined, in tax law, if legislation were quite crude and if the legislature was unlikely to correct unanticipated unreasonable outcomes, and if courts were excellent at adapting the text to unforeseen problems. If the use of legislative history greatly increases the cost of decision without helping to make better decisions, the argument against using legislative history is quite strong. In this way people who have abstract theories about interpretation, or political legitimacy, should be flexible enough to move in one or another direction with imaginable empirical findings. 
There is a deeper point here. A textualist cannot simply stipulate that judges make mistakes if they reject textualism; textualists have to come up with some criteria to give some grounds for their commitment to textualism. The fact that Article I sets up certain mechanisms for the production of law does not offer any such criteria; the question is what any "law" means. As we have seen, the notion of market-mimicking and informationeliciting default rules provides a start. Perhaps it can be added that where the outcome of a particular interpretive approach would be absurd or highly unreasonable by Congress's own lights, the interpretation produces errors and error costs. Perhaps it can be agreed-indeed, it generally is agreed-that excessive generality can produce absurdity, and the question is whether the costs (in terms of decisions and mistakes) are higher if courts reject the absurd application. Approaches of this kind would permit us to make a great deal of progress in choosing between formalist and nonformalist approaches. If formalists (or nonformalists) do not wish to claim support on this kind of ground, on what ground do they wish to defend their position? And recall that we are dealing here with a continuum of approaches, not with any rigid dichotomy. 
Some space for disagreement would of course remain, and it is here that we might find disputes that are not empirical in nature. Some people think that courts err if they attempt to decide statutory cases the way that Congress would have wanted them to do, even if the statute is ambiguous or excessively general. Moreover, different kinds of debates can be imagined among those who disagree about the role of appropriate background norms or canons of statutory construction. One person strongly favors the use of clear statement principles; another is sharply critical of them. And people can disagree about the content of such principles. One person claims that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed; another urges that statutes should be interpreted favorably to traditionally disadvantaged groups, or generously to promote environmental protection. The dispute here depends largely on judgments about the nature of a just or good legal order. But even here there are empirical questions. If courts indulge one or another interpretive principle, what will legislatures do? Will they respond at all? Respond in a way that defeats the purposes of the relevant canon of construction? Or internalize the judgments that underlie the canon? It would be possible to know a lot more about these questions than we now do. 
In sum: My narrowest claim here is that if we agree that a basic task of statutory interpretation is, in cases of doubt, to discern what Congress would have done if it had made provision on the point ("imaginative reconstruction"), the debate between formalists and nonformalists is highly empirical, and we can understand the grounds on which reasonable people might disagree. A somewhat broader claim is that empirical debates also lie at the heart of competing views about the role of legislative history, "purpose," and the canons of construction; at least such debates would be much informed by judgments about the likely performance of courts and legislatures. The broadest claim is that there is no plausible basis for formalism, and textualism, that does not depend on pragmatic and empirical considerations; that, for example, imaginative reconstruction cannot be rejected as a criterion (in favor of objective "meaning") without resort to those considerations. The question that remains to be answered is this: If this claim is wrong, on what basis might formalism be defended? 
I have argued in this Article that any defense of formalism must have a large empirical dimension. Formalism, as an approach to statutory interpretation, is best defended on the view that * under a formalist regime, legislatures will be responsive to the incentives, created by formalism, to do pretty well before the fact, and to correct mistakes after the fact; " legislatures will respond to a nonformalist regime by legislating sloppily and by delegating power to the judiciary; " a nonformalist judiciary will create blunders and injustices; and " a nonformalist judiciary will create considerable uncertainty, with high costs within the legal system (as cases increase in complexity) and in ordinary practice (as people do not know how to conduct their affairs). 
These are empirical claims that formalist interpretation will decrease error costs and decision costs. The nonformalist denies these claims, suggesting that in the relevant jurisdiction, courts are not likely to blunder, or to create significant increases in unpredictability, and that legislatures are not likely to be responsive to formalist methods. Here there are many questions for empirical testing. The answer may well vary from nation to nation and across diverse subject matters. 
For modern public law and for formalism, a significant complication is introduced by the rise of administrative agencies, which do much ofthe day-to-day work of statutory interpretation. Agencies must decide in the first instance whether to be formalists. Formalism may be good for the judiciary but bad for the administrative state, and the judiciary would do well to recognize that possibility. Thus I have argued that the greater accountability and specialization of agencies should permit them to choose between formalist and nonformalist statutory construction, so long as both are reasonable. 
The broadest lesson has to do with the relevance of empirical claims to many topics in legal theory, and the great difficulty of doing the latter without attending to the former. Of course it is not possible to evaluate facts without normative criteria; but in many contexts, there is sufficient agreement on the criteria to proceed, if the facts are clearly one way or the other. At the very least, an understanding of facts will clarify where we disagree and exactly why, and in the process it may well lower the volume of legal and even political disputes, in a way that should produce more light and less heat. Antiformalists should agree that they would change their view if it were clear that nonformalist courts would blunder, or that legislatures, when confronted with a formalist judiciary, would make ex post corrections or respond to formalism by legislating with greater clarity before the fact. For their part, formalists ought to be shaken if nonformalist judges would proceed wisely and without imposing high costs of decision, or if legislatures would be entirely unresponsive to formalist interpretation and if palpable errors would go uncorrected. Mutual acknowledgement of these points should make one of the great, quasi-theological debates in legal theory at once more tractable, less theological, and less puzzling. If formalism must be defended empirically, future progress will depend on isolating the factual disagreements and attempting to make an investigation of what, in fact, is true. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Nondelegation Canons" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 82, 1999). 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 82 (2D SERIES) Nondelegation Canons 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
It is often said that the nondelegation doctrine is dead.1 According to the familiar refrain,2 the doctrine was once used to require Congress to legislate with some clarity, so as to ensure that law is made by the national legislature rather than by the executive. But the nondelegation doctrine—the refrain continues—is now merely a bit of rhetoric, as the United States Code has become littered with provisions asking one or another administrative agency to do what it thinks best.3 While this is an overstatement, it captures an important truth: Since 1935, the Supreme Court has not struck down an act of Congress on nondelegation grounds, notwithstanding the existence of a number of plausible occasions.4 
But is the nondelegation doctrine really dead? On the contrary, I believe that the doctrine is alive and well. It has been relocated rather than abandoned. Federal courts commonly vindicate not a general nondelegation doctrine, but a series of more specific and small, though quite important, nondelegation doctrines. Rather than invalidating federal legislation as excessively open-ended, courts hold that federal administrative agencies may not engage in certain activity unless and until Congress has expressly told them to do so. The relevant choices must be made legislatively rather than bureaucratically. As a technical matter, the key holdings are based not on the delegation doctrine but on certain “canons” of construction. 
What I mean to identify here is the nondelegation canons, not organized or recognized as such, but central to the operation of * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Jill Hasday, Richard Posner, and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments on a previous draft. 1 See John H. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 131-33 (1981). 2 See id. at 131-34. 3 See David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (1995). 4 See below for a brief overview. modern public law. These are nondelegation canons for the simple reason that they forbid administrative agencies from making decisions on their own.5 Consider a few examples. Congress must affirmatively authorize the extraterritorial application of federal law6; agencies cannot exercise their ordinary discretion, under an ambiguous statutory provision, so as apply national law outside of American borders. A clear congressional statement to this effect is required. Administrative agencies are not permitted to construe federal statutes in such a way as to raise serious constitutional questions; if the constitutional question is substantial, Congress must clearly assert its goal of venturing into the disputed terrain.7 When treaties and statutes are ambiguous, they must be construed favorably to Native American tribes; the agencies’ own judgment, if it is an exercise of discretion, is irrelevant.8 As we will see, there are many more examples, including a recent canon forbidding agencies to impose high costs for trivial gains. 
In this Essay I have two purposes, descriptive and normative. The descriptive purpose is to show how certain canons of construction operate as nondelegation principles. My aim is to unify a set of seemingly disparate cases and to suggest that they actually construct a coherent and flourishing doctrine, amounting to the contemporary nondelegation doctrine. 
The second and normative purpose is to show that such canons, though highly controversial, should be understood as entirely legitimate. The nondelegation canons have crucial advantages over the more familiar nondelegation doctrine insofar as they are easily administrable, pose a less severe strain on judicial capacities, and risk far less in the way of substantive harm. The nondelegation canons represent a salutary kind of democracy-forcing minimalism, designed to ensure that certain choices are made by institutions with a superior 5 Some canons are described as “clear statement” principles, so labeled because they require a clear statement from Congress. See, e.g., William Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation 282-83 (1995). The nondelegation canons are all clear statement principles; but many clear statement principles are not nondelegation canons, because they do not involve agencies at all. See note infra. 6 EEOC v. Arabian American Oil, 499 US 244 (1991) (extraterritoriality). 7 See Bowen v. Georgetown Univ Hospital, 488 US 204 (1988). 8 Muscagee Nation v. Hodel, 851 F.2d 1439 (DC Cir 1988) (construction in favor of Native Americans). democratic pedigree.9 Indeed, the nondelegation canons turn out to be a contemporary manifestation of the founding effort to link protection of individual rights, and other important interests, with appropriate institutional design.10 In certain cases, Congress must decide the key questions on its own. This is the enduring function of the nondelegation doctrine, and it is endorsed, not repudiated, by current law. 
One Good Year11 
Despite its exceptionally infrequent use, the conventional nondelegation doctrine—the doctrine that has been displaced by the contemporary nondelegation canons—should be quite familiar. In a nutshell, it requires Congress to state an “intelligible principle” by which to guide and limit agency action.12 The motivating idea is that Article I, section 113 vests legislative power in the Congress and that this vesting cannot be waived, even if Congress and the public want to waive it. If Congress gives the executive a “blank check,” or states no intelligible principle, it has violated Article I. Sometimes the nondelegation doctrine is thought to diminish the risk of rentseeking, or legislation that reduces social welfare, by requiring a legislative consensus on details before permitting the enactment of law. 
According to the standard view, the nondelegation doctrine was a core part of the original Constitution, and its abandonment, in the aftermath of the New Deal, represented a kind of capitulation to 9 On minimalism and democracy-forcing minimalism generally, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). 10 See Williams Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason 5-27 (1995). 11 In this section I draw on a companion paper, Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, Michigan Law Review (forthcoming November 1999), which focuses on issues of EPA discretion and regulatory policy, and which offers a brief discussion of the basic claims of this essay. 12 See, e.g., Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Connally, 337 F. Supp. 737 (DC 1971) 13 U.S. Const., Art. 1. Section 1. perceived national needs.14 But this view is much too simple. There is no unambiguous textual barrier to delegations—no constitutional provision says that the legislative power is nondelegable—and in fact there is no explicit evidence that the framers and ratifiers of the original Constitution believed that it contained a nondelegation doctrine.15 Actually the early practice suggested considerable willingness to “delegate” authority. In the very first year of the Republic, Congress gave the President the power to grant licenses to trade with the Indian tribes “under such rules and regulations as the President shall prescribe.”16 The first Congress also provided for military pensions “under such regulations as the President of the United States may direct.”17 In neither case did Congress issue standards by which to limit the President’s discretion. 
The standard view also fits uncomfortably with judicial practice. It is often remarked that the Supreme Court last used the nondelegation doctrine to invalidate a federal statute in 1935. What is less often remarked is that the Court first used the nondelegation doctrine to invalidate to federal statute in exactly the same year. While earlier cases had suggested the existence of a nondelegation doctrine,18 the Court upheld a number of broad delegations,19 and 14 See David Schoenbrod, Power and Responsibility (1997); John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust 131-34 (1981); Gary Lawson, The Rise and Rise of the Administrative State, 100 Harv. L. Rev. (1995). 15 Consider in this regard the treatment of the interpretive question in Ernest Gellhorn, Returning to First Principles, 36 Am. U L Rev 345. 347-48 (1987), which attempts to show the constitutional roots of the nondelegation (a) by showing that John Locke believed in a nondelegation principle, (b) by emphasizing that the framers believed in Locke’s contractarian view, and (c) by referring to the Constitution’s provision for lawmaking. None of this establishes that the framers accepted a nondelegation doctrine. I use this example because Gellhorn is one of the outstanding administrative law scholars of the last thirty years, and also an enthusiast for the nondelegation doctrine; his inability to show a direct constitutional source for the doctrine shows that any judgment on its behalf is largely a matter of inferences. 16 1 Stat. 137. 17 1 Stat. 95. 18 The Brig Aurora, 11 US 382 (1813); Field v. Clark, 143 US 649 (1892); United States v. Grimaud, 220 US 506 (1911); JW Hampton, Jr. v. US, 276 US 394 (1928). 19 See, eg, US v. Grimaud, 220 US 506 (1911); JW Hampton, Jr. v. US, 276 US 394 (1928). hence for the first 138 years of the nation’s existence—as well as the last 64 years—no Supreme Court decision struck down a statute on nondelegation grounds. By way of preface to the contemporary nondelegation canons, let us briefly explore the two decisions of 1935, the conventional nondelegation doctrine’s only good year. 
In Panama Refining Co. v. Ryan,20 the Court invalidated a section of the National Industrial Recovery Act, saying that “the President is authorize to prohibit the transportation in interstate commerce” of oil priced in violation of state-imposed production quotas. The Court concluded that the defect lay in the absence of standards specifying exactly when the President was to exercise this power.21 This is a controversial ruling, fitting poorly with postWorld War II decisions,22 and it is most unlikely that the Court would follow it today. But the largest decision, one that has not been overruled even implicitly, was Schechter Poultry Co. v. United States,23 where the Court invalidated the National Industrial Recovery Act as a whole.24 In invalidating the Act, the Court made four critical points. First, the statutory standards were open-ended and selfcontradictory—no constraint at all on government approval of “codes.”25 From the statutory language, it was very hard to generate ceilings and floors on governmental action. Second, the Court said that the Act essentially delegated public power to private groups.26 Congress could not legitimately authorize private persons to create law in their preferred form. Because accountable officials did not “filter” efforts at private lawmaking, this did not merely raise the spectre of faction, it was the thing itself—the cooptation of public power by self-interested private groups.27 Third, the Court distinguished other statutes, most notably the Federal Trade 20 293 U.S. 388 (1935). 21 Id. at 395. 22 See below. 23 295 US 495 (1935). 24 It is an interesting historical fact that on the day of the decision, President Roosevelt did not seem much to object to judicial invalidation of a centerpiece of his New Deal, apparently on the theory that the NIRA experiment had been a failure. See Kenneth C. Davis, FDR: The New Deal Years (1988). 25 295 U.S. at 523. 26 Id. at 537. 27 Id. Commission Act and the Federal Communications Act, partly by reference to the procedural safeguards provided by those statutes. “What are ‘unfair methods of competition’ are thus to be determined in particular instances, upon evidence, in the light of particular competitive conditions and of what is found to be a specific and substantial public interest. To make this possible, Congress set up a special procedure.”28 Fourth, the statute at issued covered the entire economy, no mere sector, and thus placed the economy itself at the mercy of decisions essentially unlimited by legislative instructions. 
In the decades since Schechter Poultry, however, nondelegation challenges have been routinely repudiated.29 Indeed, the Court has upheld some apparently extreme grants of authority to the executive branch.30 To be sure, there have been a few conflicting signals. In the most visible opinion in what is generally known as the Benzene Case, then-Justice Rehnquist suggested that Occupational Safety and Health Act should be struck down on nondelegation grounds.31 Notably, Justice Stevens’ plurality opinion also referred to the nondelegation doctrine, not to invalidate the Act but as a tool of statutory construction.32 In the plurality’s view, the agency’s position would allow the agency such massive power over the private sector as to be a possibly unconstitutional delegation of power.33 Partly for this reason, the Court read the statute to require OSHA to show a “significant risk” before it could undertake regulation.34 For the plurality, then, the nondelegation doctrine operated as a kind of “clear statement” principle, or canon of construction rooted in nondelegation concerns, requiring Congress to speak unambiguously if it sought to give (what the Court saw as) open-ended authority to 28 Id. at 533. 29 See, eg, Yakus v. US, 321 US 414 (1944); Lichter v. US, 334 US 742 (1948); US v. Southwestern Cable Co, 392 US 157 (1968); Mistretta v. US, 488 US 361 (1988). 30 See Yakus, supra; Southwestern Cable Co., supra; Mistretta, supra. 31 Industrial Union Department v. API, 448 US 607, 684 (1980) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). 32 Id. at 646. 33 Id. at 646. 34 Id. at 651. administrators.35 As we will see, Justice Stevens’ plurality opinion created a fresh nondelegation canon, one that fits well with my general thesis here, and one that carries considerable independent importance. 
In the immediate aftermath of the Benzene Case, there were occasional lower court suggestions that the nondelegation doctrine was “no longer . . . moribund.”36 A handful of lower courts cases have recently invoked the doctrine. Thus in Massieu v. Reno,37 a distict court struck down a provision of a federal deportation statute saying that “an alien whose presence or activities in the United States the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds to believe would have potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences for the United States is deportable.” On the court’s view, this was an openended grant of power, because the notion of “potentially serious adverse foreign policy consequences” could be construed in numerous different ways, thus raising a risk of arbitrariness. And in South Dakota v. Department of Interior,38 a court of appeals invalidated the Indian Reorganization Act insofar as it authorized the secretary of the Interior “in his discretion, to acquire . . . any interest in lands . . . within or without existing reservations . . . for the purpose of providing land for Indians.” But these are extremely unusual cases, and it is unlikely that other courts would follow them, even on identical facts.39 35 There is much reason to question the plurality’s analysis. OSHA did not urge that it could do whatever it wanted; it did not say that the statute allowed it to regulate on whatever terms it chose. On the contrary, it said whenever there was an identifiable risk to workers, the statute required OSHA to regulate to the point where compliance was not feasible. This is a severe, even draconian statute, not so different from the Delaney Clause, which barred any carcinogens in food additives. 21 USC 376(b)(5)(B). But a draconian statute is not an open-ended delegation of authority. If Congress told the EPA, eliminate any pollutant that causes any risk at all, EPA’s discretion would be sharply constrained. 36 Fort Worth & Denver v. Lewis, 693 F.2d 432, 435 n. 8 (5th Cir. 1982). 37 915 F. Supp. 681 (D.N.J. 1996). 38 69 F.3d 878 (DC Cif 1995,. 39 See Mistretta v. United States, 488 US 361 (1988). A. What, If Anything, Is The (Conventional) Nondelegation Doctrine For? 
The opinions of Justice Rehnquist and the plurality in the Benzene Case have spurred renewed interest in the conventional nondelegation doctrine, and many observers have argued for its revival.40 There has thus been a spirited debate over what purposes, democratic, economic and otherwise, that such a revival would serve, and whether, in light of those purposes, a revival would be justified.41 I briefly discuss that debate, principally to show fatal problems with any large-scale judicial use of the doctrine, and to pave the way toward an understanding of the nondelegation canons as the far superior alternative. 

It is possible to isolate several arguments on behalf of the conventional doctrine. First and foremost, the doctrine is designed to promote a distinctive kind of accountability—the kind of accountability that comes from requiring specific decisions from a deliberative body reflecting the views of representatives from various states of the union. This is hardly to say that the executive branch lacks accountability; of course the President, who is authorized to oversee most administrative behavior, is subject to the will of people.42 But the nondelegation doctrine should be associated less with accountability in the abstract than with the particular constitutional goal of ensuring a deliberative democracy, one that involves not only accountability but also certain forms of bargaining and above all reflectiveness.43 The vesting of lawmaking power in Congress is designed to ensure the combination of deliberation, 40 See Schoenbrod, supra note; Theodore Lowi, Two Roads to Serfdom: Liberalism, Conservatism, and Administrative Power, 36 Am. U. L.Rev. 295 (1987). 41 Leading discussions include Schoenbrod, supra note 65; Symposium, 36 Am. U. L. Rev. 277 (1987); Jerry Mashaw, Chaos, Greed, and Governance (1998); Peter Aranson, Ernest Gellhorn, and Glen Robinson, A Theory of Legislative Delegation, 68 Cornell L Rev 1 (1982). 42 As emphasized in Jerry Mashaw, supra note, at 145-48, 152-56. 43 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1994). On deliberative democracy generally, see Deliberative Democracy (Jon Elster ed. 1998); Jurgen Habermas, Between Facts and Norms (1996). bargaining, and accountability that comes from a guarantee that government power cannot be brought to bear on individuals unless diverse representatives, from diverse places, have managed to agree on the details. It is notable here that the President emerges from a “winner-take-all” contest, a sharp contrast to Congress, where local majorities, but national minorities, are allowed to have some say in lawmaking. Consider, as an extreme contrast, the early decision by the German legislature to confer on Adolf Hitler the power to rule by “decree”; this delegation made possible lawmaking exercises that would otherwise have been extremely cumbersome, and hence removed an important check on arbitrary rule.44 
A closely related point has to do with the extent to which law and particularly national legislation sometimes amount to an infringement on liberty. If no law may be brought to bear against the public unless diverse members of Congress have been able to agree on a particular form of words, then there is, on one view, an important safeguard of freedom. The underlying idea is that people may not be subject to national legal constraints unless and until there has been specific legislative authorization for the constraints. This idea can in turn be associated with social contract theory, allowing people to maintain certain private law rights unless there has been explicit authorization for what would otherwise be a common law wrong.45 Indeed, a prominent if now largely discredited46 canon of 44 See David Currie, The Constitution of the Republic of Germany 109 (1995). 45 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 27 (4th ed. 1999). There is, however, a problem with this conception of freedom, a particular problem in the aftermath of the New Deal: Why should we think that the status quo embodies freedom, and that the new law at issue would threaten to abridge freedom? It is far from clear, for example, that the common law system for regulating pollution—itself a regulatory system, and anything but prepolitical—should be taken as an embodiment of liberty, and that a Clean Air Act is a liberty-threatening abridgement of that freedom. Compare the area of discrimination: Is a law forbidding discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or disability something that threatens liberty, such that it is crucial to obtain legislative agreement on its details, lest liberty be threatened? Or might the discriminatory status quo be the real threat to freedom? Questions of this kind seem to me to raise serious doubts about the idea that a strictly enforced nondelegation doctrine would promote liberty, properly conceived. On the general topic of status quo neutrality, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (1993). construction—requiring express legislative authorization for interference with common law rights47—is a close cousin of this idea; it qualifies as the core nondelegation canon of the early twentieth century. 
A related point has to do with social welfare. If we believe that legislation is at least often an effort by self-interested private groups to redistribute wealth or resources in their favor, the nondelegation might be seen as welfare-promoting, insofar as it raises the cost of legislation. On this view, the idea that legislation may not be enacted unless there is a consensus to this effect (as reflected in agreement on statutory requirements) is a safeguard against welfare-reducing legislation, increasing the likelihood that statutes will do more good than harm. On this view, more stringent enforcement of the nondelegation doctrine would promote social welfare (economically defined), by reducing the number of inefficient statutes, and by increasing the likelihood that enacted law will be efficient. The nondelegation doctrine might even be understood as an institutional cousin of a provision that directly prohibited inefficient legislation (as some people understand the Takings Clause, for example). 
The conventional nondelegation doctrine also promotes rule of law values. Indeed, the doctrine can be understood as a kind of “backdoor” void-for-vagueness doctrine, serving the same fundamental goals.48 It does this, first, by promoting planning by those subject to law, giving them a sense of what is permitted and what is forbidden. The result is to reduce the cost of litigation and seeking legal advice. It does this, second, by cabining the 46Note, however, that in Norfolk Redevelopment and Housing Authority v. Chesapeake & Potomoc Tel. Co., 104 S. Ct. 304, 307 (1983), the Court described the canon as “well-established.” 47 See, e.g., FTC v. American Tobacco CO., 264 US 298, 305-06 (1924); FTC v. Eastman Kodak Co., 274 US 619, 623-25 (1927); Felix Frankfurter and Nathan Greene, The Labor Injunction 168-82 (1930); Roscoe Pound, Common Law and Legislation, 21 Harv L Rev 383 384, 387-88 (1908). 48 Similarly, the void for vagueness doctrine might be seen as a backdoor nondelegation doctrine, requiring a legislature to speak with clarity. Both doctrines are also cousins of the plain meaning rule in statutory construction, see John Manning, Textualism As A Nondelegation Principle, 97 Colum. L. Rev 673 (1997). They are also closely connected with the project of democracyforcing minimalism. See Sunstein, supra note. discretionary authority of enforcement officials, who might otherwise act abusively or capriciously. These points can be collected with the suggestion that the conventional nondelegation doctrine reflects the Constitution’s commitment to dual-branch lawmaking—a commitment that limits arbitrary power, and promotes deliberation as well as accountability, by ensuring that governmental authority can be exercised only when both the legislature and the executive (ordinarily authorized to decline enforcement) have made a particular decision to that effect. As we will see, this commitment underlies the nondelegation canons as well. 

Those who challenge the conventional doctrine emphasize several points. A large part of their concern is institutional, involving judicial competence rather than the doctrine on its merits.49 The difference between a permissible and impermissible delegation—between “legislative” and “executive” conduct—is one of degree, not one of kind. It is for this reason that Justice Scalia, among others, has urged that in its conventional form, the nondelegation doctrine is largely unenforceable by the federal judiciary, simply because it is not subject to principled judicial application.50 Any serious effort to enforce the nondelegation doctrine is likely (ironically) to increase uncertainty of an important kind, by forcing people to guess, without clear antecedent guidance, about how much legislative vagueness is constitutionally forbidden. With a little hyberbole, we might even suggest that in the hands of judges, the nondelegation doctrine is itself likely to be void for vagueness. 
These are institutional points; other objections cut deeper against the doctrine. Sometimes Congress has good reasons to delegate. It may lack relevant information, not only about pollutants and the changing telecommunications market, but also about the social consequences of one or another approach to regulation. It may 49 See Richard B. Stewart, Beyond Delegation Doctrine, 36 Am. U. L. Rev. 323, 324-28 (1987). 50 Se Mistrtta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 375 (Scalia, J., concurring). Justice Scalia’s skepticism about judicial implementation of the nondelegation doctrine fits very well with his skepticism about rule-free law. See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation 5-15 (1997). be aware of the existence of rapidly changing circumstances, which may make any particular approach increasingly anachronistic. For a multimember body, there are serious problems in achieving closure on any particular course of action; the result can be to push law in the direction of incompletely specified abstractions.51 These points are independent of the phenomenon of delegating to escape the political consequences of specificity, a phenomenon that undoubtedly plays a large role as well.52 
The latter point is often taken as a reason for invigorating the nondelegation doctrine in the name of accountability53; but Jerry Mashaw has raised the possibility that administrators should be making political decisions, precisely on grounds of accountability.54 As Mashaw notes, agencies are themselves politically accountable through their relationship to the President. Indeed, public choice theory may well suggest that Congress is more, not less, susceptible to factional power than bureaucrats acting under the arm of the President. There is evidence that factions are most influential precisely when Congress legislates with particularity.55 There is no evidence that social welfare is more likely to be produced via specific instructions rather than via general ones. 
Indeed, the view that the conventional nondelegation doctrine would promote social welfare is undermined not only by the risk by greater rent-seeking via clear legislation, but also in light of the fact that it is highly speculative to suggest that social welfare is, in general, likely to be promoted by reducing the total volume of law. Often law promotes social welfare, whatever content we give to that contested term. In any case this issue cannot be resolved in the abstract. And it is hard to come up with any a priori reason why decisions by agencies under vague language would be worse, from the standpoint of promoting social well-being, than decisions by agencies under more specific language from Congress. Indeed, it is 51 See Aranson et al., supra note; Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions, Ethics (forthcoming 1999); Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 52 See Aranson et al., supra note. 53 See id.; Schoenbrod, supta note. 54 See Mashaw, supra note. 55 See Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air (1983). not clear that from any point of view, things have gone systematically better when Congress is clear than when Congress is not.56 
In light of these considerations, there is no plausible case for a broad-scale revival of the nondelegation doctrine. A reinvigoration of the conventional doctrine would pose serious problems of judicial competence, and it would not be a sensible response to any of the problems and pathologies of the modern administrative state.57 There is no reason to think that such a reinvigoration would ensure better regulatory policy, or even that it would mark a significant improvement in terms of democratic values. 
None of this means that the nondelegation doctrine deserves to play no role at all in the constitutional regime. Contrary to Mashaw’s suggestion, administrators are often weakly accountable to the President (or the electorate). By virtue of its composition Congress has a distinctive kind of accountability, and the special form of political accountability anticipated by Article I, section 1 does call for limitations on executive discretion. But outside of the most egregious cases,58 this requirement is best promoted not by the conventional doctrine but by the nondelegation canons—the real place where contemporary American law recognizes a nondelegation doctrine, and where that doctrine now flourishes. 56 See Stewart, supra note. 57 If we ask about promoting public welfare, or about agency reputation for competence and fair-dealing, it appears unimportant to know whether Congress has spoken with clarity. The Interstate Commerce Commission, for example, was one of the least well-respected agencies (at least between 1950 and 1980 or so), and it operated under open-ended statutory terms; the Securities and Exchange Commission is highly regarded, though its organic statute is similarly openended. The Department of Agriculture is one of the least well-regarded agencies, and the statutes it administers are frequently all too clear. The Internal Revenue Service is highly regarded, at least among those who study administrative agencies, and many of the provisions that it must enforce are highly detailed. In short: There seems to be no link between clear statutory terms and agency competence or agency contribution to social well-being. See id.; in the same spirit, see Breyer, supra note. 58 Schechter Poultry is an obvious example here. 
Let us turn now to a question that bears directly on the current status of the nondelegation doctrine: What is the authority of administrative agencies to interpret the law? When Congress has spoken clearly, everyone agrees that agencies are bound by what Congress has said. The disputed question has to do with the authority of agencies to act when Congress has not spoken clearly. Of course a strong version of the nondelegation doctrine would suggest that agencies can, in such cases, do nothing, because the underlying grant of power is effectively void. But short of this conclusion, what is the allocation of authority to agencies? A. The Chevron Canon: Aggravating the Delegation Problem? 
The place to start is of course Chevron v. NRDC,59 the decision that dominates modern administrative law.60 There the Supreme Court held that unless Congress has decided the “precise question at issue,” agencies are authorized to interpret ambiguous terms as they see fit, so long as the interpretation is reasonable.61 Chevron creates a familiar two-step inquiry. The first question is whether Congress has directly decided the precise question at issue. The second question is whether the agency interpretation is reasonable. Indeed, Chevron establishes a novel canon of construction62: In the face of ambiguity, statutes mean what the relevant agency takes them to mean. 
This is an emphatically prodelegation canon, indeed it is the quintessential prodelegation canon, and some critics have suggested that Chevron is highly objectionable on nondelegation grounds.63 On this view, the problem is that under Chevron, agencies are not merely given authority that is often open-ended; they are also permitted to interpret the scope of their own authority, at least in the face of ambiguity.64 A regime in which agencies lacked this authority 59 467 US 837 (1984). 60 The literature is immense. For an overview, see Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 64-70 (4th ed. 1999). 61 467 US at 841. 62 See Antonin Scalia, Judicial Review of Administrative Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke LJ 511. 63 See Cynthia Farina, Statutory Interpretation and the balnace of Power in the Administrative State, 89 Colum. L. Rev. 452 (1989). 64 See id. would—it might be claimed—fit better with nondelegation principles, for under such a regime, agencies would lack the power to construe statutory terms on their own. On this view, the key point, explicitly recognized in the case and by its most enthusiastic defenders, is that Chevron holds that statutory ambiguities are implicit delegations of interpretive (realistically, law-making) authority to agencies.65 The opposing view—that ambiguities are not delegations at all—would fit better with the constitutional structure. 
The weakness of this objection stems from the fact that when statutory terms are ambiguous, there is no escaping delegation. By hypothesis Congress has not been clear, perhaps because it has been unable to resolve the issue, perhaps because it did not foresee it. The recipient of the delegation will be either agencies or courts. If Chevron is rejected, ambiguous terms will be construed by judges rather than administrators, and in neither event will hard questions be made legislatively. Chevron does increase the discretionary authority of agencies—this is the sense in which it creates a prodelegation canon—but only in relation to courts. With respect to the nondelegation question itself, understood through the lens of Article III, it is neither here nor there. 
B. Trumping Chevron: Three Categories of Nondelegation Canons 
It is plain, however, that a variety of canons of construction—what I am calling nondelegation canons—trump Chevron itself.66 In other words, the agency’s interpretation of law does not, under current doctrine, prevail if one of the nondelegation canons is at work. These canons impose important constraints on administrative authority, for agencies are not permitted to understand ambiguous provisions to give them authority to venture in certain directions; a clear congressional statement is necessary. The nondelegation canons fall in three principal categories. An important qualification: I do not mean endorse each of the canons here. The goal at this stage is descriptive, not normative—to see how 65 467 US at 838-845; see also Scalia, supra note, at 518-22. 66 See, e.g., Bowen v. Georegtown Univ. Hosp., 488 US 204 (1988). This is the tendency of current law with respect to all of the nondelegation canons discussed here, but the tendency is, in some cases, little more than that, and on the conflict with Chevron, there are some conflicts in the lower courts. I do not discuss these conflicts here. they operate as a constraint on administrative power and to understand how they are justified in practice. It does not matter if particular canons would turn out, on reflection, to be indefensible. 
A number of nondelegation canons have constitutional origins. They are designed to promote some goal with a constitutional foundation. Consider, as the most familiar example, the (controversial67) idea that agencies will not be permitted to construe statutes in such a way as to raise serious constitutional doubts.68 Notice that this principle goes well beyond the (uncontroversial) notion that agencies should not be allowed to construe statutes so as to be unconstitutional. The notion appears to be that for constitutionally sensitive questions (e.g., whether a statute would intrude on the right to travel, violate the right to free speech, or constitute a taking) will not be permitted to arise unless the constitutionally designated lawmaker has deliberately and expressly chosen to raise them. The only limitations on the principle are that the constitutional doubts must be serious and substantial, and that the statute must be fairly capable of an interpretation contrary to the agency’s own.69 So long as the statute is unclear, and the constitutional question serious, Congress must decide to raise that question via explicit statement. This idea trumps Chevron for that very reason. Executive interpretation of a vague statute is not enough when the purpose of the canon is to require Congress to make its instructions clear 
agencies will not be allowed to interpret ambiguous provisions so as to preempt state law.70 The constitutional source of this principle is the evident constitutional commitment to a federal structure, a commitment that may not be compromised without a congressional decision to do so—an important requirement in light of the various safeguards against cavalier disregard of state interests created by the 67 Richard Posner, Federal Courts: Crisis and Reform 285 (1995). 68 See note supra. 69 See Rust v. Sullivan, 500 US 17 70 See National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissions v. FCC, 880 F.2d 422 (DC Cir 1989). system of state representation in Congress.71 Notice that there is no constitutional obstacle to national preemption; Congress is entitled to preempt state law if it chooses. But there is a constitutional obstacle of a sort: the preemption decision must be made legislatively, not bureaucratically.72. 
As a third example, consider the notion that unless Congress has spoken with clarity, agencies are not allowed to apply statutes retroactively, even if the relevant terms are quite unclear.73 Because retroactivity is disfavored in the law,74 Congress will not be taken to have delegated to administrative agencies the authority to decide the question. The best way to understand this idea is as an institutional echo of the notion that the due process clause forbids retroactive application of law.75 Of course the constitutional constraints on retroactivity are now modest; while the ex post facto clause forbids retroactive application of the criminal law, the clause is narrowly construed, and Congress is generally permitted to impose civil legislation retroactively if it chooses.76 But there is an institutional requirement here. Congress must make that choice explicitly and take the political heat for deciding to do so. It will not be taken to have attempted the same result via delegation, and regulatory agencies will not be taken to have the authority to choose retroactivity on their own. Perhaps part of the motivation here is uncertainty about the failure to apply the ex post facto clause, or the due process clause, so as to call into constitutional question some retroactive applications of civil law. 
Consider, finally, the rule of lenity, which says that in the face of ambiguity, criminal statutes will be construed favorably to criminal 71 See Herbert Wechsler, The Political Safeguards of Federalism, 54 Colum L. Rev 543 (1954), for the classic discussion. A recent treatment is Larry Kramer, 100 Colum. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2000). 72 It is not entirely clear whether an agency might be able to decide the question if Congress expressly said that the agency is permitted to do so. This raises a general point about the nondelegation canons: What would happen if Congress attempted to bypass them by a clear statement of delegation? I take up this question below. 73 Bowen v. Georegtown Univ. Hosp., 488 US 204 (1988). 74 Id. at 208. 75 The notion is defended in Richard Epstein, Takings (1985). 76 See Usery v. Turner Elkhorn Mining, 438 US 1 (1976). defendants. One function of the lenity principle is to ensure against delegations. Criminal law must be a product of a clear judgment on Congress’ part. Where no clear judgment has been made, the statute will not apply because merely it is plausibly interpreted, by courts or enforcement authorities, to fit the case at hand. The rule of lenity is inspired by the due process constraint on conviction pursuant to open-ended or vague statutes. While it is not itself a constitutional mandate, it is rooted in a constitutional princple, and serves as a time-honored nondelegation canon. 

The second category of nondelegation canons contains principles that lack a constitutional source but that have a structural foundation in widespread understandings about the nature of governmental authority. Consider here the fact that agencies are not permitted to apply statutes outside of the territorial borders of the United States.77 If statutes are to receive extraterritorial application, it must be as a result of a deliberate congressional judgment to this effect. The notion here is that extraterritorial application calls for extremely sensitive judgments involving international relations; such judgments must be made via the ordinary lawmaking process (in which the President of course participates). The executive may not make this decision on its own. 
For broadly related reasons, agencies cannot interpret statutes and treaties unfavorably to Native Americans.78 Where statutory provisions are ambiguous, the government will not prevail. This idea is plainly an outgrowth of the complex history of relations between the United States and Native American tribes, which have semisovereign status; it is an effort to ensure that any unfavorable outcome will be a product of an explicit judgment from the national legislature. The institutional checks created by congressional structure must be navigated before an adverse decision may be made. Consider, as a final if more controversial illustration, the fact that agencies are not permitted to waive the sovereign immunity of the United States, and indeed statutory ambiguity cannot be used by agencies as a basis for waiver, which must be explicit in legislation.79 Sovereign immunity is a background structural understanding, defeasible only on the basis of a judgment to that effect by the national legislature. 

The final set of nondelegation canons is designed to implemented perceived public policy, by, among other things, giving sense and rationality the benefit of the doubt—and by requiring Congress itself to speak if it wants to compromise policy that is perceived as generally held. 
There are many examples. Exemptions from taxation are narrowly construed80; if Congress wants to exempt a group from federal income tax, it must express its will clearly. A central idea here may be that such exemptions are often the product of lobbying efforts by well-organized private groups, and thus a reflection of factional influence; hence agencies may not create such exemptions on their own. At the same time, there is a general federal policy against anticompetitive practices, and agencies will not be permitted to seize on ambiguous statutory language so as to defeat that policy.81 If Congress wants to make an exception to the policy in favor of competition, it is certainly permitted to do so. But agencies may not do so without congressional instruction. So too, it is presumed that statutes providing veterans’ benefits will be construed generously for veterans, and agencies cannot conclude otherwise.82 This idea is an analogue to the notion that statutes will be construed favorably to Native Americans; both require a congressional judgment is a group perceived as weak or deserving is going to be treated harshly 
state, agencies are sometimes forbidden to require very large expenditures for trivial or de minimis gains.83 If Congress wants to be 79 US Department of Energy v. Ohio, 112 S Ct 1627, 1633 (1992). 80 US v. Wells Fargo Bank, 108 S CT 1179, 1183 (1988). 81 Michigan Citizens for an Indep Press v. Thornburgh, 868 F.2d 1285, 1299 ((DC Cir. 1989). 82 King v. St. Vincent;’s Hos., 112 S. Ct. 812 (1992). 83 See Industrial Union v. API, 463 US 29, 54-55 (1980) (plurality opinion); Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F2d 120 “absolutist” about safety, it is permitted to do so by explicit statement.84 But agencies will not be allowed to take ambiguous language in this direction. This is a novel nondelegation principle, a creation of the late twentieth century. It is an evident response to perceived problems in modern regulatory policy.85 
How intrusive are the nondelegation canons? What kind of judicial role do they contemplate? Canons of this sort might well be understood not as barriers but as catalysts, allowing government to act so long as it does so through certain channels. The effort is to trigger democratic (in the sense of legislative) processes and to ensure the forms of deliberation, and bargaining, that are likely to occur in the proper arenas. 
In a sense this understanding—of nondelegation canons as catalysts—is correct. So long as government is permitted to act when Congress has spoken clearly, no judicial barrier is in place.86 In this way, the nondelegation canons are properly understand as a species of judicial minimalism, indeed democracy-forcing minimalism, designed to ensure that judgments are made by the democratically preferable institution.87 As compared with more rigid barriers to Cosle, 636 F,2d 323, 36-61 (DC Cir 1979); Monsanto Co v. Kennedy, 613 F.2d 947, 955-56 (DC Cir 1979). In a famous essay, Karl Llewellyn contended that the canons of construction were indeterminate and unhelpful, see Karl Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules of Canons about How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 395 (1950). There has been a vigorous debate over whether Llewellyn was right, see, e.g., Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1998) (rejecting Llewellyn’s claim). Even if Llewellyn is right, his argument does not undermine the nondelegation canons, which go in a single direction: against agency discretion. Of course it will be possible that other canons, for example those involve syntax, will support the agency’s view of the statute. 84 See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F2d 1108 (DC Cir 1987) (finding no de minimis exception under the Delaney Clause). 85 See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle 10-17 (1993) (discussing the problem of “the last 10%”). 86 Compare Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong, 426 US 88 (1976), holding that the Civil Service Commission could not decide to exclude aliens from the civil service, but leaving open the question whether Congress or the President could do so. 87 On minimalism generally, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). government action, the conventional nondelegation doctrine itself is a form of minimalism insofar as it requires Congress to speak with clarity and does not disable the government entirely. And because the nondelegation canons are narrower and more specifically targeted—requiring particular rather than general legislative clarity—they are more minimalist still. 
But this understanding misses an important point. Nondelegation canons are barriers, and not merely catalysts, with respect to purely administrative (or executive) judgment on the matters in question. They erect a decisive barrier to certain discretionary decisions by the executive. In this respect, at least, the relevant institutions are blocked. 
This point raised a final issue, involving the status of the nondelegation canons: Suppose that Congress expressly delegates to administrative agencies the authority to decide (for example) whether a statute may be applied outside the territory of the United States, or whether a statute should be construed favorably to Native Americans, or whether a statute ought to be understood to create a serious constitutional case. Would such a delegation be unconstitutional? No clear authority answers this question, for Congress has never attempted to do anything of this sort. But at first glance, a delegation of this kind would not seem by itself to violate the conventional nondelegation doctrine, as currently understood, so long as Congress has not given the agency a general “blank check,” which courts are loathe to find.88 Thus the answer appears to be that the nondelegation canons are merely tools of construction, and that they should not be taken to forbid Congress from delegating expressly if it chooses. 
On the other hand, the Court suggested otherwise in the only decision that at all bears on this question. In Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong,89 the Supreme Court actually held that the due process clause forbids the Civil Service Commission from deciding on its own to ban aliens from working for the United States Civil Service.90 In the Court’s view, that decision must be made by Congress or the President; it cannot be made by agencies alone. The Hampton decision has had no progeny, and outside of very unusual circumstances,91 the Court would be most unlikely to say that Congress cannot delegate to agencies the power of decision, even in sensitive areas, if it chooses to do so expressly. But notice that Congress must take the political heat that would undoubtedly be generated by any such explicit delegation, a point that helps account for Congress’ failure to delegate authority of that kind. And notice too that in cases in which a constitutional right is plausibly at stake, the Court might invoke Hampton and strike down the delegation on due process grounds. 
A. Judicial Administrability and Congressional Lawmaking 
Canons of the sort I have defended here are highly controversial. Judge Posner, for example, fears that some of them create a “penumbral Constitution,” authorizing judges to bend statutes in particular directions even though there may in fact be no constitutional violation.92 But if the argument here is correct, there is a simple answer to these concerns: The relevant canons operate as nondelegation principles, and they are designed to ensure that Congress decides certain contested questions on its own. If this idea is a core structural commitment of the Constitution, there can be no problem with its judicial enforcement. 
We can go further. As briefly noted above, there are serious problems with judicial enforcement of the conventional nondelegation doctrine. A central difficulty here is institutional, involving judicial competence rather than the doctrine on its merits.93 The distinction between a permitted and a prohibited delegation is one of degree rather than one of kind, depending on the quantum of allowed discretion, and that question is not easily subject to principled judicial enforcement. The difficulty of drawing these lines makes it reasonable to conclude that for the most part, the ban on 91 Hampton involved such circumstances: a wholesale exclusion of noncitizens from a huge classes of jobs. See 426 US at 92-94. 92 See Richard Posner, Federal Courts: Crisis and Reform 285 (1995). 93 See Richard B. Stewart, Beyond Delegation Doctrine, 36 Am. U. L. Rev. 323, 324-28 (1987). unacceptable delegations is a judicially underenforced norm, and properly so.94 From the standpoint of improving the operation of the regulatory state, it is also far from clear that general judicial enforcement of the doctrine would do much good; for reasons given above, it might even produce considerable harm. 
Compare, along the relevant dimensions, judicial use of the nondelegation canons. Here the institutional problem is far less severe. Courts do not ask the hard-to-manage question whether the legislature has exceeded the permissible level of discretion, but pose instead the far more manageable question whether the agency has been given the discretion to decide something that (under the appropriate canon) only legislatures may decide. In other words, courts ask a question about subject matter, not a question about degree. Putting courts to one side, the nondelegation canons have the salutary function of ensuring that certain important rights and interests will not be compromised unless Congress has expressly decided to compromise them. Thus the nondelegation canons lack a central defect of the conventional doctrine: While a reinvigorated nondelegation doctrine would not improve the operation of modern regulation, it is entirely reasonable to think that for certain kinds of decisions, merely executive decisions are not enough. 
If, for example, an agency is attempting on its own to apply domestic law extraterritorially, we might think that whatever its expertise, it is inappropriate, as a matter of democratic theory and international relations, for this to happen unless Congress has decided that it should. Or courts might reasonably believe that retroactive application of regulatory law is acceptable not because the executive believes that an ambiguous law should be so construed, but if and only if Congress has reached this conclusion. This judgment might be founded on the idea that political safeguards will ensure that Congress will so decide only if there is very good reason for that decision. For those who believe that retroactivity is constitutionally unacceptable, this may be insufficient consolation. But a requirement that Congress make the decision on its own is certainly less likely to make abuses less common, if they are legitimately characterized as abuses at all. Many of the canons discussed above fall within this basic account—above all, perhaps, the idea that agencies may not raise serious constitutional questions on their own. 
This point has the considerable advantage of understanding the nondelegation canons as a modern incarnation of the framers’ basic project of linking individual rights and interests with institutional design.95 The link comes from providing protection of certain rights and interests not through a flat judicial ban on governmental action, but through a requirement—that certain controversial or unusual actions will occur only with respect for the institutional safeguards introduced through the design of Congress. There is thus a close connection between the nondelegation canons and a central aspiration of the constitutional structure. 
It would be possible to object at this point that the nondelegation canons will, in practice, operate as more than presumptions. At least in most cases, congressional inertia, and multiple demands on Congress’ time, will mean that the result ordained by the canon will prevail for the foreseeable future. If this is the case, nondelegation canons will not “force” legislative deliberation but simply produce a (judicially preferred?) result. But there are three problems with this objection. First, Congress will sometimes respond to the judicial decision by legislating with clarity; this has happened many times in the past. Second, the nondelegation canons—to deserve support—must rest on something other than judicial policy preferences; they must have some kind of foundation in concerns by the sort identified above. Third, there is nothing to lament about a situation in which, for example, statutes may not be applied retroactively, or extraterritorially, without congressional authorization, and in which Congress is unable to muster the will to give that authorization. If the argument here is correct, the outcome ordained by the nondelegation canon should prevail unless Congress has said otherwise. 
B. Qualifications and Futures 
There are some important limitations to the argument here. Of course many canons, including those here, operate even when 95 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason 5-27 (1995). agencies are not involved.96 Nothing I have said operates as a defense of canons except insofar as they operate as checks on agency authority. It would be necessary to look elsewhere to justify canons that do not involve an exercise of discretion by administrative agencies. If we lean very hard on the notion of judicially underenforced constitutional norms, we might be able to begin such a justification97; but that is a different topic. 
precisely the same goals as the old nondelegation doctrine, or for that matter vice versa. There are several important differences. For its defenders, the nondelegation doctrine is supposed to operate as a general or global requirement that Congress make the basic judgments of value.98 The nondelegation canons have a conspicuously more limited office. Consider, for example, the authority of the Federal Communications Commission to give out broadcasting licenses in accordance with “public interest, convenience, and necessity.”99 Those who believe in the nondelegation doctrine would want to invalidate this authority. By contrast, a nondelegation canon would operate to forbid the FCC to exercise its authority in such a way as to create serious first amendment questions, by, for example, requiring broadcasters to provide free air time for candidates for public office.100 A ruling to this effect limits FCC discretion, but only in a narrow, targeted way. Certainly a world of nondelegation canons would impose far fewer and weaker constraints on FCC authority than a world in which the nondelegation doctrine were vigorously enforced. Thus those who believe in that doctrine and urge its revival would undoubtedly 96 See, e.g., Wisconsin Dept. of Rev v, Wrigley, 112 S Ct 2447, 2457-5 Citicorp Industrial Credit v. Brock, 483 US 27 (1987); Gregory v. Ashcroft, 111 S Ct 2395 (1991) Hoffman v. Connecticut CIM, 492 US 96 (1989); Californbia v. ARC America, 490 US 93, 101 (1989). 97 On the general idea, see Lawrence Sager, Fair Measure: The Legal Status of Underenforced Constitutional Norms, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1212, 1213-28 (1978); on the connection to canons of construction, see Cass R. Sunstein, Law and Administration After Chevron, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 2071 (1990). 98 See Schoenbrod, supra note; Ely, supra note. 99 47 USC 303r. 100 Cf. Syracuse Peace Council v. FCC, 867 F.2d 654 (DC Cir 1989) (upholding FCC abandonment of the fairness doctrine). conclude that the nondelegation canons achieve far too little. My basic response to this objection is that the nondelegation canons are far preferable, because they are easily administrable, impose a much less serious strain on judicial capacities, and promise to do more good while also producing less harm. 
We have also seen that many people are skeptical of the conventional nondelegation doctrine, and for good reasons.101 Ought they also to be skeptical of nondelegation canons? Do the objections to the conventional doctrine apply to the contemporary one? Part of the answer depends on the particular canons in question. But insofar as the concern involves judicial competence, the nondelegation canons are far less troublesome, simply because they do not require judges to resolve a hard issue about degree (how much discretion is too much discretion?) and allow judges instead to draw clear lines (for example, if the statute is ambiguous, it may not be applied extraterritorially). Nor do the nondelegation canons create serious risks to the operation of the regulatory state. Their narrower office is to ensure congressional deliberation on issues of great sensitivity. Nothing in the nondelegation canons runs afoul of the reasonable concerns of those who are skeptical about the conventional doctrine. 
The most important future debates will involve not the existence or legitimacy of nondelegation canons, but their particular content. Of course the category changes over time. As noted, a core nondelegation canon of the early twentieth century required a clear legislative statement to authorize an interference with common law rights. Of course this canon is no longer reflected in current law. By contrast, the idea that statutes will be construed so as to require de minimis exceptions is relatively new, a creation of the late twentieth century, a self-conscious judicial response to certain problems in regulatory law. It would be easy to imagine the introduction of new canons and the repudiation of current ones. I have attempted to sketch defenses of existing nondelegation canons, in order to understand the basis for the review that the relevant issues may not be resolved bureaucratically. But nothing in the general account depends on whether any particular canons are defensible. 
A distinctive objection to the nondelegation canons, as catalogued here, is that they are numerous and potentially unruly, 101 See, e.g., Mashaw, supra note; Stewart, supra note. and in that way threaten to produce a complex legal system, one that imposes costs on litigants and those seeking to know the context of the law. By contrast, a simple version of the Chevron principle, allowing agencies to interpret ambiguous provisions, promises to hold down decision costs and also to promote planning. As a general rule, this is an important point about any system of multiple “canons,” and it may argue in favor of greater simplicity, and more clarity, than current law provides. In practice, however, the existing system of nondelegation canons does not leave a great deal of uncertainty, except perhaps in the decision (inevitably complex in some cases) whether the statute at issue is ambiguous. In contemporary administrative law, the real lack of clarity comes not from nondelegation canons, but from general uncertainty about Chevron itself, which different courts, and panels, apply with noticeably different degrees of enthusiasm. 
In this Essay I have argued on behalf of recognizing nondelegation canons as a distinctive feature of modern public law. The function of these canons—the modern nondelegation doctrine—is to ban Congress from authorizing administrative agencies, or the executive branch, from making certain decisions.102 These canons do not merely operate as nondelegation principles; they are the thing itself. They show that the nondelegation doctrine is alive and well. It has merely been relocated and left unnamed. 
My principal point has been descriptive—to help in understanding and unifying a set of outcomes that might otherwise seem puzzling or even incoherent. But there are normative points as well. The nondelegation canons have important advantages over the conventional nondelegation doctrine insofar as they impose fewer strains on judicial capacities and do not threaten, as the conventional doctrine would, to harm rather than improve the operation of the regulatory state. As a class, the nondelegation canons are best defended on the ground that certain decisions are ordinarily expected to be made by the national legislature, with its various institutional 102 As noted, it is unclear whether the ban is constitutional in status or whether it is merely presumptive, a tool of construction. See above. safeguards, and not via the executive alone. In this way the nondelegation canons take their place as one of most prominent domains in which protection of individual rights, and of other important interests, occurs not through blanket prohibitions on governmental action, but through channeling decisions to particular governmental institutions, in this case Congress itself.103 103 Compare this idea with the understanding of the equal protection clause as triggering political safeguards through the requirement of generality. See Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law Is A Law of Rules, 56 U Chi L Rev 1175, 1185 (1989); Railway Express v New York, 336 US 106, 116 (1941) (Jackson, J., concurring). This is a preliminary draft, dated 08/31/99, of a manuscript forthcoming in the University of Chicago Law Review. 
All rights reserved. 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). (October 1993). (March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). (June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). (August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). 1996). in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). 
Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). Overview of the la and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 1997). 
Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997). 
Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998). to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). 
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Decisions (June 1998). Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 1998). 
Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Chapter 11 (October 1998) the Tax Law (November 1998) 
International Law (November 1998) 
Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) 
Evidence (February 1999) 
Information Goods (February 1999) 
Enterprise (February 1999) and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward a 'Third Way'" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 65, 1999). 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 65 (2D SERIES) 
Cass R. Sunstein (originally published 01/99. this is a revision dated 04/99.) 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The so-called communications revolution has been driven by technological change. The rise of cable television, the Internet, satellite television, “direcTV,” and digital television has confounded ordinary understandings of “television.”1 Before long, digital television may enable viewers to choose among over a thousand programs.2 The possible combination of television and the Internet—a combination now in its early stages—may prove an equally dramatic development.3 
Law has responded to these developments in fits and starts, largely by attempting to engraft legal requirements designed for the old environment onto an altogether new communications market. The result is a high degree of anachronism, misfit, and drift, and in the view of many observers, a series of constitutional violations.4 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. From 1997 to 1998, the author served on the Advisory Committee on the Public Service Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, which produced a report in December 1998. See Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, Charting the Digital Broadcasting Future (1998). The author is grateful to other members of the Advisory Committee for many helpful discussions of these problems, and in particular to the two co-chairs of the Committee, Norman Ornstein and Leslie Moonves. The Committee’s Final Report has influenced the treatment here, not least when there are disagreements. He is also grateful to Douglas Lichtman, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for valuable comments. 1 See Bruce Owen, The Internet Challenge to Television 311-26 (1999) (discussing this possibility with some skepticism about its feasibility, but also dealing with other dramatic technological developments). 2 See Lawrie Mifflin, As Band of Channels Grows, Niche Programs Will Boom, N. Y. Times, Dec. 28, 1998, at A1. 3 See Owen, supra note 1, at 311-26. 4 See Thomas Krattenmaker and L.A. Powe, Converging First Amendment Principles for Converging Communications Media, 104 Yale L.J. 1719, 1725 Most of the modern debate involves a vigorous but increasingly tired contest between those defending the old regulatory order5 and those urging rapid movement toward “simple rules” for government control of television, above all well-defined property rights and freedom of contract.6 
My aim in this Article is to discuss a small but important part of the intersection between the emerging communications market and law: public interest obligations imposed on television broadcasters. Since the initial rise of broadcasting in the United States, government has treated the license as a kind of “grant” that is legitimately accompanied by duties.7 Congress and the FCC have required broadcasters to follow a range of requirements—a form of old-style “command-and-control” regulation, growing out of an understanding that there would be three, and only three, private broadcasting stations. Much, though far from all, of this regulation was eliminated in the 1980s.8 A large question is the extent to which public interest requirements continue to make sense, or even to survive constitutional scrutiny, in an entirely different communications market. 
The question was posed starkly with the enactment of the Telecommunications Act of 1996,9 one of whose central concerns involved the rise of digital television. The Act had to deal with two issues. First, who would have the right to broadcast digital television? (1995); Mark Fowler and Daniel Brenner, A Marketplace Approach to Broadcast Regulation, 60 Tex. L. Rev. 207, 210 (1982); the various contributions to Rationales and Rationalizations: Regulating the Electronic Media (Richard CornRevere ed. 1997). 5 This is the general thrust of Lee C. Bollinger, Images of a Free Press (1991); Owen M. Fiss, The Irony of Free Speech (1996). 6 See Rationales and Rationalizations, supra (offering a number of essays challenging any role for governmnent aside from the definition and enforcement of property rights); Richard A. Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World 275-306 (1996) (discussing environmental protection, and a general account of the role of government, in a way that is easily adapted to the area of communications). 
9 The Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (codified in scattered sections of 47 U.S.C. §§ 151-613 and amending the Communications Act of 1934). Should the licenses be sold, or auctioned, or given outright to existing broadcasters? Second, what public interest obligations—if any—should attach to the ownership of a right to broadcast digital television? The Act squarely answered the first question but was silent on the second. 10 In an extremely controversial step, Congress did not sell or auction the right to broadcast digital television, but basically gave the right to existing broadcasters for free.11 This has sometimes been described as a “$70 billion giveaway.”12 At the same time, Congress refused to eliminate public interest obligations and delegated to the FCC the power to decide whether such obligations should be imposed on digital television broadcasters, and if so in what form.13 The FCC has not yet made that decision or even commenced formal proceedings. 
In this Article I offer two basic claims, one involving ends, the other involving means. The first is that at least in the near term, the nature of the emerging communications market does not provide a sufficient reason to abandon the idea that broadcasters should be required to promote public interest goals. There is a large difference between the public interest and what interests the public. This is especially so in light of the still-distinctive character and consequences of the communications market. One of the central goals of the system of broadcasting, private as well as public, should be to promote the American aspiration to deliberative democracy14—a system in which citizens are informed about public 10 47 U.S.C. 336(a). 11 Id. 12 See, e.g., Editorial, What Price Digital Television?, N.Y. Times, Dec. 26, 1998 at A26 (editorial). See also See Federal Management of the Radio Spectrum: Advanced Television Services: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Telecomm. and Fin. of the House Comm. on Commerce, 104th Cong. 82 (1996) (statement of Robert M. Pepper, Chief, Office of Plans and Policy, FCC, stating that an auction would bring between $11 to $70 billion in revenue). For general criticism, see Thomas Krattenmaker, The Telecommunications Act of 1996, 29 Conn. L. Rev. 123, 163-64 (1996); Matthew Spitzer, Dean Krattenmacher’s Road Not Taken, 29 Conn. L. Rev. 353 (1996). 13 47 U.S.C. 336(d). 14 See, e.g., Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement 52-94 (1996) (discussing reciprocity); Joshua Cohen, Democracy and Liberty, in Deliberative Democracy 185-231(Jon Elster ed. 1998). issues and able to make judgments on the basis of reasons. Educational programming, and programming that deals with civic questions, can promote that aspiration; reliance on an unregulated market may not. There are also legitimate grounds for encouraging broadcasters to make programming accessible to people with disabilities, above all the deaf. I emphasize in this connection some special characteristics of the broadcasting market, characteristics that make it hazardous to rely on the ideal of “consumer sovereignty” as the exclusive basis for regulatory policy. 
My second claim is that in order to promote the relevant goals, government should decreasingly rely on command-and-control regulation,15 and should turn instead to three less intrusive and more flexible instruments, each of which is well-adapted to a period of rapid technological change. The instruments are (1) mandatory public disclosure of information about public interest broadcasting, unaccompanied by content regulation; (2) economic incentives, above all “play or pay”; and (3) voluntary self-regulation, as through a “code” of appropriate conduct, to be created and operated by the industry itself. These instruments have played an increasing role in regulatory policy in general, especially in the environmental arena.16 But they have not been discussed in the area of communications, where they have a natural place; and despite its growing importance, the general topic of self-regulation by industry self-regulation has received little academic attention.17 15 A question not addressed here is the content of any minimal requirements; I emphasize the more flexible alternatives as the instruments of choice, without denying the need for some minima as a “backstop.” In the current system, for example, it may well make sense to require a degree of children’s programming and also free air time for candidates. See Final Report, supra note *. The precise extent of mandatory programming is beyond the scope of the present discussion, though I do refer to mandates at several points below.. 16 See generally Neil Cunningham and Peter Grabosky, Smart Regulation: Designing Environmental Policy 422-48 (1999); Anthony Ogus, Regulation 121149, 245-56 (1998); National Academy of Public Administration, The Environment Goes To Market 12-55 (1994). 17 The principal exception can be found in an illuminating symposium issue in an Australian law review, see Symposium, Industry Self-Regulation, 19 Law & Policy 363 (1997). Through requiring broadcasters to disclose information about their public interest activities, government may be able to enlist public pressure and social norms so as to create a kind of competition to do more and better. This is the simplest and least intrusive of regulatory instruments. By allowing broadcasters to buy their way out of certain public interest obligations, government should be able to ensure that those with an incentive to produce good programming are actually doing so, and also to produce lowest-cost means of promoting public interest programming. And through encouraging (not mandating) voluntary self-regulation, government can help broadcasters to overcome a kind of prisoner’s dilemma faced by participants in a “winner-take-all” market,18 a prisoner’s dilemma that contributes to a range of social problems, often stemming from a kind of “race to the bottom” with respect to programming quality. 
It should be clear that this basic approach combines an insistence on the serious limits of unrestrained communications markets in promoting social goals with a plea for rejecting traditional regulation and for enlisting more flexible, market-oriented instruments in the service of those goals. This approach is consistent with some incipient but quite general trends in regulatory law.19 If the approach is sound, it is ideally suited to the emerging communications market; but it is easily adapted to other areas as well, involving environmental degradation and other social problems. It is much too soon to say whether there is a “third way” between traditional command-and-control regulation and reliance on free trade and well-defined property rights. But if there is indeed a “third way,” it is likely to be found in proposals of this kind. 
Thus the most general theme of this Article is that disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation might displace government command-and-control in a variety of areas of regulatory law. More specific themes involve the value of requiring producers to 18 See Robert H. Frank and Phillip J. Cook, The Winner-Take-All Society 189209 (1995). 19 See, e.g., Neil Gunningham and Peter Grabosky, Smart Regulation: Designing Environmental Policy 37-92 (1999); National Academy of Public Administration, The Environment Goes To Market (1994); Cass R. Sunstein, Informational Regulation and Informational Standing,: Akins and Beyond, 147 U. Pa. L. Rev. 613, 618-33 (1999). disclose goods and bads, independent of any regulatory requirements; of relaxing the antitrust laws so as to permit cooperation designed to reduce some of problems associated with both “winner-take-all” markets and “races to the bottom”; of distinguishing between market-suppressing and marketsupplementing remedies; of building on emerging developments in environmental protection so as to allow far more imaginative “trades” among producers of social goods and bads; and of greatly expanding the repertoire of regulatory tools to be used by officials concerned with market failures (or market successes that disserve social goals). In short, it is time to move beyond the view that market ordering and content regulation are the two possibilities for communications law. There are many alternatives, and real progress can come only from exploring the choice among them. 
The Article comes in eight parts. Part II sets the stage, outlining the history of regulation and identifying some relevant puzzles. Part III evaluates, and rejects, the claim that in the emerging television market, there is no longer room for public interest regulation of any kind. I suggest that broadcasting is no ordinary commodity, partly because of the collective benefits of good programming, and partly because viewers are more like products, offered to advertisers, than consumers paying for entertainment on their own. I also trace likely stages of the emerging market, with broadcast programming becoming more and more like general-interest magazines. Part IV deals with disclosure, exploring the possibility that relevant private groups, invoking widespread social norms, can interact to produce improvements in the broadcasting market without compulsory programming of any kind. Part V deals with economic incentives, beginning with the idea of “pay or play,” and then adapting some ideas in the law of tort to the law of broadcasting. Part VI examines whether a code of broadcasting might operate as kind of positional arms control agreement, helping to counteract a situation in which broadcasters compete to the detriment of collective goals. Part VII is a brief summary of regulatory options. Part VIII provides a conclusion. 
Broadcast licenses have never been treated like ordinary property rights, open for sale on the free market. Since the initial enactment of the Communications Act of 1934, the government has awarded licenses to broadcasters in accordance with the “public interest, convenience, and necessity.”21 The Federal Radio Commission early described the system as one in which broadcasters “must be operated as if owned by the public. . . . It is as if a community should own a station and turn it over to the best man in sight with this injunction: ‘Manage this station in our interest . . . .”22 Under this “public trustee” standard, the FCC has imposed a range of obligations on broadcasters. 
In its initial set of guidelines, the FCC required stations to meet the “tastes, needs and desires of all substantial groups among the listening public.”23 This required “a well-rounded program, in which entertainment, consisting of music of both classical and lighter grades, religion, education and instruction, important public events, discussions of public questions, weather, market reports, and news, and matters of interest to all members of the family, find a place.”24 
Often this kind of guidance operated as a general plea, with little systematic enforcement. In 1960, however, the FCC went so far as to outline fourteen of the “major elements usually necessary to the public interest.”25 These included religious programming; program for children; political broadcasts; news programs; sports programs; weather and market services, and development and use of 20 This section draws on the first section of the report referred to in note * supra. 21 47 USC 303®. 22 The Federal Radio Commission and the Public Service Responsibility of Broadcast Licensees, 11 Fed. Comm. B.J. 5, 14 (1950) (quoting Schaeffer Radio Co., an unpublished 1930 FRC decision). 23 Great Lakes Broadcasting Co. v. FRC, 3 FRC Ann. Rep. 32, 34 (1929), modified on other grounds, 37 F.2d 993 (D.C. Cir.), cert. dismissed, 281 U.S. 706 (1930). 24 Id. 25 Report and Statement of Policy Res: Commission en banc Programming Inquiry, 44 F.C.C. 2303, 2314-15 (1960). local talent. The FCC eventually specified its general guidelines, which were intended merely as “indicia of the types and areas of” appropriate service. The specifications included minimum amounts for news, public affairs, and other non-entertainment programming, including the controversial “fairness doctrine,” and also access rules for prime-time.26 Broadcasters were required to limit advertising time, maintain program logs, and ascertain local community needs.27 
Substantial changes occurred in the 1980s, a period of significant deregulation. The head of the FCC, Mark Fowler, declared that television is “just another appliance,” a “toaster with pictures.”28 The fairness doctrine was largely eliminated, and many of the more particular public interest requirements were removed.29 Nonetheless, a number of such requirements remain. For example, the FCC continues to say that if a broadcaster sells airtime to one candidate, it must sell similar time to opposing candidates as well. Congress itself has codified a right of this kind.30 A longstanding statutory provision requires that if a broadcaster offers to sell time, it must do so at the “lowest unit rate of the station” during the 45 days before a primary election and during the 60 days before a general or special election.31 
Recent years have seen special attention to children’s programming and to deaf people’s access to television. In 1990, 26 See In re Amendment to Section 0.281 of the Commission’s Rules: Delegations of Authority to the Chief, Broadcast Bureau, 59 F.C.C.2d 491, 493 (1976); See Amendment of Part 73 of the Commission’s Rules and Regulations with Respect to Competition and Responsibility in Network Television Broadcasting, Report and Order, 23 F.C.C.2d 382, 385-7 (1970). 27 See id. 28 See Bernard Nossiter, Licenses to Coin Money, 240 Nation 402 (1985). 29 In re The Revision of Programming and Commercialization Policies, 98 F.C.C. 2d 1076 (1984). See also Revision of Applications for Renewals, 49 R.R.2d 470 (1981) (postcard renewals); In re Complaint of Syracuse Peace Council, 2 F.C.C.R. 5043, 5054-55 (1987) (repealing most of fairness doctrine), aff'd, Syracuse Peace Council v. FCC, 867 F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1989). 30 47 U.S.C. § 315. 31 47 U.S.C. § 315(b). Congress enacted the Children’s Programming Act of 1990,32 which requires broadcasters to provide three hours of educational programming per week, and which also limits the advertising on children’s programming (12 minutes per hour during weekdays and 10/5 minutes per weekends).33 A statute enacted in 1990 requires new television sets to have special decoder chips, allowing them to display closed captioned television transmissions.34 T h e Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires use of “v-chip” technology, designed to facilitate parental control over what enters the home; it also contains ancillary requirements intended to ensure “ratings” of programming content.35 
Turn now to the present, or at least to the recent past. From 1997 to 1998, a presidential advisory committee met to discuss the public interest obligation of television broadcasters.36 Several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of adopting some kind of broadcasting “code,” akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters between 1928 and 1979. The Committee eventually moved toward endorsing the notion of a code, and the idea received considerable attention, mid-deliberations, in the trade press. 
In its annual meeting, however, the National Association of Broadcasters signaled its skepticism about the idea and came very close to saying “no” and “never.” Very oddly, a large part of the broadcasters’ objection was that any “code” would violate the antitrust laws. This is very odd, because in their discussions, members of the NAB treated the possibility of an antitrust violation as extremely good news. It is not often that high-level corporate 32 Children's Television Act of 1990, tits. I, II, §§ 103, 203, 47 U.S.C. §§ 303(a)-(b), 394 (1994). 33 Pub. L. No. 101-437, § 102(b). 34 Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990, 47 U.S.C. § 303(u). 35 See the general discussion in James Hamilton, supra note, at 302-11. 36 I draw on personal recollections here. See note * supra. Transcripts of the relevant meetings can be found at the website of the Advisory Committee on the Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters. officials are smiling when they discuss the possibility that certain action would be found unlawful. 
Consider a second puzzle. During the committee’s deliberations, some people argued on behalf of a “pay or play” system, in which broadcasters would be relieved of public interest obligations (to “pay”) if they agree instead to pay someone else—another broadcaster—to do so. But many of the broadcasters on the committee were quite skeptical of this approach, arguing that public interest obligations were part of the duty of every broadcaster, and that no one should be exempted for a price. This was also very odd. It is not often that high-level corporate officials prefer rigid government mandates to more flexible approaches. What explains these puzzles? 
To evaluate particular proposals, it is necessary to have a concrete sense of why some people think that even well-functioning television markets are inadequate. Consider the following possibilities, each of which has produced public concern in the last decade37: children. The existing fare may be insufficient because there is too little simply in terms of amount, or because children do not watch the stations on which it is available, or because the quality is too low. for example, it contains excessive violence, or otherwise encourages behavior that is dangerous to self and others. The result of such programming may be to produce violent or otherwise dangerous behavior in the real world.38 37 For different angles, see, e.g., Final Report, supra note; Hamilton, supra note, at 3-50 (discussing violence); Newton Minow and Craig LaMay, Abandoned in the Wasteland: Children, Television, and the First Amendment 10-45 (1995) (discussing children) Danny Schechter, The More You Watch, The Less You Know (1997) (discussing content of news). 38 See Hamilton, supra, at 20-30, for evidence. who are deaf or hard of hearing; this may be a particular problem if citizens are unable to find out about emergencies.39 during political campaigns. The relevant coverage may involve sensationalism and “sound bites,” or attention to who is ahead (“horserace issues”) rather than who thinks what and why. The result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry.40 with adverse consequences for adults, not only children.41 The adverse consequences may include an increase in violence (because of changes in social norms or “copycat” effects42), general demoralization and fear, or a misperception of reality. with real issues, but with gossip about celebrities and charges of various kinds.43 homogenous, in a form of “blind leading the blind” programming. Since a significant percentage of Americans do not receive cable television, and depend on broadcasters, the result may be insufficient variety in programming.44 little debate among people with genuinely different 39 See Final Report, supra note *, at 30-31. 40 See Kiku Adatto, Sound-Bite Democracy (1995), for general discussion. 41 See Hamilton, supra note, at 20-30, for detailed discussion. 42 For evidence, see Elliott Aronson, The Social Animal 62-64, 266-69 (6th ed. 1995). 43 See Schechter, supra note. 44 See below. perspectives about issues of policy and fact. Here too, the result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry.45 which may result in a highly balkanized viewing public, in which many or most people lack shared viewing experiences, or in which people view programming that largely reinforces their own convictions and prejudices. electorate via television. The result may be excessive competition to accumulate funds simply in order to have access to television; this competition may have corrosive effects on the electoral process. Free air time would be a possible response, perhaps qualified by an obligation, on the part of the candidate, to speak for at least 50% of the time, or to refrain from negative campaigning. 
To be sure, some of these problems cannot be corrected through regulation that is either feasible or constitutional. Moreover, these various conceptions of the relevant problem point toward diverse solutions, some of which would raise serious first amendment problems, as discussed below.46 A particular challenge is to develop approaches that would allow a high degree of flexibility, minimize government involvement in programming content, and also do some good. 
It has increasingly been urged that any objections to existing television are elitist or outmoded.47 On one view, public interest obligations have no place in modern law, particularly in light of the 45 See C. Edwin Baker, The Media That Citizens Need, 147 U Pa L Rev 317, 383-407 (1999). 46 See pp. below. 47 See Fowler and Brennan, supra note; Corn-Revere, supra note. decline of the “scarcity” rationale for regulation; it has even been urged that the FCC no longer has any appropriate role.48 
A conceptual point first: Though many people claim to argue for “deregulation,” that route is not in fact an option, or at least not a reasonable one. What “deregulation” really means is a shift from the status quo to a system of different but emphatically legal regulation, more specifically one of property and contract rights, in which government does not impose specific public interest obligations but instead sets up initial entitlements and then permits trades among owners and producers. This is a regulatory system as much as any other. If it seems close to the current system for newspapers and magazines, it is no less a regulatory system for that; a great deal of law (inevitably) governs the rights and duties of newspapers and magazines. The only real form of deregulation is anarchy, and that is not an option. The issue is thus not whether to “deregulate,” but whether one or another regulatory system is better than imaginable alternatives. 
I therefore turn to the general question whether there remains any reason for government to regulate broadcasting in the “public interest.” My concern here is both theoretical and empirical. The question is whether in the current market, broadcasters are likely to provide viewers what they would like to see, and if so whether that point is decisive on the question whether public interest obligations should be imposed.49 The brief answer is that the idea that broadcasters show “what viewers want” is a quite inadequate response to the argument for public interest obligations.50 The discussion deals with the technological present and the short-term future; below I introduce complications from emerging technological developments. 48 See Yochai Benkler & Lawrence Lessig, The New Republic, Dec. 14, 1998 at 15 (arguing that a growing body of research suggests the F.C.C. is unnecessary). 49 An excellent discussion, on which I draw at several points here, is C. Edwin Baker, Giving the Audience What It Wants, 58 Ohio St. L.J. 311 (1997). 50 The following points are directed to the television market at the close of the twentieth century and the opening of the twenty-first; later I discuss how they bear on the market that is likely to emerge thereafter. 
A well-functioning television market would promote the ideal of consumer sovereignty. People would be able to choose from a range of options, and suppliers would cater to their tastes. To a considerable extent, of course, the existing system approaches this reality. But there are three serious problems, each suggesting that consumer sovereignty is not served by free markets in programming. 
The first point is the most fundamental. Television is not an ordinary product, for broadcasters do not sell programming to viewers in return for cash. A system of “pay-per-view” would indeed fit the usual commodity model; but “pay per view” continues to be a rare practice. The difference between the existing broadcasting market and pay-per-view is quite important. The key problem here is that viewers do not pay a price, market or otherwise, for television. On the contrary, it is more accurate to say that viewers are a commodity, or a product, that broadcasters deliver to the people who actually pay them: advertisers.52 
This phenomenon introduces some serious distortions, at least if we understand an ideal broadcasting market as one in which viewers receive want they want. From the standpoint of consumer sovereignty, and taking viewers as consumers, the role of advertisers creates market failures. Of course broadcasters seek, other things being equal, to deliver more rather than fewer viewers, because advertisers seek, other things being equal, more rather than fewer viewers. To this extent the broadcasting market may well provide many or most viewers with what they “want.” But advertisers have issues and agendas of their own, and the interests of advertisers can push broadcasters in, or away from, directions that viewers, or substantial numbers of them, would actually like. 
This is a substantial difference from the ordinary marketplace. Thus advertisers like certain demographic groups and dislike others, even when the numbers are equal; they pay extra amounts in order to 51 These are market failures if it is assumed that the purpose of a well-functioning television market is to ensure that programming is well-matched to viewer preferences. 52 See C. Edwin Baker, Advertising and A Democratic Press 25-87 (1994). attract groups that are likely to purchase the relevant products, and this affects programming content.53 Advertisers do not want programming that draws product safety into question, at least not if it is their own products, and sometimes more generally.54 In addition, advertisers want programming that will put viewers in a receptive purchasing mood, and hence not be too “depressing.”55 Advertisers also tend to dislike programming that is highly controversial or that is too serious, and hence avoid sponsoring shows that take stands on public issues.56 In these ways, the fact that broadcasters are delivering viewers to advertisers—this is largely their charge, under existing arrangements—can produce offerings that diverge considerably from what would emerge if viewers were paying directly for programming. To this extent the notion of consumer sovereignty is seriously compromised. 
A second problem is that it is not clear whether broadcasters are now engaged, in anything like a systematic or scientific way, in catering to public tastes. At first glance it would seem obvious that broadcasters must be engaged in this endeavor (subject to the qualification just stated); if broadcasters are maximizing anything, they must be maximizing viewers. Attracting viewers is their job.57 But there is reason to question this judgment, at least in its simplest form. Sometimes rational people make decisions not on the basis of a full inspection of the alternatives, but on the basis of an understanding of what other people are doing.58 Because people obtain information from other people’s actions, individual actions carry with them one or more “informational externalities,” which potentially affect the decisions of others. Thus rational and boundedly rational people, in business as elsewhere, rely on the 53 See id., at 30-35. 54 See id. 55 Id. 56 Id. 57 See Danny Schechter, The More You See, The Less You Know (1998). 58 Sushil Bikchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, 12 J. Econ. Persp. 151, 164 (1998). signals provided by the words and deeds of others.59 The result can be to produce cascade effects, as B follows A, and C follows A and B, and D, as a rational agent, follows the collected wisdom embodied in the actions of A, B, and C. Informational cascades can produce unfortunate outcomes, in fact outcomes far worse than those that would result if individuals accumulated information on their own. Sometimes, moreover, people use the “availability” heuristic, by which an event is measured as more probable if an instance of its occurrence can be brought to mind.60 Using the availability heuristic, broadcasters might reason that if one show or another has attracted substantial viewers in the past, they should copy it. The result would be “fads” and “fashions” in programming.61 
In theory, then, broadcasters might be building on the programming judgments of other broadcasters, often, perhaps, reacting to the “availability” of salient recent instances in which a particular program was especially popular (dealing, let us suppose, with the O.J. Simpson trial) or especially unpopular (dealing, let us suppose, with South Africa). If this is true, private decisions by b r o a d c a s t e r s m a y p r o d u c e b o t h m i s t a k e s a n d homogeneity—mistakes in the form of programming unlike what viewers want, and homogeneity in the form of the “blind leading the blind.”62 
Recent evidence suggests that the theoretical account has considerable truth. A careful study shows that there is a good deal of simple imitation, as networks provide a certain kind of programming simply by imitating whatever other networks are doing.63 Recently 59 In a related vein, see Andrew Caplin and John Leahy, Miracle on Seventh Avenue: Information Externalities and Search, 108 Econ. J. 60 (1998). 60 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 163 (1999). 61 See note supra. 62 See David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn Ierulli eds., 1995). 63 See Sushil Bikchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, 12 J. Econ. Persp. 151. 164 (1998); Robert E. Kennedy, Strategy Fads and Competitive Convergence: An Empirical Test for Herd Behavior in Prime-Time Television Broadcasting (Harvard Business School, January 1998). popular shows tend to create cascade effects. This imitative behavior is not in the interest of viewers. On the contrary, it creates a kind of homogeneity and uniformity in the broadcasting market, and thus makes for problems in terms of providing what viewers “want.”64 This is not a conventional market failure, but it suggests that existing decisions are unlikely to promote consumer sovereignty. 
Even if broadcasters did provide each viewer with what he or she wanted, a significant problem would remain, and from the economic point of view, this is probably the most serious of all. Information is a public good, and once one person knows something (about, for example, product hazards, asthma, official misconduct, welfare reform, or abuse of power), the benefits of that knowledge will probably accrue to others.65 Note in this regard Amartya Sen’s remarkable finding that no famine has ever occurred in a democratic party with a free press.66 This finding is complemented by a series of less dramatic ones, showing the substantial benefits for individual citizens of a media that is willing and able to devote attention to public concerns, including the plight of the disadvantaged.67 But individual choices by individual viewers may well produce too little public interest programming in light of the fact that the benefits of viewing such programming are not fully “internalized” by individual viewers. Thus individually rational decisions may inflict costs on others at the same time that they fail to confer benefits on others. In this respect, the problem “is not that people choose unwisely as individuals, but that the collective consequences of their choices often turn out to be very different from what they desire or anticipate.”68 
Most generally, there are multiple external effects in the broadcasting area; some of these are positive, but unlikely to be 64 See id. 65 An illuminating and detailed discussion is Baker, Giving the Audience What It Wants, supra note, at 350-85. 66 See Amartya Sen and Jean Dreze, India 76 (1995). 67 Id. at 75-76, 173, 191. 68 Robert H. Frank and Phillip J. Cook, The Winner-Take-All Society 191 (1995). See also Pierre Bourdieu, On Television 9-29 (1998). generated sufficiently by individual choices, while others are negative, and likely to be excessively produced by individual choices. Consider a decision to watch violent programming.69 In short, the effects of broadcasting depend on social interactions, and broadcasting produces a range of collective goods and collective bads. Many of the resulting problems are connected with democratic ideals. Thus, for example, a culture in which each person sees a high degree of serious programming may well lead to better political judgments; media portrayals of violence can produce harm to others; greater knowledge on the part of one person often leads to more knowledge on the part of others with whom she interacts.70 Perhaps most important, a degree of serious attention to public issues can lead to improved governance through deterring abuses and encouraging governmental response to serious problems. In these various ways, public interest programming can produce social benefits that will not be adequately captured by the individual choices of individual citizens; the same is true for programming that produces social costs, including increased criminal activity.71 
Many people object to purely market approaches to television.72 Perhaps television is not best understood as an ordinary commodity, subject to the forces of supply and demand. There are several reasons why this might be so. The unifying theme is that the American political tradition is committed to the ideal of deliberative democracy,73 an ideal that has animated first amendment doctrine and media regulation in general.74 Even if the media market were well-functioning from the economic point of view, there would be room for measures designed to promote a well-functioning system of 69 See Hamilton, supra, at 3-49. 70 Baker, supra, at 350-367. 71 See id. at 355-56; see also James P. Hamilton, Channeling Violence: The Economic Market for Violent Television Programming 20-30, 285-322 (1998). 72 See, eg., Baker, supra, at 355-65. 73 See Joseph Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason 6-39 (1995). 74 See Minow and LaMay, supra note, at 15-65; Cass R. Sunstein, Democracy and the Problem of Free Speech 53-92 (1993). undesirable cartelization or instead as protection against an undesirable “race to the bottom.” I suggest that a code might do a great deal of good, partly because of the likely existence of external monitors, partly because of a code’s capacity to help develop a kind of internal morality likely to affect many of its signatories. A general lesson is that the antitrust laws ought not to be invoked too readily to prevent producers from undertaking cooperative action in circumstances in which competition is producing palpable social harms. In such contexts, a “code” can provide some of advantages of government regulation, but do so in a more flexible and betterinformed fashion. Thus it is hazardous to invoke the antitrust laws to prevent an industry to provide the kinds of benefits that might be provided, more crudely and expensively, by direct regulation.142 
Notwithstanding the qualifications described above, competitive pressures often can do a great deal in providing programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable television, and an increasingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be especially in producing “niche” programming for people who have a particular interest in serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; recall the possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations. But those competitive pressures also have a downside. They can lead to sensationalistic, prurient, or violent programming, and to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or to the kind of programming that is indispensable to a well-functioning democracy.143 This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can led to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, “[I]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modern societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of 142 See Robert Frank and Philip Cook, The Winner-Take-All Society 225-27 (1995). 143 See James P. Hamilton, Channeling Violence: The Economic Market for Violent Television Programming, supra, at 129-284 (discussing violence).. circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly illinformed and ill-tempered electorate.”144 
It would be possible to respond to the harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Probably the simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of “code” of good programming; this approach is specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In various nations, including the United States, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.145 Though it has yet to receive much academic commentary,146 voluntary self-regulation via industry agreements is emerging as a regulatory strategy of choice, especially in the environmental arena.147 The EPA, for example, has encouraged companies that produce pesticides to agree on pesticide reduction strategies, and here the fact of broad agreement is crucial.148 California has attempted to deal with the problem of workplace accidents via a “cooperative compliance program” involving self-enforced safety plans on large construction projects. The result has been to produce significant drops in accident rates.149 Self-regulating agreements are now in place in Canada’s system for forest management; in the Responsible Care program of the chemical industry, now operating in more than forty countries; in national regulation of nuclear power plants.150 144 See Robert H. Frank and Philip J. Cook, The Winner-Take-All Society 203 (1995). 145 See the discussion of ethical code in Israel in Moshe Negbi, The Enemy Within 14 (Joan Shorenstein Center, Harvard University, Discussion paper D35, November 1998). Note also that many international bodies attempt to certify quality, in a kind of cooperative action designed to reduce adverse effects of market pressures. 146 An exception is Neil Gunningham and Joseph Rees, Industry SelfRegulation: An Institutional Perspective, 19 Law & Policy 363 (1997). 147 See Gunningham and Graboski, supra, at 50-56, 300-07. 148 Id. at 300. 149 See Gunningham and Rees, supra, at 369. 150 Id. at 51. 
What accounts for the increasing popularity of industry selfregulation, as part of the general project of “reinventing government”151? From the industry’s standpoint, self-regulation allows far more flexibility than government mandates. From the standpoint of government itself, a special advantage of codes is that they avoid the kind of informational overload that comes from government prescriptions; it is partly for this reason that voluntary agreements among companies have had good effects in the area of occupational safety and health.152 In a point of special relevance to television, codes also have been found to have the “ability to influence community attitudes,” in a way that tends to contribute to the “development of a custodial ethic.”153 Thus codes have helped to develop “an effective institutional morality that brings the behavior of industry members within a normative framework.”154 
Such cooperative action often makes people concerned about antitrust violations and self-interested profit-seeking under a publicspirited guise. This is of course a risk, but the antitrust law can go wrong when it prevents certain cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures. Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation designed to overcome those adverse effects155; the question is whether that experience has communications analogues. 151 See symposium, Industry Self-Regulation, 19 Law and Policy 300 (1997). 152 See J.V. Rees, Reforming the Workplace: A Study of Self-Regulation in Occupational Safety and Health (1988); John Mendenhall, Regulating Occupational Safety and Health (1989). 153 Id. 154 See Gunningham and Rees, supra, at 371-72. 155 See, e.g., Profit Bows to Ethics, Independent (London), Oct. 26, 1997, Sunday, at 3.(stating “Some of the world’s biggest companies are putting their weight behind a new, verifiable code of conduct intended to answer mounting consumer criticism of the exploitative conditions under which the goods they sell are produced in poor countries. . . . The code, called SA8000 (Social Accountability 8000), is the brainchild of the Council on Economic Priorities, an American public interest group, which tries to improve corporate responsibility. It has been drawn up by companies, non-governmental organisations, trade unions, and other interested groups, and is due to start operating next year. The code covers the basic issues of child labour, forced labour, health and safety, trade My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point. Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better156; competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well. 
The idea of a broadcasting code is nothing new. Consider its development over time:157 
The idea of a broadcasting “code” has a long history. The NAB was founded in 1923, and it first attempted to produce a degree of self-regulation in 1926, as a response to the “chaos” widely perceived to have been produced by interference and piracy. Some progress was made, but ultimately the agreement broke down; hence legislation was necessary, in the form of the Radio Act of 1927. 
The initial NAB code was produced in 1928. It included some content guidance, but it was quite vague and also lacked an enforcement mechanism. Just one year later the NAB adopted a new code, involving ethics and standards of commercial practice. For example, the code banned “fraudulent, deceptive or obscene” material, “false, deceptive, or grossly exaggerated advertising claims, and “offensive” material. But the continuing imprecision of this union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay. . . . As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modelled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organization in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality. But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard.” 156 See Schechter, supra note. 157 I draw here on Mark M. MacCarthy, Broadcast Self-Regulation: The NAB Codes, Family Viewing Hour, and Television Violence, 13 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 667 (1995). code, together with the lack of an effective enforcement mechanism, made it something of limited usefulness. 
The next major step resulted from President Roosevelt’s National Recovery Administrative Codes in 1933. The NAB submitted a code of fair practices to the NRA, and on November 27, 1933, President Roosevelt signed it and gave it the force of law. The result included a seven-person Broadcaster Code Authority, designed to supervise compliance. But the National Recovery Act was struck down in 1935 by the Supreme Court, and the Code Authority was eliminated along with the “law” that President Roosevelt had signed. 
Soon thereafter the NAB produced a new voluntary code, which was largely ignored. But in 1938 the NAB produced another, more specific code and also an explicit enforcement authority, the NAB Code Committee. Part of the reason for the new development was the increasing willingness of the FCC to regulate both structure and content—and a specific warning, by the Chairman of the FCC (after the broadcast of War of the Worlds) that without industry selfpolicing, government involvement was likely. 
The 1938 code included a number of important provisions. Among other things, it (a) required broadcasters to allot time fairly for discussion of controversial views; (b) banned the sale of time for the airing of controversial views; (c) asked broadcasters to cooperate with educational groups for the airing of educational programming; (d) required fair and accurate news programs; and (e) regulated commercials by limiting the time and length of advertisements. There were also prohibitions on hard liquor advertising. A code committee would enforce the Code by determining whether a station was in compliance. Notably, the head of the FCC publicly approved the code, and the American Civil Liberties Union described it as “a great step forward in formulating a policy in the public interest.” 
All of these steps involved radio, but the 1938 code was the unmistakable precursor of the eventual television code. In its first period, television witnessed a pattern that generally characterized the past debates over radio and late twentieth century debates over television: legislative concern, proposed legislation, steps toward selfregulation, and little or no legislation or regulation. 
In 1951, members of Congress proposed a National Citizens Advisory Board for Radio and Television, to oversee programming content. At about the same time the NAB began to draft its first television code in 1952, apparently in direct response to a congressional threat of legislation.158 The new code had a broad reach, emphasizing in particular educational and cultural programming. It also contained content restrictions on display of violent action and sexual material. 
Compliance with the Code was voluntary. (Note also that station operators who were not members of the NAB were eligible to subscribe.) Its enforcement provisions were quite modest. The basic mechanism came in the form of a clearinghouse for complaints. In addition, subscribers could display a code seal (the NAB “Seal of Good Practice”), and permission to display the seal would be withdrawn for “continuing, willful, or gross” violations. Thus the only formal sanction was that the noncomplying station owner could not display the seal. But there were informal pressures too. Stations who sought license renewal were likely to have prompt FCC processing if they adhered to the code. Moreover, some people believe that subscription to the Code was appealing to those who bought advertising time, because the Code contained limits on the length and frequency of commercials, which would enhance the prominence of the announcement. Some stations in the United States did not adhere to the Code, but the vast majority chose to do so. 
In 1962, the FCC proposed to make parts of the code into a legal mandate. The industry successfully resisted this step. But there was a continuing pattern of interaction among regulatory proposals, legislative reaction, public concern, and self-regulation. Of these the most important involved 1970s concerns about violence on television. The industry responded through the “family viewing policy,” saying that inappropriate entertainment programming would 158 See Daniel L. Brenner, The Limits of Broadcast Self-Regulation Under the First Amendment, 27 Stan. L. Rev. 1527, 1529 (1975). not be shown between 7 pm and 9 pm eastern standard time. This was a distinctive form of self-regulation. But the Writers Guild of America challenged the policy on first amendment grounds (see below), arguing that the policy was not voluntary self-regulation but was in fact a produce of government coercion. 
In a controversial decision, the trial court accepted the challenge, and barred the NAB from enforcing the policy.159 The court of appeals overturned the decision on the ground that the district court was not the right forum to resolve these issues in the first instance.160 The court of appeals said that the issue should first be resolved by the FCC. Although the decision of the court of appeals was jurisdictional, that court suggested considerable doubt about the district court’s judgment: “It simply is not true that the First Amendment bars all limitations of the power of the individual licensee to determine what he will transmit to the listening and viewing public.” 161 
The FCC ruled in 1983 that there had been no government coercion and that the NAB had adopted the family viewing policy voluntarily. In its key passage the FCC wrote, “[v]oluntary industry action is often preferable to governmental solutions, and an industry frequently addresses a problem in order to forestall regulation by the Government; conversely, it is not unusual for a regulatory body to forego enacting rules when the regulated industry voluntarily adopts standards which deal with a perceived problem.”162 In June 1979, however, the Justice Department filed the antitrust suit described in detail below, resulting in the demise of the television code. 
In the 1980s, continuing congressional concern about televised violence led to a new law exempting from the antitrust law networks, broadcasters, cable operators and programmers, and trade association, in order to permit them to generate standards to reduce 159 Writers Guild of Am. West v. FCC, 423 F. Supp. 1064 (C.D. Cal. 1976), vacated sub nom. Writers Guild of Am., West v. American Broadcasting Co., 609 F.2d 355 (9th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 824 (1980). 160 Writers Guild of Am., West v. American Broadcasting Co., 609 F.2d 355 (9th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 449 U.S. 824 (1980). 161 609 F.2d at 364. the amount of violence on television.163 But there was considerable doubt about whether an explicit exemption was necessary; a 1993 opinion from the Department of Justice said that the industry could cooperate to reduce television violence without offense to the law of antitrust.164 
In June 1990 the NAB issued new, quite tepid “voluntary programming principles” to cover violence, indecency and obscenity, drugs and substance abuse, and violence. The new standards were reaffirmed in June 1991, and in 1992, ABC, NBC, and CBS issued and agreed to adhere to a set of new standards, although without an enforcement mechanism. Thus in the 1990s self-regulation can be found in various places: the advance parental advisory system, joint advisory guidelines issued by the four networks, NAB principles, and an annual public assessment, by the four networks, of television violence. 
The question is whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. Such a code might update the old NAB code, and help overcome current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing “standards.” A code might even promote some of the goals associated with deliberative democracy. 
What provisions might a new code include? An important question involves appropriate specificity; quite clear provisions (“three hours of educational programming per week”) risk excessive rigidity, whereas vague provisions (“reasonable efforts to provide educational programming per children”) risk meaninglessness. Discussions of code-making in general have stressed the need for “the public announcement of the principles and practices that the industry presumptively accepts as a guide to appropriate conduct and also as a basis fo evaluating and criticizing performance.”165 This point argues in favor of a degree of specificity. 163 See 47 U.S.C. § 303(c). 164 See Letter from Sheila Anthony, Assistant Attorney General for Legislative Affairs, U.S. Department of Justice, to Sen. Paul Simon (D-Ill.) (Nov. 29, 1993). 165 See Gunningham and Rees, supra, at 383. 
Consider the following possible code provisions,166 simply for the sake of illustration: for candidates during the two month period preceding the election. In return for free air time, candidates shall discuss substantive issues in a substantive way, and must provide something other than short “soundbites.” programming for children each day. Broadcasters shall attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to or inappropriate for children. Broadcasters shall avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. should not emphasize the sensational and the prurient. It should concern itself with claims and disagreements on matters of substance. Consistent with the exercise of legitimate station discretion, stations should not give excessive or undue attention to sensational accusations or to issues of “who is ahead,” at the expense of other issues. factual report, especially in connection with stories of crime or sex, should be avoided. News should be broadcast in such a manner as to avoid panic and unnecessary alarm. News programming should attempt to avoid prurience, sensationalism, and gossip. Stations should make an effort to 166 These provisions are adapted but substantially revised from the more detailed Code suggested by the Report of the Advisory Committee, supra note. I believe that the provisions described there are too vague and tepid to be useful; for reasons discussed in the text, vague and tepid provisons create a high probability of futility and ineffectiveness. devote enough time to public issues to permit genuine understanding of problems and disagreements. portrayed responsibly, and not exploitatively. Presentation of violence should avoid the excessive, the gratuitous, the humiliating, and the instructional. The use of violence for its own sake and the detailed dwelling upon brutality or physical agony, by sight or sound, should be avoided. Programs involving violence should venture to present the consequences to its victims and perpetrators. Particular care should be exercised where children may see, or are involved in, the depiction of violent behavior.. Programs should not present rape, sexual assault, or sexual violence in an attractive or exploitative light. responsive to the needs of citizens with disabilities. To this end, broadcasters shall ensure that programming is accessible, through the provision of closed captioning and other means, to the extent that doing so does not impose an undue burden on the broadcaster. Particular efforts should be made to provide full access to news and public affairs programming. Citizens who are deaf and hard of hearing are sometimes at risk of a form of disenfranchisement., or even physical danger, because steps are not taken to ensure that television broadcasting is available to them. Stations should take special steps to ensure that information about disasters and emergencies are fully accessible to those who are deaf and hard of hearing, including in “real time.” 
Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement. Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all, indeed it might be a form of public deception.167 167 See John Braithwaite, Responsive Business Regulatory Institutions, in Business, Ethics, and Law 91 (C. Cody and C. Sampford eds. 1993). 
There are several obvious possibilities. The simplest would be for the NAB to undertake enforcement on its own, just as it did under the old code. It might, for example, give a seal of approval to those who are shown to comply with its provisions, and deny a seal of approval to those who have been shown not to have complied. The NAB might also give special public recognition to those stations that have compiled an excellent public service record in the past year. Such recognition may be awarded for, among other things, meeting the needs of children in a sustained and creative way, offering substantive and extended coverage of elections, including interviews, free air time, and debates, offering substantive and extended coverage of public issues, and providing opportunities for discussion of problems facing the local community. At the time of license renewal, a notation might be given to the FCC that there has been compliance or continuing or egregious noncompliance with the code. If the NAB is unwilling to enforce a code of this kind, perhaps a private group could take the initiative, both promulgating the code and publicizing and in that (modest) sense sanctioning violations.168 A special problem here is that in light of increasing competition from non-broadcast programming sources, a code would not be in the economic interest of broadcasters even if generally adopted, and this is an unpromising fact for a code’s effectiveness.169 Perhaps supplemental enforcement will come from rivals of those who defect from the agreement and violate the code; this is a reasonable prediction in theory, and something similar has been found in analogous areas.170 
Any enforcement by the NAB or even a private monitoring group would be most likely to succeed if accompanied by external pressures of one sort or another. As in the case of disclosure requirements, the most promising possibilities include public interest groups able to mobilize relevant social norms and to focus media 168 This approach would have special advantages in light of the fact that some stations are not members of the NAB. For NAB stations that must compete with non-member stations, a code creates an obvious competitive risk, and there is a continuing question whether it is possible to design strategies, public or private, to combat this risk. 169 See Gunningham and Grabosky, supra note, at 53-54. 170 See Gunningham and Rees, supra note, at 403. attention on derelict actors.171 Perhaps such activity would be accompanied by market pressures of various sorts, as consumer action has had significant effects on code enforcement in related areas.172 A degree of FCC interest in the existence of code violations would also help. 
These points raise a related question: the scope of any such code. Undoubtedly such a code was less painful, and easier to operate, when three broadcasters exhausted the universe of television. Of course broadcasters now find themselves in competition with many other entertainment sources, including cable and the Internet. In these circumstances, broadcasters are not likely to constrain themselves if their competitors are not similarly constrained. The competition for an audience for news is much affected by the existence of “tabloid television,” and a broadcaster who ties himself to the mast may find himself with a significantly reduced audience. The point suggests that in the development of a code, broadcasters should perhaps be joined by the National Association of Cable Television. By itself, however, a code limited to broadcasters should do considerable good, even if some broadcasters are reluctant to subscribe to it. When the market reaches the stage in which broadcasters are merely some of a large number of providers, with no distinctive status, it might make sense to think of a more general code (with suitable adjustments for particular kinds of programmers173). It is worth underlining the point that as in the context of disclosure, the likelihood of success will increase with the existence of third-party monitors, both public and private, and also with a threat of more intrusive action should it prove necessary.174 
A code for television broadcasters might be thought to raise issues of both constitutional and antitrust law. The constitutional issues are relatively straightforward; the antitrust issues are a bit more complex. I offer a brief discussion here. 171 See Gunningham and Rees, supra, at 390-92. 172 See id. at 391 (discussing hostile consumer action). 173 For example, it is not clear that a station devoted to children should be required to provide free air time for political candidates. 174 See Gunningham and Grabosky, supra note, at 55-56. 
There is essentially no risk that a code of the sort suggested here would create serious first amendment problems. By itself, a code is a private set of guidelines, and private guidelines by themselves raise no first amendment issue. If a private group decides to impose restrictions on the speech of its members, and government is not involved, the first amendment is irrelevant Of course things would be different if government mandated any such code.175 
Nor would provisions like those described above be likely to violate the antitrust laws. The Department of Justice has so concluded,176 and in two important cases, aspects of previous codes were upheld against private antitrust attack. A district court refused to issue an injunction against code standards forbidding cigarette advertising, despite a claim that these standards were inconsistent with the antitrust laws.177 A lower court also upheld the provisions involving standards for advertising for children.178 In these cases, the 175 See Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149 (1978) (private contract raises no first amendment issue); San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U.S. 522 (1987); Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982). If a code is a product of government threat, and is effectively required by government, the first amendment comes into play. See Writers Guild of America, supra. There can be no question that a governmentally mandated code, not voluntary but taking the form that we have outlined, would raise legitimate constitutional problems. This does not necessarily mean that the first amendment would be violated; but it does mean that the code would have to be tested for compliance with first amendment principles, including constitutional limits on content regulation. 176 See note supra. 177 See American Brands, Inc. v. National Ass'n of Broadcasters, 308 F. Supp. 1166 (D.D.C. 1969). The court concluded that the plaintiff was not likely to prevail on the merits. The court referred in particular to the dangers posed by cigarette smoking and claimed that the standards and guidelines in the code serve the “public interest.” Id. at 1169. 178 See American Fed’n of Television & Radio Artists v. National Ass’n of Broadcasters, 407 F. Supp. 900 (S.D.N.Y. 1976) The rule at issue there said that children’s program hosts or primary cartoon characters “shall not be utilized to deliver commercial messages within or adjacent to the programs which feature such hosts or cartoon characters.” The provision applied as well “to lead-ins to commercials when such lead-ins contain sell copy or imply endorsement of the product by program host or primary cartoon character.” The plaintiff attacked the restrictions, claiming that it restricted the ability of hosts and actors to obtain free employment for delivery of commercials. The court said, “There is not the court basically concluded that the restrictions were reasonable and in the public interest. 
As I have noted, the most recent code met its demise as a result of an antitrust action brought by the Justice Department in 1979, based on an allegation that certain provisions of the Code violated the Sherman Act. But the Justice Department’s complaint was quite narrow. It involved not the code in general, but three specific kinds of cartel-like advertising restrictions: (1) time standards, limiting the amount of commercial material that could be broadcast in an hour; (2) program interruption standards, which imposed a limit on the maximum number of commercial announcements per program as well as on the number of consecutive announcements per interruption; and (3) multiple product standards, which prohibited the advertising of two or more products or services within a single commercial if the commercial was less than 60 seconds in length. Basically, the court held that the multiple product standards were per se unlawful, but that the time standards and program interruption standards could not be tested without an inquiry into the facts. 179 slightest indication of any anti-competitive purpose in the creation of the rule,” especially since there was no evidence of a motive ““to benefit one class of performers competitively over another class of performers.” Id. at 902. The court found it relevant that the rule “resulted from a bona fide concern on the part of various groups, and the FCC, regarding fair and ethical methods to be used in television advertising directed to children.” Id. This was “a reasonable rule of conduct regarding good practice by its members in the public interest and is not in violation of the antitrust laws.” Id. at 903. 179The district court held that the time and product interruption standards were not invalid per se. In the court’s view, the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting industry argued against a per se rule of invalidity. Because broadcast frequencies are scarce, because the whole area is subject to regulation, and because of the fact that there are only sixty minutes in an hour (!), no simple solution would be sensible. On these two issues, the court also denied summary judgment for the government under the rule of reason, concluding that there were material issues of fact. By contrast, the court held that the multiproduct standard was per se unlawful. In its view, this rule was akin to a standardization agreement by which food manufacturers set a standard for the ingredients that would be used in their products. This form of standardization was per se illegitimate. Thus the court actually invalidated only one provision of the code, on the theory that it was analytically akin to a system for price-fixing. At the same time, the court denied summary judgment for the NAB. An important question was whether the time standards would have the effect of raising or stabilizing the price of commercial 
After the court’s ruling, the NAB suspended enforcement of all code provisions.180 Doubtless the NAB did this partly for reasons of economic self-interest, and not only because it was fearful of a legal challenge. Nonetheless, the district court’s narrow decision—untested in any court of appeals—has loomed over the debate about codes. But in its most recent analysis of the problem, the Department of Justice suggested that networks could agree to guidelines and principles to reduce unnecessary violence on television.181 Indeed, this is not an ordinary form of collusion. It is not as if broadcasters are saying that advertisers must pay a minimum of $X per advertisement. It is possible that the restrictions under discussion would have little or no adverse effect on competition; they may even have good effects on competition.182 Even with a code, programmers would compete over a great many things, including the kinds of programming regulated by a code. The code might in a sense be procompetitive, because it would ensure television coverage of materials in which there is a substantial public interest and which might otherwise not be provided. This is so especially in light of the time (this was the antitrust problem); it was possible, the court said, that any such effect would be trivial in light of the importance of other factors. If this was true, the code would not violate the Sherman Act. This is because there is no antitrust violation without a significant adverse effect on competition. See, e.g., United States v. Arnold, Schwinn, & Co., 388 U.S. 365, 375 (1967), overruled on other grounds by Continental T.V., Inc. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc. 433 U.S. 36 (1977); Neeld v. National Hockey League, 594 F.2d 1297 (9th Cir. 1979). 180 In public it claimed that it would seek an appeal, but a consent judgment was issued, in which the NAB agreed, for ten years, to cease monitoring and enforcement of the three disputed code provisions. 181 See Letter Of Sheila Anthony, Assistant Attorney General, supra. The Department of Justice concluded that “the conduct that was at issue in the NAB case differs significantly from that covered by” an agreement on televised violence. Id. at 3. In the NAB case, the problem was raising “the price of time,” to “the detriment of both advertisers and the ultimate consumers of the products promoted on the air.” Id. By contrast, an agreement covering violence should “be liked to traditional industry standard-setting efforts that do not necessarily restrain competition and may have significant procompetitive benefits.” Id. In the view of the Department of Justice, “efforts to develop and disseminate voluntary guidelines to reduce the negative impact of television violence should fare well under the appropriate rule-of-reason antitrist analysis.” Id. at 4. fact that stations would compete for viewers with respect to the kinds of programming covered by the code.183 
In light of the distinctive nature of the television market, a code of the sort under discussion would likely survive a “rule of reason” inquiry. Any restrictions, such as they are, could be defended as a means of promoting competition and also various public interest goals, such as education of children, access for the handicapped, and democratic and civic functions.184 
We are now in a position to disentangle the two puzzles discussed in Part II. The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though generally “winners,” they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of competition. They were vulnerable to “winner take all” effects insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain competitive practices. In this way, a code might even help them. But the NAB would not like a code at all. The broadcasting industry as a whole would be hurt by such a code, especially because cable television would not be bound by it. Why should broadcasters, in an intensely competitive market, give a significant edge to cable? Especially if the result would be that cable could take, if not all, a lot more of the viewing audience than it now does? It is not surprising if 183 It is not entirely clear that any plaintiff would have an antitrust injury. The self-regulation that we are discussing would allow a wide range of choices and options for consumers and producers. Perhaps some producer of some marginal programming could claim that he was unable to sell his product because of (for example) free air time for candidates; but this would be an extremely speculative injury. Perhaps viewers could argue that they were deprived of certain programming that they would like; but in view of the wide range of options available to viewers, this too is speculative. Perhaps some stations or programmers could contend that a code limited their freedom; but it is not clear that this would count as an antitrust injury, especially in light of the fact that the code is voluntary. 184 This idea is bolstered by the line of cases analyzing restrictions by trade associations and similar entities. See, e.g., NCAA v. Board of Regents, 468 U.S. 85 (1984); Allied Tube & Conduit Corp. v. Indian Head, 486 U.S. 492 (1988). broadcasters who supply a large degree of public interest programming believe that they would be net winners with a code—and if the broadcasting industry as a whole believes that it would be a net loser. Such an industry, cautious about invoking its own economic interest alone, is all too likely to invoke the antitrust laws (or the first amendment) for purely strategic and self-interested reasons. 
This point helps explain the Committee broadcasters’ skepticism about “pay or play” alternatives. A set of rigid public interest requirements does not hurt them and may even help them, insofar as it places their competitors under legal duties that they would themselves meet voluntarily (because of their aspirations or because of the particular demands of their audience and their advertisers). A system of “pay or play” would mean that these broadcasters would be undercut by competitors who, unwilling to play, would pay—and capture a large audience share, in a version of “winner-take-most.” But this is not a convincing objection to a system of “pay or play.” It is true that some of those who “play” will be at a competitive disadvantage with respect to some of those who “pay” others to play instead. But by itself this competitive disadvantage is not worthy of concern, any more than we should be concerned when, in the environmental context, some of those who reduce pollution are at a competitive disadvantage with respect to those who, instead of reducing pollution, pay a substantial fee to third parties who have reduced pollution, or to the treasury. The question is what approach yields the best outcome for the public. If there is too little public interest broadcasting, or too much pollution, the solution is not the simple command to “play,” or “reduce,” but to increase the price for failing to play or for failing to reduce.185 
The best defense of a code of the sort I have discussed is that it would produce “winner-take-less” outcomes, in a way that would provide significant benefits for the public by diminishing some of the adverse effects of market competition, and by strengthening broadcaster norms in favor of obligations to children and to democratic values. And if this is so, it provides a general lesson about how voluntary private action might sometimes handle problems 185 With the qualification involving hot spots and cold spots, discussed above. usually dealt with by direct regulation—and a lesson about the reflexive use of the antitrust laws to prevent producer cooperation. 
The discussion has ranged over a number of regulatory tools, and it may be helpful, by way of summary, to discuss them all briefly and at once. We have seen that both disclosure and codes have the advantage of ensuring a minimal government role, in a way that reduces constitutional concerns and also allows a high degree of flexibility. The danger is that these remedies will have little effect; here the key question is whether there are good external monitors, able to impose reputational or other costs on those who do poorly. We have also seen that “taxes” on programming that does not serve public interest goals, and subsidies to programming that does serve such goals, can have similar effects. A principal problem with subsidies is that they create an incentive not to provide such programming voluntarily. The table that follows seems to capture the basic territory. 
Of course some of these tools could serve as complements rather than as alternatives. Disclosure makes sense with or without additional strategies. It should be the least controversial item on the list; the only real question is what else should accompany it. Disclosure is likely to work especially well in tandem with voluntary self-regulation, indeed the two tools are natural allies. By contrast, mandates and economic incentives are genuine competitors, and in the current context, economic incentives generally seem best, with mandates operating as a “backstop,” probably to be eliminated in the long term.186 
As I have emphasized, these recommendations are designed for the current stage of telecommunications technology; they are also likely to make sense for the near term. For the next decade, the key question is whether initiatives designed for broadcasters should be applied to cable programmers as well (especially disclosure and compliance with a code). 186 For an overlapping discussion, emphasizing the value of “policy mixes” in the context of environmental law, see Gunningham and Grabosky, supra, at 422-448. n o e ts r u c v s sce rr 
u c i u s ta ll s ra o e 
v Mo T n g s a r o e h r s n a i u a n t g p ou e i c g x e e r , g n e o t 
s ;se lito r- re t n p c f r m to w u y w igh ie h f ; i v evn i( i 
e o e h u m an )e e 
h on e t m a ; s s 
i E s s r u o ; h en ee i r r t a d n a M . 1 y o b t g d n te i i r 
u to s i n ll o e lm ;sw a p 
ou re r te r u x g tu e e f e ta ly oSm irvp li e k e h t e 
r 
m fa s o a le t l c ,) s i n c t s it n i l i t 
e r e u o a v F d p e w e lo iv , y t a r t t lii is 
n ib i x s t e m s l d o F a c g d n n i a u l l o ; s s o l s i D . 2 c i m — o e n iv o t c n ” .E ce ax 3 in t“ tax seu lls- t 
s e a teh ro 
u la l u i 
a lc f a t r te rm c e t r to rakm rea so 
k h y t i e l m h i h n t b it 
o o A w n t e g a t n a v d l a fco tam y a t v l 
e u l c i f f i t i g ca te n d p t a re i e t 
o m h u r o D t p b c n a e m rro ra dn m c a ;” m a r yn re g a ic ce r n m E h p “ o fau irsev onn if n go ix a l f e r m f i s l a o t e k 6 a le an C le ; g C th ’sn la i 
e n o r am tc r A te h r 
o ic 
o t R to f ra an fch c i 
g x ud ro ir a tce pp reg ay E F m o e p A W“ a T In lab rd r “ p 
u b m n e o up rag eh f v f e 
n o ro w d y i 
p id c i f s f u n e i o rc h e e ro te i e c D t s d p in (w eb L c o yb rep fro is r 
w t b o u e lso ,in S s r 
a ; m B a re P r t o e t t t r n d g o e m n n it r lo f f ; o y 3 m a S 
o m y n o fo r g 
e n it l s c d it a a n o r 
N B ; c lb ts u y 
m w “ i e o ; k r n i u vn l P S E A c e c i m — o e n iv y o t d c n is .E ce r r th h a n p g a n s i r m ob t l an try r s e u 
s li l e i o n s l n e e t b o 
d h tn t e i a s an ;sen it d i b on tse 
a c c n d t m ls t xE idn fo ifa i d ;ta fen tr fo is io o n e t r e d la 
m rs p co eh e u e t t f o s u , d n d i ,an ;ss ak eg en fo ee i i t t a i N c o a c ld ss r n o i t a y r a t n u l o 
c e e e t r p i e s r h o w n r ( 
i a s h 
b t op s u in 
u g s 
o n l o sc ,a lsa i r e e d t i w rs w te e s r n ca ev ad ;) p a l h a i e l p b e b h g ra ro l B b ro rop rep lon d o o g , . c g li . e r u , l i a f t l e a e b f ir , u p e c s i m o e n le c d b e , x r Me p n e ; y y r t c e n n e 
g um ire 
e i c s i f 
n v f o o E c s s e i t i d o c t e Md . r 6 o y t i l ib tr l y d e F in k e c o c “ lt 
u n ts ” o e l ; b eod ison fro ;ry t s C p se ra 
R g i s ” ro l a t n n u a e t 
h n ta r O A B C C c I S O O 9 6 d az ry ra i a 
n In the very long term, when broadcasters occupy no special role, it may be best to impose disclosure requirements on general-interest stations, and also to subsidize high-quality programming of various sorts. It is too soon to know whether the very long-term will come in the next decade or long thereafter.187 
Dramatic changes in the emerging communications market do not provide a sufficient reason to abandon the traditional goal of ensuring a certain level of public interest programming. To some extent this conclusion depends on conventional market failures. Thus I have emphasized the external benefits that come from public interest programming and also the peculiar characteristics of the broadcasting market, where viewers, or eyeballs, are a commodity provided to advertisers. To some extent this conclusion view turns on a rejection of economic principles as the foundation for communications policy. With respect to public interest programming, viewers’ tastes may be a product of an undesirable set of communications options, and in their capacity as citizens, they may well want to make things better rather than worse. Especially in light of the role of the communications media in the production of culture—and hence both preferences and values—it is entirely legitimate for a democratic government to refuse to make “consumption choices” the exclusive basis for policy design. Thus I have emphasized that a public committed to deliberative democracy might support initiatives designed to provide better programming for children and better coverage of public issues. This is so especially in light of the fact that a significant minority of Americans lack cable or other alternatives, and hence continue to depend on broadcasters for television. 
These points suggest that for the relevant future,188 public interest standards deserve to play a large role. For the most part, 187 See Owen, supra, at 311-26 (predicting that convergence will take a long time, with the suggestion that the Internet may never become an important means of delivering television). 188 In the long-term, when broadcasters have little or no distinctive role, it may be best to rely on government subsidies for high-quality broadcasting and on disclosure requirements for general-interest programmers. See above. 
In the last few years, a number of law professors have been involved in some highly public issues, not least through the circulation of letters with multiple signatories, expressing a view on some issue of national importance. It is not clear that there is anything like a trend in this direction; certainly teachers of law have participated in what some would consider "partisan politics" for many decades. But Neal Devins is right to raise questions about the legitimacy and conse2 quences of political involvement by academics. It is also interesting to consider the relationship between such involvement and academic freedom; if law professors are not concerned with the pursuit of truth, the case for academic freedom is certainly weakened. The Clinton impeachment provides the immediate motivation for Devins's discussion. I offer a few remarks here on academic involvement in the impeachment debate, with a few references to my own experience,3 and t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Professor Sunstein testified on the constitutional issues relating to the impeachment of President Clinton, see Testimony Before the UnitedStates House ofRepresentatives, Comm. on theJudiciay,Subcomm. on the Constitution (Nov. 9, 1998) (statement of Cass R. Sunstein, Professor of Law), availablein LEXIS, News Library, Transcripts File. I am grateful to Martha Nussbaum and Richard Posner for valuable comments on an earlier draft, and to Brooke May for research assistance. 
I See, e.g., Constitutional Scholars' Conference, Joint Statement, Constitutional Scholars' Statement on Affirmative Action After City of Richmond v. JA. Croson Co., 98 YALE L.J. 1711, 1712 (1989) (arguing that municipalities should not scrap affirmative action programs in the wake of City ofRichmond v.J.A. Croson); An Open Letter to Congressman Gingrich, 104 YALE L.J. 1539, 1539 (1995) (urging that Congressman Gingrich rescind his proposal to amend the House Rules to require three-fifths vote for enacting laws that increase income taxes); infra notes 6-7 (providing text of a one-sentence letter o2 ppposing impeachment and a letter opposing Clinton's possible resignation). 
See Neal Devins, BearingFalse Witness: The Clinton Impeachment and the Future of Academic Freedom, 148 U. PA. L. REV. 165, 166 (1999) (arguing that "when a significant number of law professors and historians hold themselves out as experts when they are not... allacademics pay a price"). 
3 The editors have asked me to provide a few details for background; readers who dislike this sort of thing are encouraged to skip the footnotes. 
(191) with an eye toward drawing some general lessons about professors and politics, including presidential politics. 
I. PARTICULARS 
With respect to the President, the United States has now had three serious impeachment inquiries in its entire history. As the nation began discussion of the impeachment of President Clinton in 1998, many constitutional law professors concluded that no legitimate grounds for impeachment had been identified. On their view, the House of Representatives had started to embark on a constitutionally impermissible path, one with potentially significant consequences. This seemed unfortunate not merely because of the potential removal of the President, and hardly because of the nature of President Clinton's particular policies, but because of the constitutional illegitimacy and potentially destabilizing effect of resort to the impeachment mechanism. 
Some law professors believed that, as a technical matter, the constitutional question was not even close.4 They believed that this interpretation was not a "partisan" view, that it had nothing to do with approval of President Clinton in general, and that it was the best reading of the Constitution-a reading that would attract support from a variety of possible approaches to interpretation and that would apply regardless of the political affiliation of the President. Before the hearings, members of the House of Representatives-themselves quite uncertain about the issue-asked, in private meetings with law professors:5 What do law professors generally think? Where are they? Why 4 For a discussion of the Impeachment Clause, see Cass R. Sunstein, Impeaching the President, 147 U. PA. L. REv. 279, 280-92 (1998). Devins is wrong to say that "scholars who argued against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings made use of originalism (and little else) in arguing against the Clinton impeachment." Devins, supranote 2, at note 24. Professor Tribe's argument, for example, was largely textual, see Defining "High Crimes and Misdemeanors": Basic Principles (visited Oct. 24, 1999) <http://www.house.gov/judiciary/22398.htn> (advocating that defining impeachment properly "means taking seriously exactly what the Constitution says"), and while I did not argue against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings, my argument was typical in stressing a range ofinterpretive theories. SeeSunstein, supra. 
5 I draw on personal experience here. There was a series of private, informal meetings with several law professors who met, in small groups, with a large number of representatives, many of whom were unsure about how to think about, or vote on, the impeachment question. A vivid recollection: The representatives listened politely to the constitutional arguments, and were clearly interested in them, but some of their eyes really lit up only during discussion, in which law professors were not involved, of the underlying political dynamics. aren't they saying anything? An obvious question was whether it might conceivably be useful for members of Congress, and the public, to know that there was widespread professional opinion to the effect that impeachment would be unconstitutional. 
These were the circumstances in which a number of professors (including me) were willing to circulate and to sign two letters opposing impeachment. One of the letters, not limited to teachers of constitutional law but circulated to law professors generally, provided an extended analysis of the legal issues; the other, limited to teachers of constitutional law,6 offered a one-sentence conclusion to the effect that impeachment would not be "appropriate" in light of the charges made by Judge Starr.7 
Many of those who signed or circulated these letters accepted (as I do) all or most of Devins's general views about the need to separate professional opinion from partisan politics. To say the least, most of those of us who were involved in all this really do not enjoy participat 
It is a considerable overstatement for Devins to say that "members of Congress were actively involved" in any academic anti-impeachment letter. Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 66. Certainly the remarks did not lead to the letters. But I agree with Devins about the general importance of a degree of independence on the part of academics involved in these matters. Those of us who agreed with the White House on the inappropriateness of impeachment made very clear-especially in several informal discussions with lawyers there involving the constitutional standard for impeachment-thatwe were not working "with" or "for" the White House in anyway. 
Because this letter was limited to teachers of constitutional law, I think Devins is wrong to say that none of the relevant letters "made expertise a prerequisite"-at least if we assume that teachers of constitutional law generally have some expertise on the topic of impeachment. Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 45. 
I wrote and circulated the one-sentence letter after many discussions with other law professors. Some people did not like this approach, on the ground that it was without reasoning; others, including me, thought that it would be worthwhile and relevant, if only because it would show a widespread judgment on the general constitutional question without committing people to a particular argument about which they might have reservations. Here is its content: 
The undersigned professors and teachers of constitutional law* have diverse political convictions and disagree on many political and legal issues; but we agree that the possible grounds for impeachment recently identified by Kenneth Starr and David Schippers are not an appropriate basis for impeaching a President under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution. 
*All of the signatories to this letter have taught the general constitutional law course or some aspect of constitutional law as part of their curricular responsibilities. 
There was also a subsequent letter, circulated after impeachment, opposing resignation on the ground that it would do damage to the constitutional structure. See BernardJ. Hibbits, Law ProfessorsSolicit SignaturesforAnti-ResignationLetter (visited Oct. 27, 1999) <http://juritlaw.pitLedu/resig.htm> (containing the full text of the letter, dated Dec. 19, 1998). ing in petition drives. Most of us thought that the process of sending and responding to emails and collecting signatures was a boring, unpleasant, and tedious business'-part of a most unwelcome (even if occasionally hilarious9) diversion from our academic jobs. Nothing here seemed glamorous, a source of "fame,"10 or in anyone's selfinterest. But the relevant law professors believed that this was an exceedingly unusual event, that the House of Representatives was on the verge of acting unconstitutionally, and that it was appropriate, and maybe not inconceivably useful, for the public and elected representatives to be aware of a widespread (though not universal) professional opinion. 
I am not entirely sure what, in particular, Devins thinks was wrong with all this, or what lesson he wants to draw from it. He does not argue that the impeachment of President Clinton was constitutionally acceptable (though he may believe this). He does not demonstrate nor even claim that the law professors who signed one or another letter were wrong on the merits. Nor does he argue for the (implausible) proposition that on principle, law professors should never speak publicly about important public issues. 
Devins suggests that developments of this kind may endanger academic freedom, an empirical claim that seems to me quite doubtful, even absurd. Is it imaginable that the tenure system for law professors would be eliminated if law professors frequently signed petitions on public issues? In any case, Devins does not discuss what academic freedom is for, to wit, the power to speak controversially about the 8 A confession: The one-sentence letter was the first such letter I have ever written and circulated, and because the process was so tedious, I hope never to have to do such a thing again. 
9 See infranote 31 (discussing Burden ofProofandtelevision producers). 10 But see infranote 31 (discussing my dog). 
I Devins follows the familiar view in stating that "Republican witnesses at the House impeachment hearings testified that the President's conduct was impeachable whereas Democratic witnesses testified that it was not." Devins, supra note 2, at note on both sides, did not consider themselves "Republican witnesses" or "Democratic witnesses." What a strange way to conduct a hearing on the impeachment question-as if, before the debate even became serious, all Republicans were for impeachment and all Democrats against it. 
Perhaps the greatest peculiarity of the hearings was that a majority of the witnesses said that the allegations in question pointed to legitimate grounds for impeachment, thus giving the impression that teachers of constitutional law were evenly divided on the question-when in fact the overwhelming majority of constitutional law teachers believed that impeachment was constitutionally illegitimate or at least inappropriate. The selection ofwitnesses gave a grossly distorted picture ofacademic opinion. truth as one sees it, free of risks of political reprisal. I agree with Devins that the principle of academic freedom is violated if those who enjoy it are not acting in good faith or are not pursuing truth (not a doubtful empirical claim about consequences but a sensible claim about principle, which is what appears to me to underlie Devins's essay). But nothing in this point argues against public statements by professors. 
Devins's concerns appear narrower. It seems to me that they fall in two categories. These categories are related but best treated separately. 
His first point has to do with the possibly limited expertise of many or some of those who signed the relevant letters. Devins says that "it is doubtful that many had thought seriously about the constitutional standards governing impeachment. He appears to believe that at least by implication, some or many law professors held themselves out as specialists or experts when, in fact, they lacked knowledge about impeachment that would qualify them as such. 
For some of the signatories, perhaps this is true. But I think that Devins'sjudgment is too harsh. Impeachment is hardly an obscure or invisible issue in constitutional law, and in the wake of the Watergate controversy, many law professors developed genuine, if fairly general, views on the appropriate meaning of the phrase "high crimes or misdemeanors." Certainly most teachers of constitutional law know something about the governing legal standards; they know enough to know, for example, that smoking marijuana or speeding would not ordinarily count as a "high crime or misdemeanor." From there they could reason by analogy to the view that, at least as a general rule, a President cannot be impeached unless he has been charged with large-scale abuse of the powers that he has by virtue of being President. 
Those law professors who signed the longer letter but who do not teach constitutional law probably believed that they knew enoughfrom training and from substantive conversations with colleagues-to have a reasonably informed opinion about the threshold question of whether the charges against President Clinton made out an impeachable offense. Law professors who do not teach constitutional law have informed views about many constitutional issues-for example, about whether racial segregation is generally unconstitutional, whether quotas can make for an acceptable affirmative action program, and 12 Md at text accompanying note 21. whether the Constitution protects the right to use contraceptives. Many law professors believe that with respect to the charges against President Clinton, impeachment falls in the same category.1 3 The signatories likely thought, in good faith, that they knew enough about the constitutional provision to conclude that an impeachable offense had not been made out. It is hard to see why there is anything untoward here. I agree with Devins that people should not sign petitions when they are unable to defend the relevant position publicly; but I would give the signatories the benefit of the doubt on this point. 
Devins's second point has to do with the motivations of those who participated in the relevant events. He says that "[m]any of the law professor and historian signatories were animated by partisanship and self-interest ... ."14 This is certainly possible-and I know very little about the historians involved-but it is very hard for Devins or anyone else to have access to the motivations of strangers. Nor is it clear what he means by "self-interest" and "partisanship." Academics "who want to see their names in print" 5 surely have much better ways to achieve that goal; it is hard to believe that publication was a significant motivating factor here. And contrary to Devins's suggestion, "celebrity"16 hardly comes from signing such a letter. A few law professors may care about celebrity, but most law professors care about the law and about ideas. 
The allegation of "partisanship"17 raises many questions. Law professors who signed this letter were offering a judgment about the meaning of the Constitution, a judgment that they believed it to be true. In what sense was their motivation "partisan"?' 8 A law professor who testifies that a proposed statute would violate the Constitution 13 Judge Posner seems to me unfair in criticizing law professors for not publicly deploring President Clinton's conduct, which, plausibly, included perjury and obstruction ofjustice. See RICHARD POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE 240-45 (1999) (lamenting that "leaders of the legal profession might have been expected to emphasize the importance of the rule of law in general and of telling the truth ... These expectations would have been disappointed"). I know that many of those who opposed impeachment on constitutional grounds believed that the relevant conduct was deplorable, and certainly many of us emphasized, publicly and privately, the seriousness of perjury and obstruction ofjustice. In any case, nearly everyone, including President Clinton's closest friends and allies, as well as members of both parties, publicly deplored his conduct, and an outpouring of statements to this effect by law professors would have been largely pointless. 
14 Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 31. is Id. at text accompanying note 32. 16 Id. 17 Id. at text accompanying note 31. is Id. at text accompanying note 32. 
PROFESSORSAND POLrTICS should be taken to be addressing the constitutional issue and need not have a political motivation; what is different about a law professor who signs a public statement about what the Constitution means? Perhaps Devins's claim is that the professors who signed this letter were motivated not by a considered judgment about the Constitution, but by their extra-legal political convictions (in favor, for example, of government regulation and the welfare state, or in favor of President Clinton generally). But I do not know how Devins can be confident of this uncharitable judgment, and in any case, the anti-impeachment conclusion would hold if President Reagan, or a future Republican President, were subject to an impeachment inquiry on the basis of similar allegations.'9 I very much doubt that the signatories would change their view if the accused President had been Republican. Perhaps Devins disagrees, but he offers little basis for any such disagreement. 
Devins seems to think that partisanship is established by his claim that the academy is "overwhelmingly left-liberal, overwhelmingly Democratic." 20 But he does not note that many people not normally characterized as "left-liberal" signed one or more of the impeachment letters.2 ' For what it is worth, the University of Chicago Law School is 
I A possible point in support of Devins: If a group of law professors despised a certain President, they might not go to the effort to circulate and sign a letter against impeachment, even if they believed that the grounds for impeachment were invalid. Perhaps some law professors did not sign the Clinton letters even though they agreed with them, simply because they did not like President Clinton; perhaps some law professors would not sign a similar letter on behalf of, for example, President Reagan, even if they agreed with it. 
20Devins, supranote 2, at text accompanying note 33. 
21 These include Douglas Laycock, Stephen Macedo, and Andrzej Rapaczynski. I am sure that there are many more and am happy to say that I do not know the political views of the vast majority of signatories. Of course Devins is allowed to characterize people as he chooses, but for what it is worth, I would not describe myself as a "leftliberal," see Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying notes 33-39, or indeed as a Democrat, see id. at note 36 and accompanying text. 
Devins is misleading to suggest thatJudge Posner described the "law professor antiimpeachment letter as 'a form of herd behavior... by the animal that likes to see its name in print.'" Devins, supranote 2, at text accompanying note 54 (quoting RICHARD A. POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE 242 (1999)). ActuallyJudge Posner describes this as the possible opinion of an "unkind critic," thus distancing himself from the charge, which is not his own view. RICHARD A. POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE 242 (1999). (I owe this correction to judge Posner.) 
I also doubt that "many legal academics see Ken Starr... as their nemesis." Devins, supranote 2, at text accompanying notes 36-37. I do know that many of those (including me) who opposed Clinton's impeachment believe that Starr was a distinguished judge and a distinguished Solicitor General and have not the slightest doubt that he is an entirely honorable person. A number of us who strongly opposed imnot usually characterized as "left-liberal," and while I cannot speak officially or on behalf of the faculty, it seemed to me that at least a solid majority of the faculty, including many strong critics of President Clinton's policies, were opposed to impeachment on the ground that it would be illegitimate or inappropriate from the constitutional point of view. Indeed, my former colleague Michael McConnell, hardly a left-liberal, went so far as to write a letter to Congressman Hyde, sharply critical of President Clinton and suggesting that impeachment would not be unconstitutional-but pleading with Hyde not to support impeachment of the President in the midst of such partisan divisions. 22 Was McConnell's letter inappropriate? Unacceptably partisan? Illegitimate because (unlike the two widely distributed letters) it did not directly address a purely legal question? 
The impeachment of President Clinton produced, on all sides, more than enough challenges to other people's motivations.23 I am not sure why Devins does not, with respect to law professors and historians on all sides, indulge a principle of charity-suggesting that in cases of doubt, we should assume that those with whom we disagree are acting in good faith an d24 on the basis of evidence that they honestly believe to be sufficient. peachment, and who were quite critical of some of the decisions of the Office of Independent Counsel, knowJudge Starr, like and respect him personally, and believe that the 9ersonal attacks on him and his motivations were absurd and baseless. 
See Letter from Michael W. McConnell, Presidential Professor, The University of Utah College of Law, to Henry J. Hyde, Jr., Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives 1-2 (Dec. 12, 1998) (on file with the University ofPennsylvania Law Review) (indicating that while "the Constitution allows for the possibility that an elected President may so abuse the public trust that he can and should be removed," still "a President should [not] be impeached or removed from office solely on the votes ofhis political rivals"). 
23 This seems to me to infect RIcHARD A. POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE (1999) as well, where analysis of the constitutional issue seems to me remarkably casual and offhand. See id. at 94-109 (discussing the history and scope of impeachment through a "structural and pragmatic... approach to constitutional meaning"). 
24 I share many of Devins's concerns about the political campaign against Judge Robert Bork. But I do not think that the law professors who opposed Bork's confirmation did so because they "saw Bork as a threat to their status and influence." Devins, supranote 2, at text accompanying notes 51-53. I think that they did so on principle, that is, because they believed thatJudge Bork's view about constitutional interpretation would be a threat to constitutional ideals, properly understood. They may have been wrong on the merits, and I agree with Devins that petitions of the sort circulated againstJudge Bork should be rare. (In the interest offull disclosure, I should say that I testified quite critically about Judge Bork's views on separation of powers questions, but signed no petitions and took no public position on the question of whether he should be confirmed.) 
II. GENERALTES 
There are much broader questions in the background. Devins thinks that academic participation in the Clinton impeachment is part of a larger trend and a more general problem, one that threatens academic freedom itself. Thus he writes that "[t]oday, academics seek fame through talk show appearances, op-ed pieces, and trade press books."2 Devins also says that "the traditional image of the academic has given way to 'postmodernism, multiculturalism, and political correctness,'26 and hence that "there is good reason to doubt whether academics still think of themselves as truth seekers." 7 His suggestion appears to be that the involvement of law professors in the Clinton impeachment signals a larger trend toward highly partisan, mostly leftwing activity, in which law professors do not care about truth but instead push some kind of political agenda. Devins suggests that if professors are engaging in partisan politics, academic freedom is at risk. I share many of his concerns, and I agree that the principle of academic freedom is undermined if professors do not care about truth. But there seem to me to be three problems with his claims here. 
The first problem is that there is no single way to be a law professor. Most of us, most of the time, are devoted to teaching and research; few of us "seek fame" or anything 6lse through talk shows, oped pieces, and trade press books. But some professors sometimes do express their views on talk shows, and a few more write op-ed pieces and publish with trade presses. Why is this so terrible, or indeed terrible at all? (Can anyone really object that Gerald Gunther published his excellent book on Learned Hand 8 with Knopf rather than Stanford University Press?) One of the purposes of academic freedom is to permit professors to speak publicly without fear of reprisal, and those who write op-eds or publish with a trade press are doing what academic freedom is designed to permit them to do. My hunch is that when law professors write op-eds or go on television, it is to express the truth as they see it, not to "achieve their fifteen minutes of fame."2' Some people spend all of their time on teaching and academic projects; others testify before Congress and write an occasional amicus brief; still others write op-eds and say what they think on radio or tele 
Id. at text accompanying note 55. 
26 Id. at text accompanying note 75 (quoting David M. Rabban, CanAcademic Freedom SurvivePostmodernism?,86 CAL L. REV. 1377, 1378 (1998)). 
27 I. 28 GERALD GUNTHER, LEARNED HAND: THE MAN AND THEJUDGE (1994). 29Devins, supranote 2, at text accompanying note 55. 
UNIVERS1TY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVEW vision shows. Of course some of us may not think so well of colleagues who spend a lot of time on talk shows, especially in light of the (ridiculous, hilarious"0 ) restrictions of the format,3' and above all if this comes at the expense of their scholarship and teaching. But since there are many ways to be a good law professor, and so long as teaching and research are not cheapened or neglected, I do not quite see Devins's objection here. 
The second problem with Devins's claims is that they overlook the fact that it is perfectly responsible, maybe even a civic duty, for law professors to participate in public affairs, at least some of the time, by showing how what they know bears on public issues. (I do not believe that Devins disagrees with this point.) If, for example, a teacher of constitutional law thinks that a proposed law is unconstitutional, there should be no taboo on her saying so, even through an op-ed piece. If a teacher of criminal law believes that laws forbidding gang loitering so For example: In one interview on CNN, I was required to try to stand on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes, not as a scientific experiment or medical test or cruelty of some kind, but so as to ensure a view of the Capitol building on the television screen. Most of the time, it seemed likely that I would fall off. (This interview was live.) And apparently all law professors on television are, by some firmly enforced unwritten rule, required to try to hold a small piece of equipment in one ear, so as to be able to communicate with other people on the show, including the host. (It isn't easy to hold things in your ear.) Most of the time, the small piece of equipment does not fall out; but some of the time, it does. (This is especially troublesome when you are trying to balance yourself on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes.) See Burden of Proof (CNN television broadcast, Nov. 9, 1998), availablein LEXIS transcript no. 98110900V12 (discussing the meaning of "other High Crimes and Misdemeanors," perjury, and Bills of Attainder). 
A personal anecdote: I appeared on several shows to discuss impeachment issues, but the format seemed so confining, and so conducive to ludicrous oversimplification, and driving there and back seemed so time consuming, that after a while I decided not to do it anymore. I told a producer of CNN's BurdenofProofthat I would no longer discuss impeachment, and would appear on the program if and only if my new dog Perry, a (photogenic) Rhodesian Ridgeback puppy, could appear with me. They called my bluff. The show aired on December 31, 1998, and dealt with legal issues relating to dogs. My dog did become at least somewhat famous; in the middle of the show, the producer broke in to tell me that CNN was being "flooded" with calls and compliments about Perry. Interested readers (can there possibly be any?), those who think I'm joking, and Rhodesian Ridgeback enthusiasts can find the transcript at CNN Burden ofProof(CNN television broadcast, Dec. 31, 1998), availablein LEXIS, transcript no. 98123100V12. [Ed. Note: Perry's photo is available at <http://studentwww.uchicago.edu/orgs/law-phoenix/2bear.html>]. 
A small media notation: The producers who invite people to appear on their shows seem to have the same style and character as that of the on-air hosts of those shows (is this an antecedentjob qualification, or does it develop over time?). Thus the most hilarious invitation came from the producer of the show Hardbal whose invitation appeared in exactly the same staccato voice as that of Chris Matthews, the host of the show: We-want-you-on-Hardball-know-about-it? will or will not deter crime, and has reasons for the belief, it is important for the public to know about this. This is an ordinary part of civic discourse, and a nation is better off with it than without it. Indeed, this kind of academic engagement is one of the things that academic freedom is designed to allow. 
Of course silence about public issues can be legitimate too. Whether or not professors should speak publicly depends at least partly on the justice or injustice, and on the legality or illegality, of the practices at issue. Since silence is a choice and not a neutral position, professors, like other citizens, are properly criticized for failing to speak out on certain questions, at least if they have relevant expertise. Teachers of constitutional law would have been properly criticized, I believe, if they had remained silent during the unconstitutional impeachment of President Clinton. 
If it is legitimate for one professor to speak publicly, it is not illegitimate for a group of them to do so, at least on rare occasions. Surely it is relevant that law professors are by their very profession concerned with highly public issues. They are unlike teachers of French literature, for their daily life is likely to breed expertise on issues that will, at one point or another, have public salience. I emphatically agree with Devins's concluding suggestion-that academics should not sign letters that they could not defend publicly.32 But this is a test that could, I believe, be easily passed by those who signed the anti-impeachment letters, and indeed I doubt that this test would be flunked by many academics with respect to letters they have signed in the past. 
The final problem is that it is unclear what Devins means to claim with his invocation of "postmodernism, multiculturalism, and political correctness."33 Very few of those involved in the Clinton impeachment letters have any sympathy with postmodernism, a movement that (in my view fortunately) has had only a sporadic influence on the academic study of law-far less of an impact than, for example, that of the economic analysis of law. "Multiculturalism" can be understood in many different ways, and certainly no form of "multiculturalism" now dominates law schools. "Political correctness," if understood as a social taboo on the expression of unpopular opinions, is certainly to be deplored.3 But so understood, it is hardly limited to left-leaning aca32 Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 109 (advocating this test as a means of ensuring that academics do the necessary work before registering opinions). 33 Id. at text accompanying note 75 (internal quotations omitted). 
A qualification: Some unpopular opinions are properly subject to taboo; condemics, and here too, I am not sure how the complaint about political correctness bears on the points at hand. Instead of complaining about what he appears to see as left-wing domination of law schools, Devins might defend a substantive position that he believes is unjustly devalued and that deserves a better hearing. 
I agree with Devins's concerns about skepticism with respect to truth, as do many others; 5 but as a class, law professors are hardly skeptical of the idea of truth, and I do not see why Devins believes that there is, within the law schools, much "discomfort with truthseeking."3 6 Law professors founded their overwhelming opposition to the Clinton impeachment on a commitment to truth, not on skepticism about truth. Nor is Devins entirely clear about the distinction between "truth" and "political motivation." Suppose that someone really believes that a proposed law is unconstitutional. Suppose someone believes that some proposition about the Constitution is true. Is there any problem with writing, or signing, a letter to that effect? What makes that action inconsistent with academic freedom? 
It is time to conclude. Academics have a duty to pursue truth, and for most academics, most of the time, participation in partisan causes can be destructive to that endeavor. But legal academics sometimes know things that are relevant to public life, and when this is so, they are entitled, and sometimes obligated, to say what they know. They may be wrong on the merits, but that is another matter. sider the view that slavery was very good, or that the Holocaust should be celebrated as a wonderful event. 
35 See generallyDANIEL A. FARBER & SUZANNA SHERRY, BEYOND ALL REASON: THE RADICAL ASSAULT ON TRUTH IN AMERIcAN LAW (1997); Martha C. Nussbaum, Skepticism About PracticalReason in Literatureand the Law, 107 HARV. L. REV. 714 (1994); Cass K Sunstein, On AnalogicalReasoning,106 HARV.L. REV. 741, 779-80 &n.130 (1993). 
Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 80. Of course there are exceptions, discussed and addressed in FARBER& SHERRY, supra note 35. (Ofcourse I do not mean to endorse, by these brief comments, everything in Farber and Sherry's controversial book.) 
Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere. 
PUBLIC LAW AND LEGAL THEORY WORKING PAPER NO. 01 
Second-Order Decisions 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=193848 
According to one picture of practical reasoning, people are decision-making animals, assessing the advantages and disadvantages of proposed courses of action and choosing in accordance with that assessment. This picture plays a familiar role in economics and decision theory; in various forms, it is central to leading descriptions of reasoning in law and politics.1 Even in psychology, where models of bounded rationality are pervasive and where it is common to speak of “satisficing” rather than optimizing, the deviations can be understood only against the background of this picture.2 
As many people have noticed, this understanding of practical reasoning is quite inadequate.3 An important problem is that it * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. ** Center for Rationality and Interactive Decision Theory, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. We are grateful to Joshua Cohen, David Friedman, Elizabeth Garrett, Saul Levmore, Avishai Margalit, Martha Nussbaum, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on a previous draft; thanks too to participants in a faculty workshop at the University of Nebraska. 1 Thus the most complete treatment of legal reasoning, Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986), deals well with the use of precedent, but not at all with the use of strategies to simplify the burdens of decision; this is a serious gap. Helpful discussions of aspects of that topic can be found in Joseph Raz, Practical Reason and Norms 37-45 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2d ed. 1991) (discussing rules and exclusionary reasons) and Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986) (discussing analogies). In the political domain, see Yuen Foongh Khong, Analogies At War (1992). 2 A prominent exception of George Ainslie, Picoeconomics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), but Ainslie’s focus is on precommitment, only one of the set of solutions discussed here, and Ainslie does not clearly distinguish between rules and other kinds of precommitment strategies. 3 See, e.g., Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-53 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990): John Rawls, “Two Concepts of Rules,” Philosophical Review 64 (1955) 3-32; Edward McClennen, Rationality and Dynamic Choice ignores the existence of simplifying strategies that people adopt well before on-the-spot decisions must be made.4 Debates over rule utilitarianism have of course emphasized the importance of these strategies, and precommitments, plans, and rules have received prominent attention from (among others) Jon Elster,5 Edward McClennen,6 Richard Thaler,7 and Frederick Schauer.8 A central point here is that people seek to overcome their own shortcomings—calculative, moral or otherwise—by making some meta-choice before the moment of ultimate decision. But there are significant gaps in these discussions. They do not take sufficiently seriously the reluctance of ordinary people and social institutions to make on-the-spot decisions,9 and they offer a truncated and (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). See also the useful survey of a number of treatments in McClennen at 219-238. Within economics, see, e.g., Thomas Schelling, “Enforcing Rules on Oneself,” 1 J L Econ. & Org. 357 (1985); Kaplow, supra note; Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics 77-90 (New York: Rusell Sage, 1993); Eric Rasmussen, “Managerial Conservatism and Rational Information Acquisition,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 1: 175-202 (1992); Eric Rasmussen, Games and Information 129 (Oxford: Blackwell 1994). 4 Mill himself emphasized the point; see John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, i n John Stuart Mill, On Liberty and Other Essays 151-53 (John Gray ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991). 5 See Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens pp. 36-47 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979). 
8 See Frederick Schauer, Playing By The Rules (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), which contains useful institutional discussion, particularly of the relationship between courts and legislatures. Conrad Johnson, Moral Legislation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), is in some ways complementary, discussing the differences between decisions at the legislative level and individual choices. 9 For example, Elster’s principal concern is with the particular problem of weakness of will, see Ulysses and the Sirens, p. 37, which is important but, as we will see, only one of a large number of grounds for second-order decisions. Thaler and Schelling are similarly concerned with self-control problems. McClennen’s principal interest is in dynamic consistency. See p. 219. Mill’s brief but important discussion involves the cognitive demands of constant calculation. See Mill, p. 152. undifferentiated sense of the range of potential strategies for improving, or reducing the burdens, of first-order decisions. They do not, for example, investigate why an agent might adopt a firm rule or instead a soft presumption or a standard; nor do they deal with choices between these options and delegating to others or proceeding via small, reversible steps.10 The result is to give an inadequate understanding of how agents and institutions do or should proceed, and no real sense of the political, moral, and legal issues involved. 
By second-order decisions we refer to decisions about the appropriate strategy for reducing the problems associated with making a first-order decision. Second-order decisions thus involve the strategies that people use in order to avoid getting into an ordinary decision-making situation in the first instance. There are important issues here about cognitive burdens and also about responsibility, equality, and fairness. In law, for example, some judges favor a second-order decision in favor of rules, on the ground that rules promote predictability and minimize the burdens of subsequent decisions. In politics, legislatures often adopt a second-order decision in favor of a delegation to some third party, like an administrative agency. But there are many alternative strategies, and serious ethical and even democratic questions are raised by rule-bound decisions (as opposed, for example, to small, reversible steps) and by delegations (as opposed, for example, to rebuttable presumptions). 
We aim here to clarify the choice among second-order strategies. We do so by showing that these strategies differ in the extent to which they produce mistakes and also in the extent to which they impose informational, moral, and other burdens on the agent and on others, either before the process of ultimate decision or during the process of ultimate decision. We identify three especially interesting kinds of cases. The first involves second-order decisions 10 Johnson, supra note, is typical in not exploring the second-order alternatives to rules (such as presumptions) as ways of promoting consequentialist goals. Elster offers illuminating discussions of some of these strategies, but separately and in various places, without discussing how agents can and do choose between them, and with little treatment of institutional questions. See Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-45 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993) (discussing randomization; Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens pp. 36-47 (discussing precommitment, apparently via rules). that greatly reduce burdens at the time of ultimate decision, but require considerable thinking in advance. Decisions of this kind, which we call High-Low, may be difficult to make before the fact; the question is whether the burdens are worth incurring in light of the aggregate burdens, moral, cognitive, and otherwise, of secondorder and first-order decisions taken together. The second we call Low-Low. Some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burdens either before or during the ultimate decision. This is a great advantage, and a major question is whether the strategy in question (consider a decision to flip a coin) produces too much unfairness or too many mistakes. The third we call Low-High. Some second-order strategies involve low ex-ante decisional burdens for the agents themselves, at the cost of imposing possibly high subsequent burdens on someone else to whom the first-order decision is “exported”; a delegation of power to some trusted associate, or to an authority, is the most obvious case. 
By drawing on actual practices, individual and institutional, we attempt to provide guidance for seeing when one or another strategy will be chosen, when one or another makes best sense, and how both rational and boundedly rational persons and institutions might go about making the relevant choices.11 No particular strategy can be said to be better in the abstract; but it is possible to identify, in the abstract, the factors that push in favor of one or another strategy, and also the contexts in which each approach makes sense. 
We suggest, for example, that a second-order decision in favor of firm rules (a form of High-Low) is appropriate when an agent faces a large number of decisions with similar features and when advance planning is especially important; in such cases, the crudeness of rules is easily tolerated because of their overall advantages. By contrast, a second-order decision in favor of small, reversible steps (a form of Low-Low) is preferable when the agent lacks reliable information and reasonably fears unanticipated bad consequences; this point helps explain the method that is often at work among common law courts (and argues against some of the critics of that 11 Of course second-order decisions might operate as a rational response, by boundedly rational persons or institutions, to their own bounded rationality; but such decisions might also suffer from bounded rationality and go wrong because of cognitive or motivational problems. See below. method). A sensible agent will choose the alternative second-order strategy of delegating to another person or institution (a form of Low-High) when there is a special problem with assuming responsibility—informational, moral, or otherwise—and when an appropriate delegate, with sufficient time and expertise, turns out to be available; this point helps illuminate debates over delegations within the family and from legislatures to administrative agencies.12 In the process we address a range of ethical, political, and legal issues that are raised by various second-order decisions. 
A. Strategies 
The following catalogue captures the major second-order strategies. The taxonomy is intended to be exhaustive of the possibilities, but the various items should not be seen as exclusive of one another; there is some overlap between them. 
Rules. People anticipating hard or repetitive decisions may do best to adopt a rule. A key feature of a rule is that it amounts to a full, or nearly full, ex ante specification of results in individual cases. People might say, for example, that they will never cheat on their taxes or fail to meet a deadline. A legislature might provide that judges can never make exceptions to the speed-limit law or the law banning dogs from restaurants, or that everyone who has been convicted of three felonies must be sentenced to life imprisonment 
Presumptions. Sometimes ordinary people and public institutions rely not on a rule but instead on a presumption, which can be rebutted. The result, it is hoped, is to make fewer mistakes while at the same time incurring reasonable decisional burdens.13 An 12 Of course self-interested participants in politics will attempt to exploit arguments of this kind in order to produce their preferred outcome. A n industry representation nervous about its chances of success in the legislature might argue strongly on behalf of a delegation, in the hopes that the delegate will be more receptive to its arguments (or more vulnerable to its influence). We deal only in passing with the strategic considerations involved in secondorder strategies; this is a fertile area for further work, both empirical and theoretical. 13 It is important here to distinguish between a presumption and a rule-withexceptions. A rule with exceptions has the following structure: “Do X—except administrative agency might presume, for example, that no one may emit more than X tons of a certain pollutant, but the presumption can be rebutted by showing that further reductions are not feasible. 
Standards. Rules are often contrasted with standards.14 A ban on “excessive” speed on the highway is a standard; so is a requirement that pilots of airplanes be “competent,” or that student behavior in the classroom be “reasonable.” These might be compared with rules specifying a 55 mph speed limit, or a ban on pilots who are over the age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in assigned seats. 
Routines. Sometimes a reasonable way to deal with a decisional burden is to adopt a routine. By this term we mean something similar to a habit, but more voluntary, more self-conscious, and without the pejorative connotations of some habits (like the habit of chewing one’s fingernails). Thus a forgetful person might adopt a routine of locking his door every time he leaves his office, even though sometimes he knows he will return in a few minutes; thus a commuter might adopt a particular route and follow it every day, even though on some days another route would be better. 
Small steps. A possible way of simplifying a difficult situation at the time of choice is to make a small, incremental decision, and to leave other questions for another day. When a personal decision involves imponderable and apparently incommensurable elements, people often take small, reversible steps first.15 For example, Jane may in circumstances A, in which case you are exempt from doing X.” For example, “observe the speed limit—except when you’re driving a police car or an ambulance in an emergency, in which cases you may exceed it.” By contrast, a typical presumption says something like: “Act on the assumption that P—unless and until circumstances A are shown to obtain, in which case, do something else.” The two amount to the same thing when the agent knows whether or not circumstances A obtain. The two are quite different when the agent lacks that information. With a presumption, you can proceed without the information; with a rule-with-exceptions, you cannot proceed, that is, you are justified neither in doing X nor in not doing X. See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “On Presumption,” J.Phil 80: 143-162 (1983). 14 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow, “Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis,” Duke L.J. 42 (1992): 189-221; Kathleen Sullivan, “Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards,” Harv. L. Rev. 105 (1993): 22-103. 15 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “Opting: The Case of ‘Big’ Decisions,” in The 1985 Yearbook of the Wissenschaftkeleg Zu Berlin. decide to live with Robert before she decides whether she wants to marry him; Marilyn may go to night school to see if she is really interested in law. A similar “small steps” approach is the hallmark of Anglo-American common law.16 Judges typically make narrow decisions, resolving little beyond the individual case; at least this is their preferred method of operation when they are not quite confident about the larger issues, not only in the common law but in constitutional law too.17 
Picking. Sometimes the difficulty of decision, or symmetry among the options, pushes people to decide on a random basis. They might, for example, flip a coin, or make some apparently irrelevant factor decisive (“it’s a sunny day, so I’ll take that job in Florida”). Thus they might “pick” rather than “choose” (taking the latter term to mean basing a decision on preference).18 A legal system might use a lottery to decide who serves on juries or in the military, and indeed lotteries are used in many domains where the burdens of individualized choice are high, and when there is some particular problem with deliberation about the grounds of choice, sometimes because of apparent symmetries among the candidates. 16 See Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning 3- 15 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948). In political science, see Charles Lindblom, “The Science of Muddling Through,” 19 Pub. Admin. Rev. 79 (1955), which offers an influential and relevant argument about incrementalism. See also Charles Lindblom, “Still Muddlin, Not Yet Through,” Public Administration Review 39 (1979): 517-26. Lindblom’s discussion is in the same general family as our exploration of small steps, though (oddly) Lindblom does not discuss the judiciary, and he does not explore when other second-order stategies might be preferable. 17 Thus in cases involving the right to die, affirmative action, and sex equality, Justices Sandra Day O’Connor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg much favor small steps as the strategy of choice; this is the ground on which they tend to disagree with Justice Scalia, and in fact it counts as the leading jurisprudential dispute on the current Supreme Court The tension between the rule of law and the common law method is the basic theme of Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation 5-15 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997). For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time: Judicial Minimalism on the Supreme Court (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999). 18 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Sidney Morgenbesser, “Picking and Choosing,” Social Research 44 (1977): 757-83. 
Delegation. A familiar way of handling decisional burdens is to delegate the decision to someone else. People might, for example, rely on a spouse or a friend, or choose an institutional arrangement by which certain decisions are made by authorities established at the time or well in advance. Such arrangements can be more or less formal; they involve diverse mechanisms of control, or entirely relinquished control, by the person or people for whose benefit they have been created. 
Heuristics. People often use heuristic devices, or mental shortcuts, as a way of bypassing the need for individualized choice. For example, it can be overwhelming to figure out for whom to vote in local elections; people may therefore use the heuristic of party affiliation. When meeting someone new, your behavior may be a result of heuristic devices specifying the appropriate type of behavior with a person falling in the general category in which the new person seems to fall. A great deal of attention has been given to heuristic devices said to produce departures from “rationality.”19 But often heuristic devices are fully rational, if understood as a way of producing pretty good outcomes while at the same time reducing cognitive overload or other decisional burdens. 
B. Costs of Decisions and Costs of Errors 
Under what circumstances will, or should, an agent or institution make some second-order decision rather than making an all-things-considered judgment on the spot? And under what circumstances will, or should, one or another strategy be chosen? Many people have emphasized the particular value of rules, which can overcome myopia or weakness of will20; but the problem is far more general, and rules are just one of many possible solutions. Our ultimate goal is to suggest the most promising contexts for the principal candidates, especially rules, small steps, and delegation. 
We have said that second-order strategies differ in the extent to which they produce mistakes and decisional burdens. In what follows we shall suggest that second-order strategies should be 19 See, e.g., John Conlisk, “Why Bounded Rationality?,” J. Econ. Lit. 34 (1996): 669-698. 20 See the discussion of precommitment in Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, and the treatment of “resolute choice” in McClennen. chosen by attempting to minimize the sum of the costs of making decisions and the costs of error, where the costs of making decisions are the costs of coming to closure on some action or set of actions, and where the costs of error are assessed by examining the number, the magnitude, and the kinds of mistakes.21 We understand “errors” as suboptimal outcomes, whatever the criteria for deciding what is optimal; thus both rules and delegations can produce errors (the rule may be crude; the delegate may be incompetent). If the costs of producing optimal decisions were zero, it would be best to make individual calculations in each case, for this approach would produce correct judgments without compromising accuracy or any other important value. This would be true for individual agents and also for institutions. It is largely because people (including public officials) seek to reduce decisional burdens, and to minimize their own errors, that sometimes they would like not to have options and sometimes not to have information; and they may make second-order decisions to reduce either options or information (or both).22 
Three additional points are necessary here. The first involves responsibility: people sometimes want to assume responsibility for certain decisions even if others would make those decisions better, and people sometimes want to relieve themselves of responsibility for certain decisions even if other people would make those decisions worse. These are familiar phenomena in daily life; so too in politics and law, where people with authority encounter formal and informal barriers to their own efforts to delegate. A failure of 21 Kaplow illuminatingly uses a framework of this sort, but in a way that seems to us too reductionistic. Schauer, pp. 196-206, recognizes that the case for rules depends on empirical considerations. The treatments of precommitment i n Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, and Schelling do not explore the circumstances i n which a rule-bound strategy is preferable to some other (second-order) approach, nor do they explore the grounds for choice among the various second-order strategies discussed here. In general, existing treatments of precommitment tend to ambiguous about whether the relevant strategy is a rule or something else. See, e.g., Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, at 37-40 (collecting heterogeneous illustrations). 22 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “On Not Wanting To Know,” in Reasoning Practically (New York: Oxford University Press, forthcoming 1999); Gerald Dworkin, “Is More Choice Better Than Less?”, in Autonomy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991). 
Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 10 responsibility might be understand as a kind of “cost,” but it is qualitatively different from the decision costs and error costs discussed thus far, and raises separate questions. Special issues are created by institutional arrangements that divide authority, such as the separation of powers; such arrangements forbid people from assuming or delegating certain decisions, even if they would very much like to do so. 
The second point comes from the fact that multi-party situations raise distinctive problems. Above all, public institutions (including legislatures, agencies, and courts) may seek to promote planning by setting down rules and presumptions in advance. The need for planning can argue strongly against on-the-spot decisions even if they would be both correct and costless to achieve. As we will see, the need for planning can lead in the direction of a particular kind of second-order strategy, one that makes on-the-spot decisions more or less mechanical. 
The third and most important point is that a reference to a “sum” of decision costs and error costs should not be taken to suggest that a straightforward cost-benefit analysis is an adequate way to understand the choice among second-order strategies. Of course there is no simple metric along which to align the various considerations. Important qualitative differences can be found between decision costs and error costs, among the various kinds of decision costs, and also among the various kinds of error costs. Thus for any agent the costs of decision may include time, money, unpopularity, anxiety, boredom, agitation, anticipated ex post regret or remorse, feelings of responsibility for harm done to self or others, injury to self-perception, guilt, or shame. We refer to decision costs and error costs in order to start with a relatively simple framework; additional considerations will be introduced as the discussion proceeds. 
Things become differently complicated for multimember institutions, where these points also apply, but where interest-group pressures may be important, and where there is the special problem of reaching a degree of consensus. A legislature, for example, might find it especially difficult to specify the appropriate approach to global warming, given the problems posed by disagreement, varying intensity of preference, and aggregation issues; for similar reasons a multimember court may have a hard time agreeing on how to handle an asserted right to physician-assisted suicide. The result may be strategies for delegation or for deferring decision, often via small steps. 
An institution facing political pressures may have a distinctive reason to adopt a particular kind of second-order decision, one that will deflect responsibility for choice. Jean Bodin defended the creation of an independent judiciary, and thus provided an initial insight into a system of separated and divided powers, on just this ground; a monarch is relieved of responsibility for unpopular but indispensable decisions if he can point to a separate institution that has been charged with the relevant duty.23 This is an important kind of enabling constraint, characteristic of good second-order decisions. I n modern states, the existence of an independent central bank is often justified on this ground. In the United States, the President has no authority over the money supply and indeed no authority over the Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, partly on the theory that this will prevent the President from being criticized for necessary but unpopular decisions (such as refusing to increase the supply of money when unemployment seems too high); the fact that the Federal Reserve Board is unelected is an advantage here. There are analogues in business, in workplaces, and even in families, where a mother or father may be given the responsibility for making certain choices, partly in order to relieve the other of responsibility. Of course this approach can cause problems of fairness, equality, and mistake. C. Burdens Ex Ante and Burdens On-the-Spot 
The inquiry into second-order strategies might be organized by noticing a simple point: Some such strategies require substantial thought in advance but little thought on-the-spot, whereas others require little thought before the situation of choice arises and also little thought on-the-spot. Stlll others involve little ex-ante thought, which leads to imposing the possibly high decisional burdens on others. Thus there is a temporal difference in the imposition of the burdens of decision, which we describe with the terms “High-Low,” “Low-Low,” and “Low-High.” To fill out the possibilities, we add 23 See Stephen Holmes, Passions and Constraint (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 
“High-High” as well. By the term decision costs we refer to the overall costs, which may be borne by different people or agencies: the work done before the fact of choice may not be carried out by the same actors who will have to do the thinking during the ultimate choice. Consider Table 1: little on-the-spot thinking Substantial onthe-spot thinking little ex ante thinking Low-Low: picking; small steps; various heuristics; some standards (1) Low-High: delegation (3) 
Substantial ex ante thinking High-Low: rules; presumptions; some standards; routines (2) High-High: some characters in Henry James novels; dysfunctional governments (4) 
Cell 1 captures strategies that promise to minimize the overall burdens of having to make decisions (whether or not they promote good overall decisions). These are cases in which agents do not invest a great deal of thought either before or at the time of decision. Picking is the most obvious case; consider the analogous possibility of flipping a coin. Small steps are more demanding, since the agent does have to make some decisions, but because the steps are small, there need be comparatively little thought before or during the decision. The most sharply contrasting set of cases is High-High, Cell (4). As this cell captures strategies that maximize overall decision costs, it ought for our purposes to remain empty, or at least nearly so. Fortunately it seems to be represented only by a small minority of people in actual life. Often those who fall in Cell (4) seem hopelessly indecisive, but it is possible to imagine people thinking that HighHigh represents a norm of moral responsibility, or that (as some people seem to think) incurring high burdens of decision is something to relish. It is also possible to urge High-High where the issue is extremely important and where there is no other way of ensuring accuracy; consider, for example, the decision when to terminate a war, a decision that may reasonably call for a great deal of deliberation both before and during the period of choice. 
Cell (2) captures a common aspiration for national legislatures and for ordinary agents who prefer their lives to be rule-bound. Some institutions and agents spend a great deal of time choosing the appropriate rules; but once the rules are in place, decisions become extremely simple, rigid, even mechanical. Everyone knows people of this sort; they can seem both noble and frustrating precisely because they follow rules to the letter. Legal formalism—the commitment to setting out clear rules in advance and mechanical decision afterwards, a commitment defended by Supreme Court Justices Hugo Black and Antonin Scalia—is associated with cell (2).24 
When planning is important and when a large number of decisions must be made, cell (2) is often the best approach, as the twentieth-century movement away from the common law, and toward bureaucracy and simple rules, helps to confirm. Individual cases of unfairness may be tolerable if the overall result is to prevent the system from being overwhelmed by decisional demands. Cell (2) is also likely to be the best approach when many people are involved and it is known in advance that the people who will have to carry out on-the-spot decisions constantly change. Consider institutions with many employees and a large turnover (the army, entry levels of large corporations, and so forth). The head of an organization may not want newly recruited, less-than-well-trained people to make decisions for the firm: rules should be in place so as to insure continuity and uniform level of performance. On the other hand, the fact that life will confound the rules often produces arguments for institutional reform in the form of granting power to administrators or employees to exercise “common sense” in the face of rules.25 An intermediate case can be found with most standards; the creation of the standard may itself require substantial thinking, 24 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation pp. 5-20. 25 See Phillip Howard, The Death of Common Sense 12-51 (New York: Warner Books, 1996). 
but even when the standard is in place, agents may have to do some deliberating in order to reach closure. 
Cell (3) suggests that institutions and individuals sometimes do little thinking in advance but may or may not minimize the aggregate costs of decision. The best case for this approach involves an agent who lacks much information or seeks for some other reason to avoid responsibility, and a delegate who promises to make good decisions relatively easily. As we have seen, delegations may require little advance thinking, at least on the substance of the issues to be decided; the burdens of decision will eventually be faced by the object of the delegation. Of course while some delegations are almost automatic (say, in a family), some people think long and hard about whether and to whom to delegate. Also, some people who have been delegated power will proceed by rules, presumptions, standards, small steps, picking, or even subdelegations. Note that small steps might be seen as an effort to “export” the costs of decision to one’s future self; this is related to an important theme in the common law, and an aspect that is highly valued by many judges. 
It is an important social fact that many people are relieved of the burdens of decision through something other than their own explicit wishes. Consider prisoners, the mentally handicapped, young children, or (at some times and places) women; in a range of cases, society or law makes a second-order decision on someone else’s behalf, often without any indication of that person’s own desires. The usurpation of another’s decisions, or second-order decisions, is often based on a belief that the relevant other will systematically err. This of course relates to the notion of paternalism, which can be seen as frequently arising when there is delegation without consent. 
In some cases, second-order decisions produce something best described as Medium-Medium, with imaginable extensions toward Moderately High-Moderately Low, and Moderately LowModerately High. As examples consider some standards, which, it will be recalled, structure first-order decisions but require a degree of work on the spot, with the degree depending on the nature of the particular standard. But after understanding the polar cases, analysis of these intermediate cases is straightforward, and hence we will not undertake that analysis here. 
We now turn to the contexts in which agents and institutions will, or should, follow one or another of the basic second-order strategies. 
A. Informal and Formal Delegations 
As a first approximation, a delegation is a second-order strategy that exports decision-making burdens to someone else, in an effort to reduce the agent’s burdens both before and at the time of making the ultimate decision. A typical case involves an agent who seeks to avoid responsibility (for some strategic or ethical reason, or because of a simple lack of information) and who identifies an available delegate whom he trusts to make a good, right, or expert decision. 
Informal delegations occur all the time. Thus, for example, one spouse may delegate to another the decision about what the family will eat for dinner, what investments to choose, or what car to buy. Such delegations often occur because the burdens of decision are high for the agent but low for the delegate, who may have specialized information, who may lack relevant biases or motivational problems, or who may not mind (and who may even enjoy) taking responsibility for the decision in question. (These cases may then be more accurately captured as special cases of Low-Low.) The intrinsic burdens of having to make the decision are often counterbalanced by the benefits of having been asked to assume responsibility for it (though these may be costs rather than benefits in some cases). Thus some delegates are glad to assume their role; this is important to, though it is not decisive for, the ethical issue whether to delegate (consider the question of justice within the family). And there is an uneasy line, raising knotty conceptual and empirical questions, between a delegation and a division of labor (consider the allocation of household duties). A key issue here is whether the recipient of the delegation has the authority to decline. 
Government itself is a large recipient of delegated decisions, at least if sovereignty is understood to lie in the citizenry. On this view, various public institutions–-legislatures, courts, the executive branch–-exercise explicitly or implicitly delegated authority, and there are numerous subdelegations, especially for the legislature, 
which must relieve itself of many decisional burdens. A legislature may delegate because it believes that it lacks information about, for example, environmental problems or changes in the telecommunications market; the result is an Environmental Protection Agency or a Federal Communications Commission. Or the legislature may have the information but find itself unable to forge a consensus on underlying values about, for example, the right approach to affirmative action or to age discrimination. 
Often a legislature lacks the time and the organization to make the daily decisions that administrative agencies are asked to handle; consider the fact that legislatures that attempt to reconsider agency decisions often find themselves involved in weeks or even months of work, and fail to reach closure. Or the legislature may be aware that its vulnerability to interest-group pressures will lead it in bad directions, and it may hope and believe that the object of the delegation will be relatively immune. Interest-group pressures may themselves produce a delegation, as where powerful groups are unable to achieve a clear victory in a legislature but are able to obtain a grant of authority to an administrative agency over which they will have power. The legislature may even want to avoid responsibility for some hard choice, fearing that decisions will produce electoral reprisal. Self-interested representatives may well find it in their electoral self-interest to enact a vague or vacant standard (“the public interest,” “reasonable accommodation” of the disabled, “reasonable regulation” of pesticides), and to delegate the task of specification to someone else, secure in the knowledge that the delegate will be blamed for problems in implementation. 
B. When to Delegate 
Delegation deserves to be considered whenever an appropriate and trustworthy delegate is available and there is some sense in which it seems undesirable for the agent to be making the decision by himself. But obviously delegation can be a mistake—an abdication of responsibility, an act of unfairness, a recipe for more rather than fewer errors, for even higher (aggregate) costs of decision. And since delegation is only one of a number of second-order strategies, an agent should usually consider other possibilities before delegating. 
Compared to a High-Low approach, a delegation will be desirable if the legislature, or the delegator, is unable to generate a workable rule or presumption (and if anything it could come up with would be costly to produce) and if a delegate would therefore do better on the merits. This may be the case on a multimember body that is unable to reach agreement, or when an agent or institution faces a cognitive or motivational problem, such as weakness of will or susceptibility to outside influences. A delegation will also be favored over High-Low if the delegator seeks to avoid responsibility for the decision for political, social, or other reasons, though the effort to avoid responsibility may also create problems of legitimacy, as when a legislator relies on “experts” to make value judgments about environmental protection or disability discrimination. 
As compared with small steps or picking, a delegation may or may not produce higher total decision costs (perhaps the delegate is slow or a procrastinator). Even if the delegation does produce higher total decision costs, it may also lead to more confidence in the eventual decisions, at least if reliable delegates are available. In the United States, for example, the Federal Reserve Board has a high degree of public respect and hence there is little pressure to eliminate or reduce the delegation. But a delegate—a friend, a spouse, an Environmental Protection Agency—may prove likely to err, and a rule, a presumption, or small steps may emerge instead. Special issues are raised in technical areas, which create strong arguments for delegation, but where the delegate’s judgments may be hard to oversee (even if they conceal controversial judgments of value; return to the EPA26). 
There is also the independent concern for fairness. In some circumstances, it is unfair to delegate to, for example, a friend or a spouse the power of decision, especially but not only because the delegate is not a specialist. Issues of gender equality arise when a husband delegates to his wife all decisions involving the household and the children, even if both husband and wife agree on the delegation. Apart from this issue, a delegation by one spouse to another may well seem inequitable if (say) it involves a child’s 26 This is the basic theme of Marc Roberts et al., The Environmental Protection Agency: Asking the Wrong Questions (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2d ed. 1996). 
problems with alcohol, because it is an abdication of responsibility, a way of transferring the burdens of decision to someone else who should not be forced to bear them alone. 
In institutional settings, there is an analogous problem if the delegate (usually an administrative agency) lacks political accountability even if it has relevant expertise. The result is the continuing debate over the legitimacy of delegations to administrative agencies.27 Such delegations can be troublesome if they shift the burden of judgment from a democratically elected body to one that is insulated from political control. What we are adding here is that the longstanding debate over delegations offers a far too limited sense of the alternatives. A legislature is not confronted only with the choice whether or not to delegate; if the legislature wants to avoid the degree of specificity entailed by rulebound law, it might instead enact a presumption or take small steps (as, for example, through an experimental pilot program). Related issues are raised by the possibly illegitimate abdication of authority when a judge delegates certain powers to law clerks (as is occasionally alleged about Supreme Court justices) or to special masters who are expert in complex questions of fact and law (as was alleged in connection with a delegation of factfinding power to a prominent law professor in the Microsoft litigation, a delegation that was ultimately ruled invalid). 
C. Complications 
Three important complications deserve comment. First, any delegate may itself resort to making second-order decisions, and it is familiar to find delegates undertaking each of the strategies that we have described. Sometimes delegates prefer High-Low and hence generate rules; almost everyone knows that this is the typical strategy of the Internal Revenue Service. Alternatively, delegates may use standards or proceed by small steps. This is the general approach of the National Labor Relations Board, which (strikingly) avoids rules whenever it can, and much prefers to proceed case-by-case. Or a delegate may undertake a subdelegation. Confronted with a 27 Compare David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995) with Jerry Mashaw, Chaos, Greed, and Governance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997). delegation from her husband, a wife may consult a sibling or a parent. Asked by Congress to make hard choices, the President may and frequently does subdelegate to some kind of commission, for some of the same reasons that spurred Congress to delegate in the first instance. Of course a delegate may just pick. 
The second complication is that the control of a delegate presents a potentially serious principal-agent problem. How can the person who has made the delegation ensure that the delegate will not make serious and numerous mistakes, or instead fritter away its time trying to decide how to decide? There are multiple possible mechanisms of control. Instead of giving final and irreversible powers of choice to the delegate, a person or institution might turn the delegate into a mere consultant or advice-giver. A wide range of intermediate relationships is possible. In the governmental setting, a legislature can influence the ultimate decision by voicing its concerns publicly if an administrative agency is heading in the wrong direction, and the legislature has the power to overturn an administrative agency if it can muster the will to do so. Ultimately the delegator may retain the power to eliminate the delegation, and to ensure against (what the delegator would consider to be) mistakes, it may be sufficient for the delegate to know this fact. In informal relations, involving friends, colleagues, and family members, there are various mechanisms for controlling any delegate. Some “delegates” know that they are only consultants; others know that they have the effective power of decision. All this happens through a range of cues, which may be subtle. 
The third complication stems from the fact that at the outset, the burdens of a second-order decision of this kind may not be so low after all, since the person or institution must take the time to decide whether to delegate at all and if so, to whom to delegate. Complex issues may arise about the composition of any institution receiving the delegation; these burdens may be quite high and perhaps decisive against delegation altogether. A multimember institution often divides sharply on whether to delegate and even after that decision is made, it may have trouble deciding on the recipient of the delegated authority. 
D. Intrapersonal Delegations and Delegation to Chance 
Thus far we have been discussing cases in which the delegator exports the burdens of decision to some other party. What about the intrapersonal case? On the one hand, there is no precise analogy between that problem and the cases under discussion. On the other hand, people confronted with hard choices can often be understood to have chosen to delegate the power of choice to their future selves. Consider, for example, such decisions as whether to buy a house, to have another child, to get married or divorced, to move to a new city; in such cases agents who procrastinate may understand themselves to have delegated the decision to their future selves. 
There are two possible reasons for this kind of intrapersonal delegation, involving timing and content respectively. You may believe you know what the right decision is, but also believe it is not the right time to be making that decision, or at least not the right time to announce it publicly. Alternatively, you may not know what the right decision is and believe that your future self will be in a better position to decide. You may think that your future self will have more information, suffer less or not at all from cognitive difficulties, bias, or motivational problems, or be in a better position to assume the relevant responsibility. Perhaps you are feeling under pressure, suffering from illness, or not sure of your judgment just yet. In such cases, the question of intrapersonal, intertemporal choice is not so far from the problem of delegation to others. It is even possible to see some overlapping principal-agent problems with similar mechanisms of control, as people impose certain constraints on their future selves. There are close parallels for judges and legislators, who care a great deal about both timing and content, and who may wait for one or another reason. 
From the standpoint of the agent, then, the strategy of small steps, like delay, can be seen as a form of delegation. Also, the strategy of delegation itself may turn into that of picking when the delegate is a chance device. When I make my future decision depend on which card I draw from my deck of cards, I’ve delegated my decision to the random card-drawing mechanism, thereby effectively turning my decision from choosing to picking. 
We have seen that people often make second-order decisions that are themselves costly, simply in order to reduce the burdens of later decisions in particular cases. This is the most conventional kind of precommitment strategy.28 The most promising setting for rulebound precommitment involves a large number of similar decisions and a need for advance planning (as opposed to improvisation). I n such a setting, the occasional errors inevitably produced by rules are likely to be worth incurring. When this process is working well, there is much to do before the second-order decision has been made, but once the decision is in place, things are greatly simplified.29 A. Diverse Rules, Diverse Presumptions 
We have suggested that rules and presumptions belong in the High-Low category, and frequently this is true. But the point must be qualified; some rules and presumptions do not involve high burdens of decision before the fact. For example, a rule might be picked rather than chosen—drive on the right-hand side of the road, or spoons to the right, forks to the left. Especially when what it is important is to allow all actors to coordinate on a single course of conduct, there need be little investment in decisions about the content of the relevant rule. A rule might even be framed narrowly, so as to work as a kind of small step. A court might decide, for example, that a law excluding homosexuals from the armed services is unconstitutional, and this decision might be framed as a rule; but the court’s opinion could be issued in such a way as to leave undecided most other issues involving the constitutional status of homosexuals. Rules often embody small steps. Of course the same points can be made about presumptions, which are sometimes picked rather than chosen and which might be quite narrow. 28 See, e.g., Elster; Schauer. 29 See, e.g., Elster and Schelling, who see that precommitment strategies are often appropriate, but who do not discuss the choice between rules and alternative candidates, or whether some other second-order strategy might be better. 
For present purposes we focus on situations in which an institution or an agent is willing to deliberate a good deal to generate a rule or a presumption that, once in place, turns out greatly to simplify (without impairing and perhaps even improving) future decisions. This is a familiar aspiration in law and politics. A legislature might, for example, decide in favor of a speed limit law, partly in order to ensure coordination among drivers, and partly as a result of a process of balancing various considerations about risks and benefits. People are especially willing to expend a great deal of effort to generate rules in two circumstances: (1) when planning and fair notice are important and (2) when a large number of decisions will be made.30 
In most well-functioning legal systems, for example, it is clear what is and what is not a crime. People need to know when they may be subject to criminal punishment for what they do. In theory if not in practice, the American Constitution is taken to require a degree of clarity in the criminal law, and every would-be tyrant knows that rules may be irritating constraints on his authority. So too, the law of contract and property is mostly defined by clear rules, simply because people could not otherwise plan, and in order for economic development to be possible they need to be in a position to do so. When large numbers of decisions have to be made, there is a similar tendency to spend a great deal of time to clarify outcomes in advance. In the United States, the need to make a large number of decisions has pushed the legal system into the development of rules governing social security disability, workers’ compensation, and criminal sentencing. The fact that these rules produce a significant degree of error is not decisive; the sheer cost of administering the relevant systems, with so massive a number of decisions, makes a certain number of errors tolerable. 
Compared to rules, standards and “soft” presumptions serve to reduce the burdens of decision ex ante while increasing those burdens at the time of decision. This is both their virtue and their vice. Consider, for example, the familiar strategy of enacting rigid, rule-like environmental regulations while at the same time allowing a “waiver” for special circumstances. The virtue of this approach is 30 See Louis Kaplow, “Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis,” 42 Duke LJ (1992, supra. that the rigid rules will likely produce serious mistakes—high costs, low environmental benefits—in some cases; the waiver provision allows correction in the form of an individualized assessment of whether the statutory presumption should be rebutted. The potential vice of this approach is that it requires a fair degree of complexity in a number of individual cases. Whether the complexity is worthwhile turns on a comparative inquiry with genuine rules. How much error would be produced by the likely candidates? How expensive is it to correct those errors by turning the rules into presumptions? B. Of Institutions, Planning, and Trust 
Often institutions are faced with the decision whether to adopt a High-Low strategy or instead to delegate. We have seen contexts in which a delegation is better. But in three kinds of circumstances the High-Low approach is to be preferred. First, when planning is important, it is important to set out rules (or presumptions) in advance. The law of property is an example. Second, there is little reason to delegate when the agent or institution has a high degree of confidence that a rule (or presumption) can be generated at reasonable cost, that the rule (or presumption) will be accurate, and that it will actually be followed. Third, and most obviously, HighLow is better when no trustworthy delegate is available, or when it seems unfair to ask another person or institution to make the relevant decision. Liberal democracies take these considerations as special reasons to justify rules in the context of criminal law: The law defining crimes is reasonably rule-like, partly because of the importance of citizen knowledge about what counts as a crime, partly because of a judgment that police officers and courts cannot be trusted to define the content of the law. Generally legislatures tend in the direction of rule-like judgment when they have little confidence in the executive; in America, parts of the Clean Air Act are a prime example of a self-conscious choice of High-Low over delegation. 
When would High-Low be favored over Low-Low (picking, small steps)? The interest in planning is highly relevant here and often pushes in the direction of substantial thinking in advance. If the agent or institution has faith in its ability to generate a good rule Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 24 or presumption, it does not make much sense to proceed by random choice or incrementally. Hence legislatures have often displaced the common law approach of case-by-case judgment with clear rules set out in advance. In England and America, this has been a great movement of the twentieth century, largely because of the interest in planning and decreased faith in the courts’ ability to generate good outcomes through small steps. Of course mixed strategies are possible. An institution may produce a rule to cover certain cases but delegate decision in other cases; or a delegate may be disciplined by presumptions and standards; or an area of law, or practical reason, may be covered by some combination of rule-bound judgment and small steps. 
C. Private Decisions: Ordinary People, Intrapersonal Collective Action Problems, and Recovering Addicts 
Thus far we have been stressing public decisions. In their individual capacity, people frequently adopt rules, presumptions, or self-conscious routines in order to guide decisions that they know might, in individual cases, be too costly to make or be made incorrectly because of their own motivational problems. Sarah might decide, for example, that she will turn down all invitations for outof-town travel in the month of September, or John might adopt a presumption against going to any weddings or funerals unless they involve close family members, or Fred might make up his mind that at dinner parties, he will drink whatever the host is drinking. Rules, presumptions, and routines of this kind are an omnipresent feature of practical reason; sometimes they are chosen self-consciously and as an exercise of will, but more often they are, or become, so familiar and simple that they appear to the agent not to be choices at all. Problems arise when a person finds that he cannot stick to his resolution, and thus High-Low may turn into High-High, and things may be as if the second-order decision had not been made at all. 
Some especially important cases involve efforts to solve the kinds of intertemporal, intrapersonal problems that arise when isolated, small-step first-order decisions are individually rational but produce harm to the individual when taken in the aggregate. These cases might be described as involving “intrapersonal collective action problems.”31 Consider, for example, the decision to smoke a cigarette (right now), or to have chocolate cake for desert, or to have an alcoholic drink after dinner, or to gamble on weekends. Small steps, which are rational choices when taken individually and which produce net benefits when taken on their own, can lead to harm or even disaster when they accumulate. There is much room here for second-order decisions. As a self-control strategy, a person might adopt a rule: cigarettes only after dinner; no gambling, ever; chocolate cake only on holidays; alcohol only at parties when everyone else is drinking. But a presumption might work better – for example, a presumption against chocolate cake, with the possibility of rebuttal on special occasions, when celebration is in the air and the cake looks particularly good. 
Well-known private agencies designed to help people with selfcontrol problems (Alcoholics’ Anonymous, Gamblers’ Anonymous) have as their business the development of second-order strategies of this general kind. The most striking cases involve recovering addicts, but people who are not addicts, and who are not recovering from anything, often make similar second-order decisions. When selfcontrol is particularly difficult to achieve, an agent may seek to delegate instead. Whether a delegation (Low-High) is preferable to a rule or presumption (High-Low) will depend in turn on the various considerations discussed above. 
V. Low-Low (with Special Reference to Picking and Small Steps) A. Equipoise, Responsibility, and Commitment 
Why might an institution or agent pick rather than choose? When would small steps be best? At the individual level, it can be obvious that when you are in equipoise, you might as well pick; it simply is not worthwhile to go through the process of choosing, with its high cognitive or emotional costs. As we have seen, the result can be picking in both low-stakes (cereal choices) and highstakes (employment opportunities) settings. Picking can even be said to operate as a kind of delegation, where the object of the delegation 31 Cf. Thomas Schelling, “Self-Command in Practice, in Policy, and in a Theory of Rational Choice,” Am. Econ. Rev. 74 (1984): 1-22. 
is “fate,” and the agent loses the sense of responsibility that might accompany an all-things-considered judgment. Thus some people sort out hard questions by resorting to a chance device (like flipping a coin). 
Small steps, unlike a random process, are a form of choosing. Students in high schools tend to date in this spirit, at least most of the time; often adults do too. Newspapers and magazines offer trial subscriptions; the same is true for book clubs. Often advertisers (or for that matter prospective romantic partners) know that people prefer small steps and they take advantage of that preference (“no commitments”). In the first years of university, students need not commit themselves to any particular course of study; they can take small steps in various directions, sampling as they choose. Typical cases for small steps thus involve a serious risk of unintended bad consequences because of a disproportion between the paucity or dearth of information and the magnitude of the decision; hence reversability is especially important. 
On the institutional side, consider lotteries for both jury and military service. The appeal of a lottery for jury service stems from the relatively low costs of operating the system and the belief that any alternative device for allocation would produce more mistakes, because it would depend on a socially contentious judgment about who should be serving on juries, with possibly destructive results for the jury system itself. The key point is that the jury is supposed to be a cross-section of the community, and a random process seems to be the best way of serving that goal (as well as the fairest way of apportioning what many people regard as a social burden). In light of the purposes of the jury system, alternative allocation methods would be worse; consider stated willingness to serve, an individualized inquiry into grounds for excuse, or financial payments (either to serve or not to serve). For military service, related judgments are involved, in the form of a belief that any stated criteria for service might be morally suspect, and hence a belief that random outcomes produce less in the way of error.32 32 On ethical and political issues associated with lotteries in general, see Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-122 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993). B. Change, Unintended Consequences, and Reversibility 
Lotteries involve random processes; small steps do not. We have said that Anglo-American judges often proceed case-by-case, as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision and the consequences of error. In fact many legal cultures embed a kind of norm in favor of incremental movement. They do this partly because of the distinctive structure of adjudication and the limited information available to the judge: in any particular case, a judge will hear from the parties immediately affected, but little from others whose interests might be at stake. Hence there is a second-order decision in favor of small steps. 
Suppose, for example, that a court in a case involving a particular patient seeking a “right to die” finds that it has little information; if the court attempted to generate a rule that would cover all imaginable situations in which that right might be exercised, the case would take a very long time to decide. Perhaps the burdens of decision would be prohibitive. This might be so because of a sheer lack of information, or it might be because of the pressures imposed on a multimember court consisting of people who are unsure or in disagreement about a range of subjects. Such a court may have a great deal of difficulty in reaching closure on broad rules. Small steps are a natural result. 
When judges proceed by small steps, they do so precisely because they know that their rulings create precedents; they want to narrow the scope of future applications of their rulings given the various problems described above, most importantly the lack of sufficient information about future problems. A distinctive problem involves the possibility of too much information. A particular case may have a surplus of apparently relevant details, and perhaps future cases will lack one or more of the relevant features, and this will be the source of the concern with creating wide precedents. The existence of (inter alia) features X or Y in case A, missing in case B, makes it hazardous to generate a rule in case A that would govern case B. The narrow writing and reception of the Supreme Court’s decision in the celebrated Amish case, allowing an exemption of Amish children from mandatory public schooling, is an example. 
Small steps can also make special sense if circumstances are changing rapidly. Perhaps relevant facts and values will change in Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 28 such a way as to make a rule quickly anachronistic even if it is well suited to present conditions. Thus it is possible that any decision involving the application of the first amendment to new communications technologies, including the Internet, should be narrow, because a broad decision, rendered at this time, would be so likely to go wrong. On this view, a small step is best because of the likelihood that a broad rule would be mistaken when applied to cases not before the court. 
In an argument very much in this spirit, Joseph Raz has connected a kind of small step—the form usually produced by analogical reasoning—to the special problems created by one-shot interventions into complex systems.33 In Raz’ view, courts reason by analogy in order to prevent unintended side-effects from large disruptions. Similarly supportive of the small-step strategy, the German psychologist Dietrich Dorner has done some illuminating computer experiments designed to see whether people can engage in successful social engineering.34 Participants are asked to solve problems faced by the inhabitants of some region of the world. Through the magic of the computer, many policy initiatives are available to solve the relevant problems (improved care of cattle, childhood immunization, drilling more wells). But most of the participants produce eventual calamities, because they do not see the complex, system-wide effects of particular interventions. Only the rare participant is able to see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions on the system. The successful participants are alert to this risk and take small, reversible steps, allowing planning to occur over time. Hence Dorner, along with others focussing on the problems created by interventions into systems,35 argues in favor of small steps. Judges face similar problems, and incremental decisions are a good way of responding to the particular problem of bounded rationality created by ignorance of possible adverse effects. 
From these points we can see that small steps may be better than rules or than delegation. Often an institution lacks the 33 Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985). 34 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure (1994). 35 See James Scott, Seeing Like a State (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1998). information to generate a clear path for the future; often no appropriate delegate has that information. If circumstances are changing rapidly, any rule or presumption might be confounded by subsequent developments. What is especially important is that movement in any particular direction should be reversible if problems arise. On the other hand, a small steps approach embodies a kind of big (if temporary) decision in favor of the status quo; a court that tries to handle a problem of discrimination incrementally may allow unjust practices to continue, and so too with a state that is trying to alleviate the problem of joblessness in poor areas. A small steps approach might also undermine planning and fail to provide advance notice of the content of law or policy. Thus it cannot be said that a small steps approach is, in the abstract, a rational approach to bounded rationality36; whether it is a (fully optimal) response to bounded rationality, or a (suboptimal) reflection of bounded rationality, depends on the context. 
The analysis is similar outside of the governmental setting. Agents might take small steps because they lack the information that would enable them to generate a rule or presumption, or because the decision they face is unique and not likely to be repeated, so that there is no reason for a rule or a presumption. Or small steps may follow from the likelihood of change over time, from the fact that a large decision might have unintended consequences, or from the wish to avoid or at least to defer the responsibility for large-scale change. 36 In one form or other, small steps are favored in Scott, supra note; Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning 3-15 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949); Alexander Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962). These discussions fail, however, to notice that there are circumstances in which a form of High-Low is preferable, as where advanced planning is necessary; consider the areas of property and contract law, where a high degree of certainty is extremely important. Thus those who favor Low-Low tend to share the problem with those who favor High-Low, see Scalia, supra note; they appear not to see that the virtues and vices of any particular second-order strategy depend on context and on the competence of relevant institutions, and cannot rest on a priori arguments. 
d i h e , r ; p e iev in ro o t c r t r a r p g e r 
o ag f d o f d o o o t e l g ib n m s i o 
id h s o c w p e ; la y r adn liit i e te n op t g P robp ifra rse ih w d o gh eh lee t 2 e l b a O ce ch om d c i m b d t ro is te e u f n a sa o o e T t t s fo sce a r e l 
d ra en f ryo ;se to fe u 
q t u n le e 
s o b n a i m v s a o 
r n c m r e o y o av sa ed s s 
e t / e ce le r a s b ;s ip i 
n a op ree i f n e i n d m a l e e p t l fo reag lit 
p ty g u l g m u a ; c i h ts g s f if i n w ; i s p d to co an s 
s c ;y e l t h n u c te eq low rev ithw iun sc e 
n n o la li r i e 
b vo irs n a c ir ; e 
aw igb m l -A on ;ise la sn o n io l m re 
so is g n m tt r 
c A co lo ep ed l la su : w sm iro s lo , . ic te e 2 p s h 
i t r e n a e r cp ak t l i i u an to io s i t n n f a fo iis e c 
u p y m f c o o fro liit ed 
b e r d a t u e n reb ed ta e in a s n m /s u n iv n o t r is t 
i e i e n ;n e s ce ex 
n e n e t o i d ra s if e i e c n n h e ep ce o e s d r d c g s e k a t s i m g n i t a r e n e 
; fg ro sn ce o se ito la f f 
od seu ce i o r n d g p o s u o r m in ;ty ign e 
i n fun cen ro lp 
m an o o ifn se ts s s n u t co iso ; i 
c i low ced lp fa a c e li a t ;s ; 
m law is ; h ig ,s h le s . u r o 3 r p r , s n o i t p s 
e m n u it e u l fo a r ; ed la i m cvo i d o sep leg irc re ad ep n a c n o i t u t i t isn ise r w o r 
e cy th n o e g o a d l a ; n ty i 
o i t r u a t l i u t p s o in upn ro ; l s a i s y i u e d s 
p l v a i r 
d l ap in co a l n o i s i 
g d in n e a b c y r p ed lla cu u sse tcu in d 
n l 
o e a t s (eunn trssea tsaan iiso )d 
n o o le ce oo n c p d g ; s r reyn trcea la ts 
a ion en H h t in s a e f t r e am sy vo c J d g 
un ren c c m h g i h h g i h 0 3 
A. Second-Order Strategies 
The discussion is summarized in Table 2. Recall that the terms “low” and “high” refer to the overall costs of the decision, which are not necessarily borne by the same agent: with Low-High the costs are split between delegator and delegate; with High-Low they may be split between an institution (which makes the rules, say) and an agent (who follows the rules). 
There are two principal conclusions. The first is that no second-order strategy can reasonably be preferred in the abstract. The second is that it is possible to identify the settings in which one or another is likely to make sense, and also the factors that argue in favor of, or against, any particular approach. 
B. Do People Actually Make Second-Order Decisions? Should They? 
There remains an important underlying issue: do people, or institutions, actually make a self-conscious decision about which second-order strategy to favor, given the menu of possibilities? 
Sometimes this is indeed the case. A legislature may, for example, deliberate and decide to delegate rather than to generate rules; a court may choose, self-consciously, to proceed incrementally; having rejected the alternatives, a President may recommend a lottery system rather than other alternatives for admitting certain aliens to the country. An institution or a person may well make an all-things-considered decision in favor of one or another secondorder strategy. 
Sometimes, however, a rapid assessment of the situation takes place, rather than a full or deliberative weighing of alternative courses of action. This is often the case in private decisions, where judgments often seem immediate. Indeed, second-order decisions might be too costly if they were a product of an optimizing strategy; so taken, they would present many of the problems of first-order decisions. As in the case of first-order decisions, it sometimes makes sense to proceed with what seems best, rather than to maximize in any systematic fashion, simply because the former way of proceeding is easier (and thus may maximize once we consider decision costs of various kinds). For both individuals and institutions, the salient features of the context usually suggest a particular kind of second 
order strategy; there is no reason to think long and hard about the second-order decision. 
These are intended as descriptive points about the operation of practical reason. But there is a normative issue here as well, for people’s second-order decisions often go wrong. People tend to make mistakes when they choose strategies a priori; and often they would do better to be self-conscious and reflective about the diverse possibilities. For example, legal formalists, most prominently Justice Antonin Scalia, argue for a High-Low strategy, but they do so without engaging the pragmatic and empirical issues at stake, and without showing that this strategy is preferable to the realistic second-order alternatives.37 
The same can be said about those who argue that rules can promote consequentialism indirectly38 and also those who favor incrementalism, or small steps, in political or legal reasoning.39 There are many ways of handling decisional burdens, and others may be better. 
Pathologically rigid rules can be a serious problem for law and policy; the Sentencing Guidelines are often criticized on this ground, and whether or not the criticism is just, pathological rigidity is a problem for societies as well as individuals. Sometimes delegation is a most unfortunate route to travel. 
At the political level, and occasionally at the individual level too, it would be much better to be more explicit and self-conscious about the various alternatives, so as to ensure that societies and institutions do not find themselves making bad second-order decisions, or choosing a second-order strategy without a sense of the candidates. We have attempted to systematize the underlying considerations here. 37 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation pp. 5-24. Schauer sees that the choice of formalism must be largely based on empirical considerations, but he does not identify alternative second-order possibilities or show how they might be compared to rule-bound law. 38 See Johnson. Nothing said here shows that Johnson is wrong; it shows only that a full defense of using rules as a way of promoting consequentialist goals would have to grapple with various second-order alternatives (such as presumptions or standards). 39 See Edward Levi, supra note, at 3-7; Lindblom, supra note. C. Rationality and Bounded Rationality 
Second-order decisions are often a response to a particular source of bounded rationality: limited information. As we have emphasized, second-order strategies are potentially optimal solutions to the problems posed by unanticipated side-effects and the difficulty of obtaining knowledge about the future. Or they may respond to an institution’s awareness that it is prone to use unreliable heuristic devices when a decision must be made on the spot. In addition, second-order strategies may be a response to motivational rather than cognitive problems; people try, for example, to counteract their own tendencies toward impulsiveness, myopia, and unrealistic optimism.40 In these ways second-order decisions can be seen as rational responses by rational actors making those decisions with full awareness of the costs of obtaining information and of their own propensities for error. 
But of course bounded rationality can affect second-order decisions as well. When rational actors make second-order decisions to overcome their own bounded rationality, these decisions may themselves be made badly, as a result of informational and motivational problems. A lack of information may press people and institutions in the direction of suboptimal second-order strategies; an inadequately informed court, for example, may choose small steps even though rules would be better. We suspect that the availability heuristic—by which people make judgments by focusing on similar cases that come readily to mind—underlies some erroneous judgments about appropriate second-order strategies.41 Bad secondorder decisions can also be a result of motivational problems. An impulsive or myopic agent or institution may fail to see the extent to which rules will be confounded by subsequent developments; an unrealistically optimistic agent or institution may overestimate its 40 See Neil Weinstein, “Unrealistic Optimism About Susceptibility to Health Problems,” J. Behavioral Medicine 10 (1987): 481-512, for a general discussion. 41 Cf. Itzhak Gilboa and David Schmeidler, “Case-Based Decision Theory,” Q. J. Econ. 110 (1995) 605-34; Daniel Kahneman and Don Lovallo, Timid Choices and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, Mgmt. Sci. 39 (1993): 17-35. 
capacity to make optimal small steps. Thus people may choose second-order strategies that badly disserve their own goals, as, for example, when people rely on heuristic devices that produce mistakes.42 D. Conclusion 
Ordinary people and official institutions are often reluctant to make on-the-spot decisions; they respond with one or another second-order strategy. The diverse candidates raise separable ethical and political problems. Some such strategies involve high initial burdens but generate a relatively simple, low-burden mechanism for deciding subsequent cases. These strategies, generally taking the form of rules or presumptions, are best when the anticipated decisions are numerous and repetitive and when advance notice and planning are important. 
Other strategies involve both light initial burdens and light burdens at the time of making the ultimate decision. These approaches work well when a degree of randomization is appealing on normative grounds (perhaps because choices are otherwise in equipoise, or because no one should or will take responsibility for deliberate decision), or when a first-order decision is simply too difficult to make (because of the cognitive or emotional burdens involved in the choice) or includes too many imponderables and a risk of large unintended consequences. A key point in favor of small steps involves reversibility. 
Still other strategies involve low initial burdens but high, exported burdens at the time of decision, as when a delegation is made to another person or institution, or (in a metaphor) to one’s future self. Delegations take many different forms, with more or less control retained by the person or institution making the delegation. Strategies of delegation make sense when a delegate is available who has relevant expertise (perhaps because he is a specialist) or is otherwise trustworthy (perhaps because he does not suffer from bias or some other motivational problem), or when there are special political, strategic, or other advantages to placing the responsibility for decision on some other person or institution. Delegations can 42 See Khong for suggestive examples. raise serious ethical or political issues and create problems of unfairness, as when delegates are burdened with tasks that they do not voluntarily assume, or would not assume under just conditions, and when the delegation is inconsistent with the social role of the delegator, such as a legislature or a court. Hence delegations can be troubling from the point of view of democracy or the separation of powers. 
The final set of cases involve high burdens both before and at the time of decision, as in certain fictional characters, and in highly dysfunctional governments. We have merely gestured in the direction of this strategy, which may make sense under extreme circumstances, but which generally can be considered best only on the assumption that bearing high overall burdens of decision is an affirmative good (perhaps for moral reasons) or even something to relish. This assumption might appear peculiar, but it undoubtedly helps explain some otherwise puzzling human behavior—behavior that often provides the motivation to consider the other, more promising second-order decisions discussed here. Forthcoming in Ethics. Published in the Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper Series with permission. 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
PUBLIC LAW AND LEGAL THEORY WORKING PAPER NO. 06 Standing for Animals 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
In the last decades, the protection of animals has become a pervasive goal of federal statutory law. Indeed, Congress has enacted more than fifty statutes designed to protect the well-being of animals.1 
Of these the most prominent is the Animal Welfare Act (AWA),2 which contains a wide range of safeguards against cruelty and mistreatment, and which creates an incipient bill of rights for animals.3 If vigorously enforced, the AWA, alongside other enactments, would prevent a wide range of abusive practices. As often, however, there is a large gap between statutory text and realworld implementation. Many people have criticized the national government’s enforcement efforts under these statutes, contending that the executive branch has violated the law by issuing weak and inadequate regulations, making the relevant statutes symbolic rather than real.4 These complaints raise a central and largely unexplored question,5 one that will inevitably increase in prominence over time: Under what circumstances will standing be available for those, * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Brooke May for superb research assistance, to Jill Hasday and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments, and to Martha Nussbaum for helpful discussions. 1 For an already dated overview, see Henry Cohen, Federal Animal Protection Statutes, 1 Animal Law 143 (1995). Of course human beings are animals too, and there is an oddity, and perhaps a pernicious one, in the linguistic convention of distinguishing between human beings and animals. See James Rachels, Created From Animals (1990). For simplicity I use the convention at several points here. 2 7 USC 2131 et seq, 3 See 7 USC 2131 et seq. I use the word “incipient” because many qualifications are necessary to the view that the AWA creates a genuine animals’ bill of rights. See Gary Francione, Animals, Property, and the Law 185-248 (1995), for an extended and highly critical discussion. 4 See, e.g., Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Espy, 23 F.3d 496 (DC Cir 1994); Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426 (DC Cir 1998). 5 Valuable discussion can be found in Francione, supra note, at 65-89. human and non-human, who seek to challenge unlawful mistreatment of animals?6 
Current doctrine is exceptionally confusing on this question.7 One of my chief goals here is to dispel some of the confusion, in a way that, I hope, will illuminate the law of standing and the question of “animal rights” as a whole. My principal conclusion is that human beings, invoking their own injuries as a predicate for the action, are entitled to sue to protect the interests of animals in a variety of settings. More particularly, three categories of persons—those deprived of legally required information, those facing “aesthetic” injury, and those suffering competitively—have standing to protect the legal interests of animals. 
This conclusion is part of a more general one: the question of standing is mostly for legislative resolution, and both people and animals have standing to protect animals to the extent that Congress has said that they have standing. Under existing law, this means (in my view unfortunately) that animals lack standing to sue in their own right, for Congress has restricted standing to “persons.” But it also means that Congress can accord standing to animals if it chooses to do so. 
As we will see, these conclusions about animal and human standing raise a number of questions about existing law and suggests some promising directions for rethinking it, not only in the context of standing to protect animals but more generally. In the process of discussing the standing question, I also offer a few notes on the much-debated topic of animal rights.8 My plea here is for disaggregation. From the legal point of view, there is nothing at all 6 A famous article urged that standing should be accorded to non-human objects. See Christopher Stone, Should Trees Have Standing?, 45 S. Cal. L. Rev. 450 (1972). The principal difference between that article and this one has to do with the conception of the law of standing. In my view, the standing question is for legislative resolution. The claim that people have standing to protect the rights of animals, and that animals may be given standing to have suit brought on their behalf in their own name, is a claim about the nature of legislative power. 7 See, e.g., Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Glickman, 154 F.2 426 (DC Cir. 1998) (7-4 division on en banc court); Japan Whaling Association v. American Cetacean Society, 478 US 221 (1986). 8 See Peter Singer, Animal Liberation (1976); Gary Francione, Animals, Property, and the Law (1995). new or unfamiliar in the idea of “animal rights”; on the contrary, it is entirely clear that animals have legal rights, at least of a certain kind.9 An investigation of the question of standing helps show that the real issues involve problems of enforcement and scope. Much illumination can be gained by dividing the question of “animal rights” into its component parts. For those who believe (as I do) that any general attack on the notion of “animal rights” is implausible,10 and who notice that a growing commitment to animal welfare is an unmistakable part of modern public law, the strategy of disaggregation seems best suited toward producing both analytical clarity and future progress. To this end I offer a recommendation that is modest but that would do considerable good; animal welfare statutes should be amended to grant a private cause of action against those who violate them, so as to allow private claimants to supplement agency enforcement efforts. 
Without much fanfare or advance foresight, American law has come to recognize a wide array of protections for animals.11 Indeed, it would not be too much to say that federal and state law now guarantee a set of “animal rights.”12 Some people believe that while 9 Thus there is disagreement here with the sharp distinction drawn in Gary Francione, Animals, Property, and the Law (1998), between “animal rights” and “animal welfare.” Statutes protecting animal welfare protect a form of animal rights, and there is nothing in the notion of “rights” or “welfare” that calls for much, or little, protection of the relevant interests. Rights can be defeasible, and an interest in “welfare” may create a strong presumption. Francione convincingly shows, however, that the interests of animals are given remarkably and indefensibly little weight under many state and federal laws. 10 See James Rachels, Created From Animals:The Moral Implications of Darwinism (1990), for general discussion. 11 Remarkably little academic attention has been given to this development. Relevant discussion can be found in Dichter, Legal Definitions of Cruelty and Animal Rights, 7 BC Envtl. Aff. L. Rev. 147 (1978); Susan Godkin, The Evolution of Animal Rights, 18 Colum. Human Rights L. Rev. 259 (1987). 12 American law thus rejects Kant’s view that animals are mere things and that any duties owed to them really involve duties owed to people. “But so far as animals are concerned we have no direct duties. Animals . . . are there merely as means to an end. That end is man.” The reason to avoid cruelty to animals is that “He who animals lack rights, human beings have duties to them.13 It is not clear what turns on this distinction, a point to which I will return. But it is clear that as a matter of positive law, animals have rights in the same sense that people have rights, at least under those statutes that are enforceable only by public officials.14 
The common law contained a good deal of uncertainty about cruelty to animals. Courts generally suggested that such cruelty was not unlawful unless it worked an injury to the owner, who was the is cruel to animals becomes hard also in his dealings with man.” Immanuel Kant, Lectures on Ethics 239-40. 13 Thus Kant believed that “indirect duties” were due to animals only for the sake of human beings; see id. See also John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 512 (1971), suggesting, in a qualified way, that animals are not due justice but are due consideration: “While I have no maintained that the capacity for a sense of justice is necessary in order to be owed the duties of justice, it does seem that we are not required to give strict justice anyway to creatures lacking this capacity. But it does not follow that there are no requirements at all in regard to them . . . Certainly it is wrong to be cruel to animals and the destruction of a whole species can be a great evil. The capacity for feelings for pleasure and pain and for the forms of life of which animals are capable clearly impose duties of compassion and humanity in their case. I shall not attempt to explain these considered beliefs. They are outside the scope of the theory of justice . . . .” This is a brief passage, almost an aside, and it is not clear what Rawls means by “strict justice.” An obvious problem is why “the” theory of justice should find the question of fairness to animals outside of its scope. See also the emphasis on “moral persons,” with among other things an ability to have a sense of justice, as those to whom “equal justice” is owed, id. at 505, a suggestion that raises obvious problems for, eg, the mentally retarded. My suspicion, though I cannot establish the point here, is that the evident problems with entirely excluding animals from the topic of justice raises difficulties for contractarian theories in general. 14 This is true, for example, of many criminal and regulatory statutes that do not create private rights of action. Of course the words “at least” are important; duties created by the criminal law are generally accompanied by parallel common law rights, so that people ordinarily have rights to protect themselves in the event that the prosecutor fails to act. But this is not always the case; under the Federal Trade Commission Act, to take one of many examples, there is no private right o action. It is important here to avoid purely semantic disagreements; the only point is that animals have rights in the same sense that people have many rights that they cannot enforce on their own. essential rights holder15; but they sometimes concluded that cruelty could count as a common law misdemeanor.16 The common law has of course been superseded by state statutes, and every state now purports to provide significant safeguards against cruelty or mistreatment of animals. Hence it is now said, in many jurisdictions, that “animals have rights, which, like those of human beings, are to be protected.”17 The relevant provisions are broadly phrased and seem to offer significant safeguards; but in practice, enforcement activity is sporadic and unreliable.18 
What is perhaps most striking is that the relevant statutes go well beyond beating, injuring, and the like, and impose affirmative duties on people with animals in their care. Omissions may count as cruelty; so too for overworking or underfeeding animals, or for depriving them of adequate protection.19 Owners must offer adequate sustenance and shelter.20 As a matter of statutory text, defenses and excuses are quite limited. Protection of life or property is a defense against a charge of unlawful killing of an animal, but there must be a reasonable proportion between the danger presented and the action taken21; and anger, intoxication, and impulse provide neither defense nor excuse.22 
New York contains a representative set of provisions. Anyone who has impounded or confined an animal is obliged to provide good air, water, shelter, and food.23 Criminal penalties are imposed on anyone who transports an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner, 15 Allen v. Commonwealth, 77 Pa. Super. 244 (1921); McCausland v. People, 145 P 685 (1914); Waters v. People, 46 P 112 (1896). 16 Stage Horse Cases, 15 Abb Pr. N.S. 51; Ross’s Case, 3 City Hall Rec. 191. 17 State v. Karstendiek, 22 So 845 (1897); Hodge v. State,79 Tenn. 528 (1883). 18 See Francione, supra, at 119-133. 19 See 3A Corpus Juris Secondum 101, p. 586. 20 State v, Gorsoeclose, 171 P2d 863, 67 Idaho 71(1946); Ames v. Ohio, 11 Ohio NPNS 385; State v. Goodall, 175 P 857; 90 Or. 485. 21 See Grizzle v. State, 707 P2d 1210 (1985); Rushin v., State, 267 SE2d 473 (Ct. App. Ga. 1980); State v. Libby, 556 A.2d 1099 (1989). On the relation between statutes preventing cruelty to animals and medical or scientific experimentation, see 42 ALR4th 860. 22 3A Corpus Juris Secundum 106, pp. 590-91. 23 NY Agri & Mkts 356. or in such a way as to subject it to torture or suffering, conditions that can come about through neglect.24 People who transport an animal on railroads or cars are required to allow the animal out for rest, feeding, and water every five hours.25 Those who abandon an animal, including a pet, face criminal penalties.26 A separate provision forbids people from torturing, beating, maiming, or killing any animal, and also requires people to provide adequate food and drink.27 Indeed it is generally a crime not to provide necessary sustenance, food, water, shelter, and protection from severe weather.28 New York, like most states, forbids overworking an animal, or using it for work when it is not physically fit.29 Compare in this regard the unusually protective California statute, which imposes criminal liability on negligent as well as intentional overworking, overdriving, or torturing of animals.30 “Torture” is defined not in its ordinary language sense, but to include any act or omission “whereby unnecessary or unjustified physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted.”31 
There are three noteworthy points about state prohibitions on cruelty to animals. First, enforcement can occur only through public prosecution; the state has a monopoly on implementation.32 The point is important because prosecution occurs only in a subset of the most egregious cases; there is a great deal of difference between what these statutes ban and what in practice is permitted to occur.33 Private enforcement would obviously make a great deal of difference.34 Second, duties to animals, and the correlative rights of animals, exist largely by virtue of a particular relationship voluntarily assumed by human beings—that of owner, transporter, driver, and so forth. There are no obligations of good samaritanship, for example, or of affirmative obligations to animals not within one’s domain or care. In these ways the network of duties to animals tracks the corresponding network for duties to human beings, many of which are enforced publicly rather than privately, and which generally do not include obligations of good samaritanship. Third, state law protections do not apply to the use of animals for medical or scientific purposes, or for use as food, or for cruelty in connection with the production of animals as food; here cruel and abusive practices are generally unregulated at the state level.35 
It would be an overstatement to say that the relevant provisions are entirely symbolic. But because they are vulnerable to prosecutorial decisions, and because few prosecutors have them a high priority, they have a largely expressive dimension. They say much more than they do. They express an aspiration, but one that is routinely violated in practice, and violated without reprisal. 
In the last several decades, a remarkable number of federal statutes have been enacted to protect species, animals, and animal welfare. Over fifty such statutes are now in place, and the number is growing.36 The most famous of these statutes is the Endangered Species Act,37 designed to protect against extinction of threatened or endangered species, enforced publicly rather than privately, and raising a number of knotty standing problems.38 A great deal of 34 This is an evident motivation for the recommendation in Steven M. Wise, Recovery of Common Law Damages for Emotional Distress, Loss of Society, and Loss of Companionship for the Wrongful Death of A Companion Animal, 4 Animal Law 33 (1998). 35 See Francione, supra note. 36 See Cohen, supra note. 37 16 USC 1531 38 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 US 555 (1992). litigation has involved the meaning of the Marine Mammal Protection Act,39 which imposes a selective moratorium on the taking and importation of marine mammals and marine mammal products.40 A particular provision outlaws commercial whaling.41 It also requires the Secretary of the Interior to issue regulations to protect marine mammals from unlawful activity.42 
Federal law contains a number of more specialized provisions. An important statute is specifically designed to protect horses from cruel treatment and in particular from the exploitation of injured horses.43 The key statute involving game parks provides, “no person shall kill any game in said park except under an order from the Secretary of the Interior for the protection of persons or to protect or prevent the extermination of other animals or birds."44 Another statute is designed to protect migratory bird habitat and also to protect habitat for mammals, including bears, moose, and wolves.45 Federal law imposes a moratorium on the importation of raw and worked ivory, as a way of helping to protect the African elephant.46 It is a federal crime to shoot birds, fish, or mammals from an aircraft, or to use an aircraft to harass birds, fish, or animals.47 It is also a federal crime to kill or harass wild horses or burros48 and to possess, sell, buy, or transport any bald or golden eagle, alive or dead.49 The Secretary of Agriculture is charged with ensuring that slaughtering of animals must be “humane,” and Congress lists two methods that are designed to ensure “rapid and effective” killing.50 39 16 USC 1372(a)(2)(A). 40 16 USC 1371 et seq, 41 16 USC 1372(f). 42 16 USC 1373 
In terms of animal protection, however, by far the most important measure is the Animal Welfare Act, which imposes, on those who deal in or with animals, a wide range of negative constraints and affirmative duties.51 The Act begins with an elaborate statement of purposes, emphasizing the need for “humane care and treatment” in exhibition of animals, transportation of animals, and “use” of animals “as pets.”52 There is a flat ban on commercial ventures in which animals are supposed to fight.53 Licenses are required for all those who sell animals for exhibition or for “use” as a pet.54 The Secretary is also asked to issue “humane standards” with respect to “the purchase, handling, or sale of animals” by “dealers, research facilities, and exhibitors at auction sales.”55 
The key provision of the statute requires the Secretary to issue “standards to govern the humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals by dealers, research facilities, and exhibitors.”56 These are supposed to include “minimum requirements” governing “handling, housing, feeding, watering, sanitation, ventilation, shelter from extremes of weather and temperatures, adequate veterinary care.”57 A separate provision requires minimum requirements for “exercise of dogs”58 and “for a physical environment adequate to promote the psychological wellbeing of primates.”59 Animals in research facilities must be protected in addition through requirements “to ensure that animal pain and distress are minimized.”60 In “any practice which could cause pain to animals,” a veterinarian must be consulted in planning, and tranquilizers, analgesics, and anesthetics must be used.61 An independent provision requires compliance by the national government with the Secretary’s standards.62 Breeders of dogs and cats must allow inspections and may not transport underage dogs.63 The Act also contains a set of recordkeeping requirements, designed to ensure that dealers, exhibitors, research facilities, and handlers provide records, evidently designed to allow federal monitoring of the treatment of animals.64 
Most state statutes do some of the work of the Animal Welfare Act by forbidding cruelty and requiring adequate nutrition and shelter. But the Act goes beyond state law by imposing a federal presence and also by imposing numerous requirements not contained in state law. These include requirements of exercise for dogs, minimizing pain and distress to animals used in research, adequate veterinary care in general, recordkeeping, and a physical environment that will promote the psychological well-being of primates. 
By virtue of its scope, the Animal Welfare Act promises an ambitious set of safeguards against cruel or injurious practices; taken together with other federal statutes, above all the Marine Mammal Protection Act, it suggests that national law is committed to something not very different from a bill of rights for animals.65 But here too there is a question whether statutory law is not largely expressive and symbolic, a statement of good intentions, delivering far more on paper than in the world.66 Many people have complained that these statutes have been indifferently or even unlawfully enforced, not least via regulations that do far less than the statute requires.67 The Departure of Agriculture has hardly been eager to enforce the AWA, and neither citizens nor animals have 61 7 USC 2143(a)(3)(C)(i); 7 USC 2143(a)(3)(C)(ii) 62 7 USC 2143. 63 Cox v. US Dept of Agriculture, 925 F.2d 1102 (8th Cir. 1991). 64 7 USC 2140; 7 USC 2142. 65 A notable exception involves animals raised for use as food or clothing. 66 See Francione, supra, at 185-248. been given an express cause of action against facilities that are in violation.68 An important question therefore becomes: Who has standing to bring suit to require compliance with law governing animal welfare? 
Under current doctrine, Article III is understood to require plaintiffs to show: (1) an injury in fact that (2) is a result of the action of the defendant and that (3) would be redressed by a decree on the plaintiff’s behalf.69 There are also “prudential” requirements, that is, standing rules that can be eliminated if Congress does so expressly. The most important of these require (1) that the injury be “arguably within the zone of interests” protected or regulated by the statute in action70 and (2) that the injury not be widely generalized, that is, it must not be shared by all or most citizens.71 Under what circumstances do these requirements permit or bar an action brought to prevent unlawful injury done to an animal? The most general question is when human beings may invoke their own “injuries in fact” to challenge harms done to animals. I suggest here that three kinds of injuries are relevant: deprivation of information, competitive injury, and aesthetic harm. My major interest here is in unpacking the implications of current standing doctrine in this unusual context; I deal below with further complexities. 68 See IPPL v. IBR, 799 F.2d 934 (4th Cir 1986). 69 See, e.g., Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 US 555 (1992); FEC v. Akins, 118 S Ct 1777 (1998). 70 See Clarke v. SIA, 479 US 388 (1987); Data Processing v. Camp, 397 US 150 (1970); National Credit Union Admin. v. First National Bank 118 S Ct 927 (1998). 71 See FEC v. Akins, 118 S Ct 1777 (1998). There the Court held that Congress could give standing to “any person” to require disclosure of information about an alleged “political committee.” 
It is now established that Congress can confer on citizens—even on citizens as a whole—a right to obtain information.72 It is also established that Congress can give citizens—even all citizens—a right to bring suit to vindicate that interest.73 If Congress says that people have a right to information of a certain kind, and if that information is denied, Congress is permitted to say that the deprivation of information counts as an “injury in fact” for which suit may be brought. 
These points suggest the first route by which people might have standing to protect the rights of animals. Suppose, for example, that a statute obliges laboratories and zoos to provide to the government, or even the public at large, information about their treatment of animals within their care. Suppose that it is urged that under the government’s legally insufficient regulations, far less information is forthcoming than would be available under a legally sufficient regulation. If Congress has granted standing to “any person” to contest violations of this duty of disclosure, there should be no constitutional obstacle to the suit; The deprivation of the requisite information counts as the “injury in fact.” 
The “if” in the preceding sentence is an extremely important qualification, for Congress has not given citizens standing to seek information that bears on animal welfare.74 Neither the Animal Welfare Act nor the Marine Mammal Protection Act contains any such grant. When Congress has not spoken clearly, plaintiffs must therefore rely on the Administrative Procedure Act, which requires them to show as well (a) that their injury is arguably within the zone of interests protected or regulated by the statute and (b) that their injury is not too “widely generalized.” Thus, for example, if a citizen is unable to distinguish himself from any other citizen complains of 72 See FEC v. Akins, 118 S Ct 1777 (1998). For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Informational Standing and Informational Regulation: Akins and Beyond, 147 U Pa L Rev 613 (1999). 73 Id. 74 The only exception is the Endangered Species Act, which does give standing to “any person,” but not to receive information. Of course the opportunity to see a member of an endangered species may provide information, but that is a different matter. See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, supra. unlawful deprivation of information involving treatment of animals, his injury will probably be held too widely generalized to be cognizable.75 And in some cases, the plaintiffs’ interests might be deemed too far afield of the interests protected or regulated by the statute. 
Consider in the latter regard Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Espy.76 There the Animal Legal Defense Fund and the Humane Society of the United States challenged what they saw as an unduly narrow definition of “animal” for purposes of the Animal Welfare Act, a definition that would exclude birds, rats, and mice from the category “animal.” The plaintiffs claimed injury from the fact that the narrow definition of animal, which would undermine “their attempts to gather and disseminate information on laboratory conditions for those animals.”77 With a broader definition, laboratories would be required to provide more information about their treatment of animals, and the plaintiffs contended that they would use that information in “public education and rulemaking proceedings.”78 The narrow definition of “animal” would also make it harder for plaintiffs to educate the laboratories about the “humane treatment of birds, rats, and mice.”79 
It is clear that the plaintiffs would have had standing if Congress had expressly said that they have standing. But under the APA, the court held otherwise. Its central claim was that the informational injury did not fall within the zone of interests of the statute. The Animal Defense Fund was not attempting to protect its members’ own legal rights, but “simply to educate all those who desire to promote the statute’s substantive purpose.”80 Informational standing would require not merely a “general corporate purpose to promote the interests to which the statute is addressed” but also “a congressional intent to benefit the organization” or some evidence that the organization is “a peculiarly suitable challenger of 75 See Akins, 118 S Ct at 1791. 76 23 F.3d 496 (DC Cir 1994). 77 23 F.3d at 501. 78 Id. 79 Id. 80 23 F.3d at 503. administrative neglect.”81 In this regard the court emphasized that the Animal Welfare Act creates an oversight committee consisting of private citizens designed to ensure compliance with the Act. Thus “the organizations are not the intended representatives of the public interest in animal welfare.”82 
The general approach suggested in Espy is quite sound; sometimes those who invoke rights under a statute protected animal welfare will not be within the statutory zone of interests. But the particular holding is quite doubtful. As the Supreme Court has made clear, the zone of interests test is not meant to be demanding,83 and if any group is within the zone of interests of the Act, members of the Animal Legal Defense Fund count as such. The strongest argument for the court’s conclusion would be that the existence of the oversight committee should be taken to negate standing for other private organizations concerned about inadequate enforcement.84 But this is a fragile argument. It would be at least as plausible to say that private lawsuits do not displace but complement the work of the oversight committee. For present purposes what matters is less the particular evaluation than the general suggestion that for actions brought under the APA, those who complain of a deprivation of information may suffer injury in fact but fall outside the zone of statutorily protected interests. 
It has become a platitude to suggest that many apparently public-spirited statutes are enacted, or take the form they do, because of the competitive benefits they provide to individuals or companies with self-interested states in the outcome.85 If 81 23 F.3d at 503, quoting Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 274 U.S. App. D.C. 44, 861 F.2d 277, 283 (D.C. Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 490 U.S. 1106, 104 L. Ed. 2d 1020, 109 S. Ct. 3157 (1989). 82 23 F.3d at 503. 83 See Clarke, supra; National Credit Association Admin., supra. 84 See Block v. Community Nutrition Inst., 467 US 340 (1984) (holding that creation of specific standing for some negated standing for others not specifically granted standing). 85 For the classic demonstration in the context of environmental law, see Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air (1981). government enforces such statutes inadequately, competitors might be injured “in fact.” The Supreme Court has been quite willing to allow competitors to challenge unlawful governmental action adverse to their interests.86 For example, the Court has allowed a set of individual banks, and also the American Bankers Association, to challenge agency action allowing credit unions to create multiple unrelated employer groups, an action that, in the banks’ view, would give credit unions an unlawful competitive advantage.87 
This line of cases raises legitimate (though not yet explored88) possibilities for human standing to protect animal welfare. Suppose, for example, that the statute at issue places certain companies at a competitive disadvantage, by forbidding those companies from engaging in practices that would help them in the marketplace. The proposed ban on the importation of products made with dog or cat fur is an example; the ban would plainly help companies that sell ordinary or synthetic fur coats. The existing cases on competitor standing suggest that such companies would be entitled to sue to create legally required enforcement action. Or suppose that a statute designed to protect animal welfare is obeyed by some commercial actors but not by others; suppose too that compliance is costly and hence that those who disobey are at a competitive advantage (as is highly likely). At first glance, a company that complies with the Animal Welfare Act (in testing pain-relief products, for example) would seem to have standing to challenge governmental practices that allow its competitors to do whatever they wish. 
There are two obstacles to competitor standing in this context. First, the competitor must be arguably within the zone of interests protected by the statute, and in some cases, it is easy to imagine an argument that the competitor’s interests are simply too far afield.89 Whether the argument is convincing depends on the particular 86 See Association of Sata Processing Service Org. v. Camp, 397 US 150 (1970); Clarke v. Securities Industry Assn., 479 US 388 (1987); National Credit Union Adm. V. First National Bank, 118 S Ct 927 (1998). 87 See National Credit Union, supra. 88 I have been unable to find any case in which a litigant invoked competitive injuries in challenging violations of a statute designed to protect animals. But as the text explains, there should be many opportunities. 89 See Air Courier Conf. v. American Postal Workers Union, 498 US 517 (1991). statute and on whether its background reveals a lack of concern with the plaintiff’s interests. The cases suggest that courts are quite willing to presume that statutes do show such an interest and hence that competitor standing is highly likely.90 Second, a competitor might have problems along the dimension of redressability. If, for example, a statute is applied to forbid the importation of coats lined with cat fur, how, exactly, will any particular competitor be helped? The cases suggest that competitor standing will be presumed in cases of this kind,91 but the issue raises a number of complexities. I return to this point below. 
In many cases, a plaintiff objecting to harm done to an animal seeks to claim an “aesthetic injury.” In a number of these cases, standing is available. But there is considerable conflict in the lower courts, and the outcomes seems quite unruly and even odd. Let us begin with some polar cases. 
researcher objects to the unlawful and inhumane treatment of animals in a certain facility; the facility may be a zoo, or it may be a laboratory engaged in experimentation. Suppose that the citizen, activist, or researcher attempts to bring suit. On the facts as stated, the outcome is clear: Standing is unavailable, for there is no injury in fact. The plaintiffs have only an ideological interest in the dispute, and they are attempting to enforce the law for its own sake. Under current law, there is universal agreement on this point.92 The key holding is Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, where the plaintiffs, including people interested in seeing and studying members of an endangered species, challenged a federal decision not to apply the Endangered Species Act extraterritorially. The Court held that the plaintiffs lacked standing because they had no plan to visit the members of the species; whether they had a concrete interest of this 90 See note supra. 91 See note supra. 92 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 US 555 (1992) (199); Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 US 727, 734 (1972); Humane Society v. Bobbitt, 46 F.3d 93 (DC Cir 1995) kind was, on a reasonable reading of the complaint, purely speculative. Thus they failed to show an injury in fact. Along the same lines, consider Animal Lovers Volunteer Association v. Weinberger,93 in which the plaintiffs sought to enjoin aerial shooting of goats on a military enclave for which public access is unavailable. The court held that standing was unavailable because the members did not visit the enclave and hence lacked any concrete injury. 
and researchers are attempting to see and study members of a particular species; that their desire to see and study the relevant animals is imminent and definite rather than conjectural; and that they challenge government action that, on their view, will reduce the supply of animals available for study. Under current law, it appears clear that the scientists and researchers have standing.94 In Defenders of Wildlife, the Court acknowledged as much, suggesting that if the plaintiffs had procured a plane ticket, the injury in fact requirement would be met.95 The injury in fact consists of the reduced likelihood that they will be able to engage in the relevant research. 
As we will see, questions might be raised about this analysis; but the law appears settled on the point. The key case is Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Soc.96 There several wildlife conservation groups, including members who were committed to watching and studying whales, objected to the failure of the Secretary of Commerce to certify that nationals in Japan were engaged in acts diminishing the effectiveness of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. The consequence of certification of Japan by the Secretary of Commerce would be to require the Secretary of State to reduce, by at least 50%, Japan’s fishing allocation within the United States.97 In a brief discussion in a footnote, the Court held that the wildlife organizations had standing. “They undoubtedly have alleged a sufficient ‘injury in fact’ in that the whale watching 93 765 F.2d 937 (9th Cir. 1985). 94 See Humane Society v. Babbitt, 46 F.3d 93, 97 (DC Cir. 1995). 95 Note, however, that a plurality of the Court doubted that the redressability requirements would be met even in that event. See below. 96 478 US 221 (1986). 97 Id. at 236. and studying of their members will be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting.”98 Indeed, the same conclusion applies not only to scientists and researchers, but also to everyone with an interest in observing members of the relevant species, even if the interest is “for purely esthetic purposes.”99 Thus in Animal Welfare Institute v. Kreps,100 the court held that members of the plaintiff organization had standing to challenge a waiver of the moratorium on marine mammal importation under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. The court referred to the ability of the members “to see, photograph, and enjoy Cape fur seals alive in their natural habitat under conditions in which the animals are not subject to excessive harvesting, inhumane treatment and slaughter of pups that are very young and still nursing.”101 
unendangered. The intermediate cases, and the difficult ones under current law, arise when there is no argument that the species will dwindle in number, but when a plaintiff alleges that the difficult conditions faced by the animal will cause, to the plaintiff, an injury in fact, defined in “aesthetic” terms. An obvious oddity here is that the plaintiff is likely to be concerned ethically or morally, not “aesthetically”—at least if the notion of the “aesthetic” is taken to refer to judgments, not ethical or moral in character, about beauty or ugliness. Nonetheless, it is the aesthetic injury that is the basis for the suit. 
The leading case is Animal Legal Defense Fund v. Glickman,102 in which an en banc panel for the D.C. Circuit was sharply divided. In 98 Id. at 231 n. 4. 99 Defenders of Wildlife, 504 US at 562-63. 100 561 F2d 1002 (DC Cir 1977). 101 Id. at 1007. See also Alaska Fish & Wildlife Fed/n v. Dunkle, 829 F.2d 933 (9th Cir. 1987), granting standing to those “who wish to hunt., photograph, observe, or carry out scientific studies on migratory birds,” in the context of a challenge to agreements that would permit the hunting of such birds in Alaska); Humane Society of the United States v. Hodel, 840 F.2d 45 (DC Cir 1988) (allowing society members who visited wildlife refuges standing to challenge ruling expanding hunting, on the ground that members would be subjected to environmental degradation, fewer numbers of animals, and corpses). 102 154 F.3d 426 (1998). that case, Marc Jurnove, an employee and volunteer for animal relief and rescue organizations, complained about what he believed to be the unlawful treatment of many animals at the Long Island Game Farm Park and Zoo. Jurnave contended that he had visited the park at least nine times between May 1995 and June 1996, and that the unlawful and inhumane treatment caused “injury to this aesthetic interest in observing animals living under humane conditions.”103 Thus Jurnave did not urge that he had special interest in the decent treatment of animals by virtue of his service as employee and volunteer for animal relief and rescue organizations. What mattered was that he was a visitor to the zoo. 
The court held that the aesthetic interest counted as an injury in fact and that Jurnove had “far more” than an abstract interest in law enforcement in its own sake.104 In the court’s view, Jurnove established an aesthetic interest that he had repeatedly attempted to promote by “visiting a particular animal exhibition to observe particular animals there.”105 Thus the court concluded that an injury in fact could be established “to a plaintiff’s interest in the quality and condition of an environmental area that he used.”106 The court also concluded that Jurnave could satisfy the two causation requirements. The current USDA regulations allegedly permitted the conditions of which Jurnave complained; thus the injury was due to the government’s action. Standing would be found for “plaintiffs who claimed aesthetic injury . . . based on the government’s failure to adequately regulate a third party.”107 In addition, the injury would be redressed by a decree in Jurnave’s favor, for “more stringent regulations . . . would necessarily alleviate [his] aesthetic injury during his planned, future trips to the Game Farm.”108 
The dissenting judges contended that none of the Article III requirements had been met. They contended that for those complaining of an injury to the aesthetic interest in observing animals, standing was limited to “diminution-of-the-species.”109 By itself aesthetic injury, “a matter of individual taste,” could not justify standing.110 “Aesthetic injury,” thus understood, was no different from the interest in law enforcement of its own sake. In their view, Jurnave’s claim would allow standing for those seeking to view “animals in any manner that does not comport with” the plaintiff’s “individual taste.” Thus “a sadist with an interest in seeing animals kept under inhumane conditions” would have standing to contest the inhumane treatment.111 In other words, this was a purely “subjective” interest, not a legally cognizable one. 
The dissenters urged as well that Jurnave could not show sufficient causation. The inhumane treatment was not caused by government; it was caused by the zoo. Thus the dissenters found it “frightening at a constitutional level” to suggest “that the government causes everything that it does not prevent.”112 A judicial order invalidating the regulation and directing the USDA to promulgate a new regulation would mandate new conditions at parks and zoos, but “it would require sheer speculation to presume that any enrichment devices specified in a future regulation would satisfy Jurnove’s aesthetic tastes.”113 Thus it was far too conjectural to connect the decree sought to protection of the interests invoked by Jurnove. 
If the goal is simply to describe current law, the majority view seems correct. In Japan Whaling, and in cases that follow it, courts did not say that an “injury in fact” would exist if and only if the action at issue would diminish the number of members of the species at issue. Nor is it clear why “diminution of the species” should count as an injury in fact and harms of the sort invoked by Jurnove should not. If the question is whether the plaintiff has suffered an “injury,” why are the two different? At the same time, there are serious problems in the majority’s analysis, a point to which I will return below. 109 Id. at 448. 110 Id. 
D. Evaluation fact” are not entitled to bring suit. But what is an “injury in fact”? In the environmental area, it is well known that people are willing to pay a certain amount, sometimes a very large amount, to ensure the “existence” of endangered species. The United States government takes account of “existence value” in calculating the costs and benefits of certain courses of action.114 If someone is willing to pay for the existence of some animal or set of animals, in what sense is that person not “injured” when the animal is killed? 
I do not mean to suggest that this question cannot be answered. Perhaps it could be said that someone who is willing to pay for some state of affairs wants that state of affairs to exist, but that the injury that comes from the disfavored state of affairs is not something that the legal system should, or constitutionally may, treat as an injury “in fact.”115 On the conventional understanding, this person is interested in law enforcement for its own sake, or in a state of affairs that he supports for merely ideological reasons. What is important for present purposes is to recognize that the legal system is denying that people suffer injury “in fact” for reasons that involve not “facts” but judgments about what facts, and what harms, ought to count for legal purposes. I will return to this point below. 
raises fresh questions about the nature of the “injury in fact” requirement. Many people wish to see animals; many people wish to see animals treated in certain ways. Do all such people always have 114 Ohio v. Department of Interior, 880 F.2d 432 (DC Cir 1989). 115 The “injury in fact” test has been criticized on grounds of this kind in many places, See, eg, William Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 Yale LJ 221, 229 (1988); David Currie, Misunderstanding Standing, 1981 Sup. Ct. Rev. 41, 42; Cass R. Sunstein, What’s Standing After Lujan, 91 Mich L Rev 163 (1992). See also International Primate Protection League v. Administrators of Tulane, 500 US 72, 77 (1991), where the Court says that “standing is gauged by the specific common law, statutory, or constitutional claims that a party presents,” and notes that standing “should be seen as a question of substantive law, answerable by reference to the statutory and constitutional provision whose protection is invoked.” Id. at 77. See also Lujan, supra, 504 US at 560, where the Court says that “the plaintiff must have suffered an ‘injury in fact’—an invasion of a legally protected interest.” standing, when their wishes are violated? One puzzle of the court’s holding is that it seems to offer an affirmative answer to this question. Another puzzle is that the real objection of the relevant plaintiffs seems ethical or moral, not aesthetic. And a final puzzle is the court’s suggestion that Jurnave, unlike a sadist, has standing because his interest is “legally protected”: “[N]ot every aesthetic interest can form the basis for a lawsuit; our injury-in-fact test protects only those aesthetic interests that have been ‘legally protected.’”116 Let us attempt to sort out these puzzles. 
Of course people do not have standing whenever they have an “aesthetic injury”—if this term refers to a subjective perception of disgust or distaste or offense. The requirement of “injury in fact” is designed to bar suits based on perceptions of this sort. People in California might well feel disgust or distaste or offense if they hear of racial discrimination, or a commercial development, on Long Island; but this does not give them standing. Under current law, it is necessary for them to be victims of discrimination, or materially affected by it. If their complaint involves commercial development, they must visit the relevant area. But this point raises a genuine problem about the conception of “injury in fact.” Surely the Animal Legal Defense Fund dissenters are correct to doubt whether a sadist would have standing to contest regulations that make conditions more humane for animals—even though there is no doubting that a case can be imagined in which the sadist suffers no less, “in fact,” than Jurnave. This point leaves the court’s decision open to the objection that it really depends on sympathy for Jurnave on the merits. But something else is at work. Recall that the court’s answer is that any injury in fact must be “legally cognizable”; it objects that the sadist would have no legally cognizable interest. To this the dissenting opinion, naturally enough, objects that the response confuses the “injury in fact” inquiry with an inquiry whether the plaintiff is arguably within the zone of protected interests. 
The objection is correct, but it does not count against the court’s decision. There is no way to inquire into “injury in fact” without making inquiries into law as well. People suffer injuries “in fact” every day, not least aesthetic injuries, and these injuries do not 116 154 F.3d at 434 n. 7. provide the basis for a suit in federal court.117 The question is whether some source of law recognizes those injuries. Before the enactment of the Animal Welfare Act, a person who complained of mistreatment of animals in a zoo would have no cognizable injury, no interest protected by law. After the enactment of the Animal Welfare Act, such mistreatment may well be unlawful, and someone who complains about it will count as a proper plaintiff if he can show a particular interest in its prevention. Jurnave certainly was able to show this interest. The case would be different if a plaintiff never visited the animals at all, not because such a nonvisitor would have no injury at all, but because Congress has not given members of the general public a right to bring suit to ensure law enforcement. A possible objection would be that Congress conferred no cause of action on Jurnave. But under the APA as it has come to be understood, someone who suffers a material injury is permitted to bring suit so long as he is within the zone of protected interests and stands apart from members of the general public. Of course Congress can deny standing to such people if it chooses to do so. 
The basic conclusions are therefore as follows. If Congress seeks to give standing to people to protect interests relating to the wellbeing of animals, it must comply with the injury-in-fact requirement. That requirement is met if a person has a nonspeculative plan to visit, study, or see the animals in question. Under the Administrative Procedure Act, the same conclusion follows, with two qualifications: Plaintiffs must show that they fall within the zone of interests protected by the Act, and they must also show that in terms of their interests and concerns, they are different from citizens generally. 
puzzles. On the authority of Japan Whaling, it seems generally agreed that those who fear the loss of an animal or of animals may bring suit to prevent governmental action that threatens to create the loss. But there is some tension in the cases, particularly because the Japan Whaling Court did not deal with the redressability problem, which, to get slightly ahead of the story, seems quite severe: How, 117 See Fletcher, supra note; Sunstein, supra note. exactly, would a decree in favor of the American Cetacean Society benefit its members? 
In Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, the Supreme Court did not merely hold that those without a particular plan to see or visit members of an endangered species lacked standing. A plurality also said that the redressability requirements were not met, for even if there was such a plan, the injury was not a result of the government’s action, nor would it be redressed by a decree on the plaintiffs’ behalf.118 For example, the United States was funding under 10% of the disputed development project; if the United States withdrew funding, would there be any effect on the species that the plaintiffs sought to preserve? “Respondents have provided nothing to indicate that the projects they have named will either be suspended, or do less harm to the listed species, if that fraction is eliminated.”119 In addition, the Court noted that the defendant was the Secretary of the Interior, not the relevant funding agencies. It was not clear that the funding agencies were funding, in law or in fact, by the decision of the Secretary, even if he concluded that the EDA applied extraterritorially. 
On this count, the plurality view in Defenders of Wildlife is in conspicuous tension with the majority view in both Akins and Japan Whaling, where it was also contended that a decree in the plaintiffs’ favor would not redress their injury. How do these cases bear on the redressability issue when human beings are attempting to guard against harms to animals? 
Consider first cases in which people seek to observe a species whose numbers will allegedly be reduced as a result of government action. This was the situation in Japan Whaling, where the Court stated, in its footnote discussion, that continued whale harvesting would impair the members’ interest in whale watching and studying. This was a statement about injury in fact; the Court did not discuss the redressability problems. Now it seems clear that if the action under review would result in the elimination or near-elimination of whales, the redressability requirements would be met. But there were several problems in the case. First, a decision to “certify” Japan would 118 505 US at 567-69. 119 505 US at 568. not necessarily result in compliance, by Japan, with international conventions with respect to the killing of whales. Perhaps the only consequence would be that Japan would face sanctions from the Secretary of State. Second, it is not at all clear that compliance with Japan would have any material consequences for any member of the American Cetacean Society. Even if fewer whales were killed, how, concretely, would that redress the members’ injury. In short, the difficulty here is that the reduced number of total whales will not necessarily cause any harm to the plaintiff; for this reason, there is a possible objection to standing on grounds of both redressability and injury in fact. 
These problems suggest that in order to know whether the causation requirements are met, it is necessary to know how to characterize the relevant injury. If the injury is characterized as an adverse effect on the desire to see a particular whales at particular times, the plaintiffs will have a very difficult time in establishing standing. But if the injury is characterized as an increased probability of one kind or another, the causation requirements are plainly met. Japan Whaling must be understood as holding that the decreased availability of whales is itself a legally cognizable injury, and also that the increased likelihood of decreased availability, brought about by the failure to certify Japan, counts as a legally cognizable injury. This holding, to be defensible as such, must depend on some kind of characterization of the injury that the underlying source of law is designed to prevent. 
Compare, for example, the Court’s decision that white construction contractors had standing to challenge a racial set aside program, even though they could not show that they would have received a contract without the program; the equal protection clause protects the opportunity to compete on equal terms, and that injury would be redressed by a decree in the plaintiffs’ favor.120 Similarly, the cases recognizing standing for competitors must be taken to have held that the redressability requirements were, not because any particular plaintiff would necessarily have benefited materially, but because the injury consists of the inability to compete on the terms prescribed by Congress. From these points we can see the weakness in the plurality’s view on the redressability issue in Defenders of Wildlife. The plaintiffs were complaining, not that particular species members would die, but that there was an increased risk of death as a result of the unlawful use of federal funds to sponsor the relevant program. If the plaintiffs were correct on the law—and that was an issue for the merits—the statute was designed to prevent American funds from being used in programs that might result in the death of members of an endangered species. The injury, so characterized, would have been redressed by a decree in their favor. 
Two conclusions follow. First, competitors who suffer “injury in fact” need not worry about the redressability requirements. Second, plaintiffs claiming “aesthetic” injuries will probably have standing if they are complaining about the government’s failure to issue or enforce regulations that, if issued or enforced, would eliminate those injuries. 
far has been that the standing question should be focussed on legislative instructions. Injuries qualify as such if a statute qualifies them as such; whether an injury is redressable depends on how it is characterized, and the best way to characterize it is to examine the relevant source of law. But all this does raise a puzzle for at least some competitors. Perhaps some statutes protecting animal rights or welfare are enacted in part because of their beneficial effects for competitors; but others are designed to protect animals, and have nothing to do with competitors at all, whose economic advantage is entirely incidental. This point suggests that an inspection of some statutes will show that competitors are not even arguably within the zone.121 The best response would point to the fact that competitive advantages, for those who comply with the relevant laws, are a means to the end sought by the statute. In most cases, this response should be sufficient, though reasonable people will differ in assessing statutes that are usually unclear on the point. 121 Air Courier Conf. v. American Postal Workers Union, 498 US 517 (1991). 
The discussion is best summarized with a set of stylized cases. about threats to the continued existence of a species challenge government action that, on their view, leads to unlawful harm to animals. On the facts as stated, no standing is available, even if Congress has conferred a cause of action on “any person.” The reason is that there is no injury in fact. 
who wish to see, enjoy, or study the relevant animals. No standing is available, even if Congress has conferred a cause of action of “any person,” because on the facts as stated, no member has a sufficiently concrete plan in mind, and hence there is no injury in fact. 
treatment of animals under the Animal Welfare Act; the group contends that the information must be both compiled and disclosed. If Congress has granted a cause of action to “any person,” standing is available. If Congress has not conferred such a cause of action, standing is unavailable—unless the group can establish that it has a special interest in the information that distinguishes it from citizens generally and that it is within the zone of interests protected by the statute. 
the Animal Welfare Act at that zoo. Standing is available if Congress has conferred a cause of action on “any person.” The case is somewhat more difficult without such a special grant of standing, but the suit should be justiciable in that case as well, because the injury in fact test is met, because the plaintiff is within the zone of protected interests, and because the plaintiff has an interest that distinguishes him from members of the public as a whole. 
commercial practices by Company B; company A contends that the practices of Company B are violative of the Animal Welfare Act and led to the production of medicines that serve as competition for Company A’s products. Standing is probably available, because Company A suffers an injury in fact, and because Company A is at least arguably within the zone of interests protected by the statute in question. 
Do animals have standing? Several cases so suggest. In Palila v. Hawaii Dept. of Land and Natural Resources,122 the court said that “[a]s an endangered species under the Endangered Species Act, . . . the bird (Loxioodes bailleui), a member of the Hawaiian honeycreeper family, also has legal status and wings its way into federal court as a plaintiff in its own right.”123 In a remarkably large number of cases in the federal reports, animals appear as named plaintiffs.124 But some courts have held that animals cannot bring suit in their own name.125 Of course any animals who are entitled to bring suit in this way would be represented by counsel, who would owe guardianlike obligations and make decisions, subject to those obligations, on their clients’ behalf. But this type of proceeding is hardly foreign to our law; consider suits brough on behalf of children or corporations. 
From the discussion thus far, it should be clear that the question whether animals have standing depends on the content of positive law. If Congress has not given standing to animals, the issue is at an end. Generally, of course, Congress grants standing to “persons,” as it does under the general standing provision of the APA,126 the Marine Mammal Protection Act,127 and the Endangered Species Act.”128 Indeed I have not been able to find any federal statute that allows animals to sue in their own name. As a rule, the question is therefore quite clear: Animals lack standing as such, simply because no relevant statute confers a cause of action on animals. 122 852 F.2d 1106, 1107 (9th Cir. 1988). 123 Id. at 1107. 124 See, e.g., Northern Spotted Owl v. Hodel, 716 F. Supp. 479 (WD Wash 1988); Northern Spotted Owl v. Lujan, 758 F. Supp 621 (WD Wash 1991); Mt. Graham Red Squirrel v. Yeutter, 930 F.2d 703 (9th Cir 1991). 125 See Hawaiiean Cow v. Lujan, D. Hawaii, Sept 13, 1991; Citizens to End Animal Suffering and Exploitation v. New England Aquarium, 836 F. Supp. 45 (D Mass 1993). 126 See 5 USC 702 (referring to “any person suffering legal wrong”). 127 16 USC 1374. 128 16 USC 1531. 
It seems possible, however, that before long, Congress will grant standing to animals to protect their own rights and interests. Congress might do this in the belief that in some contexts, it will be hard to find any person with an injury in fact to bring suit in his own name. Consider, for example, a proposed statutory ban on the importation of goods made with dog or cat fur129—a statutory ban that if disregarded, might not be easily enforceable by human beings. And even if statutes protecting animal welfare might be enforceable by human beings, Congress might grant standing to animals in their own right, partly to make a public statement about whose interests are most directly at stake,130 partly to increase the number of private monitors of illegality, and partly to bypass complex inquiries into whether prospective human plaintiffs have injuries in fact. 
Suppose that Congress does grant a cause of action to animals directly, to allow them to prevent actions harmful to their interests, such as extinction or suffering. Is there anything problematic in this course of action? The only serious question is constitutional in nature: whether the grant of standing would violate Article III’s requirement of a “case or controversy.”131 Perhaps it could be argued that Congress could not constitutionally confer standing on animals. On this view, the modern understanding of what qualifies as a “case or controversy” should be based on an inquiry into what the founding generation understood to count as such. To say the least, the founding generation did not anticipate that dogs or chimpanzees could bring suit in their own name. Ideas of this kind have been used to limit the class of disputes that Congress can place in an Article III court132; perhaps they could be used to forbid Congress from giving standing to animals. 129 The impetus for the ban is that dogs and cats are often cruelly treated and a ban would reduce the market for the cruel treatment. 130 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Expressive Function of Law, 144 U Pa L Rev 2021 (1996). 131 U.S. Const. Art. III, section 1. 132 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 US 555 (1992); see also Antonin Scalia, The Doctrine of Standing As An Essential Element of the Separation of Powers, 17 Suffolk L Rev 881 (1983). 
A central problem with this objection is that Congress is frequently permitted to create juridical persons, and to allow them to bring suit in their own right. Corporations are the most obvious example. But legal rights are also given to trusts, municipalities, partnerships, and even ships.133 In an era in which slaves were not “persons,” it was acceptable to allow actions to be brought on behalf of slaves. In the same way, Congress might say that animals at risk of injury or mistreatment have a right to bring suit in their own name. Nothing in the requirement of a “case or controversy” should be read to forbid Congress from treating animals as owners of legal rights. The “case or controversy” requires means that courts may not hear cases in which there is no cause of action, and it imposes other limitations on judicial power, including, under current doctrine, prohibitions on mootness, political questions, and merely ideological claims. To be sure, the framers anticipated that plaintiffs would ordinarily be human beings. But nothing in the Constitution limits Congress’ power to give standing to others. The conclusion is that if Congress wants to give animals standing to bring suit to protect their legal interests, it is permitted to do so. 
This is not the place for a general treatment of the law of standing of the question of “animal rights.” But the discussion does bear on those issues, and it may therefore be useful to offer a few brief speculations here. 
The area of standing to protect animals suggests (yet again) the extreme awkwardness of continuing to proceed as if “injury in fact” is a necessary or sufficient condition for standing.134 Many people have injuries “in fact” in connection with the suffering of others, human or nonhuman, but they do not have standing for that reason. If Jones sees an act of abuse directed against a child, a friend, or a horse, he may well suffer injury, indeed he may well be willing to pay a great deal to avoid that injury; but by virtue of that injury, he is not 133 See Stone, supra note, at 452. 134 Many people have raised this concern. See, e.g., Fletcher, supra note. entitled to bring suit in federal court. Some source of law must make that injury legally cognizable. In the three sorts of cases I have discussed—informational, competitive, and aesthetic injury— standing exists to the extent that it makes sense to interpret the relevant source of law as giving particular persons a right to bring suit. The most important point to recognize is that Congress has control over that question. 
The second most important point to recognize is a corollary: When the cases seem hard, it is because it is not clear, from those statutes that have been enacted, whether the plaintiff has been given a right to bring suit. Hence the information cases are easiest when Congress has spoken unambiguously on the question. Competitor standing is generally easy too, for the Court has suggested that when a competitor is injured “in fact,” it should be assumed that Congress sought to prevent that injury. The aesthetic injury cases are harder if it is unclear whether, in enacting the statutes protecting animal welfare, Congress should be taken to have granted a private cause of action to people who are distressed by seeing mistreated animals. It is for this reason that the two Animal Legal Defense Fund cases could have gone the other way; the real dispute involved the best reading of the underlying statute. It is important to recognize these points partly because they clarify a topic that is otherwise quite confusing, partly because they make it possible to see what reasonable people might be disagreeing about, and above all because they place control of the standing question in the hands of the democratic process, which is where it belongs. 
What about the question of “animal rights”135? Many people reject the idea that animals can have “rights,” often on the theory that rights belong along to those with certain cognitive capacities, limited to human beings. Some people think that it is important to say that animals lack “rights” even if people have duties to animals. Without answering the largest questions about the nature of rights, we might suggest that for certain purposes, at least, it is most useful 135 See James Rachels, Created From Animals: The Moral Implications of Darwinism (1990). to treat “rights” as legally enforceable claims of one kind or another. If rights are understood in this mundane and pragmatic way, there is nothing novel or unfamilar about the notion of animal rights. Indeed, animals have long had a wide range of “rights” against cruelty and mistreatment under state law, and these rights have recently been growing in both state and national legislatures. 
For purposes of knowing whether animals “have rights,” it is not sufficient to know whether animals are able to vindicate these rights in their own name. Many of the most familiar and celebrated of human rights are enforceable only by public authorities. We have seen that mere neglect of animal welfare counts as a criminal violation, and people are under an affirmative obligation to expend resources for the care and protection of animals. In many states, a failure to feed or shelter an animal can amount to, in practice, to a violation of an animal’s rights; the Animal Welfare Act creates national rights to food, shelter, even adequate ventilation and medical care. Indeed, animals have, under current law, a remarkable set of legal entitlements, including property rights of various sorts,136 and they enjoy these rights against their “owners.” The reason that the relevant rights do not matter in the world—to the extent that they do not—is that little enforcement activity is directed against violations. The real question, and the question on which much future debate is inevitable, is the extent and dimension of animal rights, not their existence. 
In an instructive discussion of the general problem Gary Francione makes a sharp distinction between “animal welfare” and “animal rights.” He contends that American law is committed to preventing infliction of “unnecessary” pain on animals and to ensuring that animals are treated “humanely.”137 This commitment results in a form of balancing in which animals, generally treated as mere property, end up losing whenever human interests can be found on the other side. “To label something property, is, for all intents and purposes, to conclude that the entity so labeled possesses no interests that merit protection and that the entity is solely a means to 136 These are not rights to exclusive possession, of course. 137 Francione, supra, at 253. the end determined by the property owner.”138 Francione seeks to replace “legal welfarism” with a system of animal rights, in which ultimately animals are regarded as having “inherent worth and value” and are not treated as property at all. 
Much of what Francione argues seems convincing. Often animals have been regarded as means to human ends, and often the status of animals as mere property has helped to ensure this unjust state of affairs. Of course animals should not be treated as mere means to human ends, if only because they are capable of suffering, and in any case both state and federal law are firmly committed against the notion of animals as mere means. But there is nothing magical in the notions of “animal welfare” and “animal rights”; what matters is not the abstractions but the concrete meanings given to them. It is possible to imagine a regime of animal “rights” in which the permissible justifications for intrusions are so numerous, and so undemanding, that animals are hardly protected at all. It is possible to imagine a regime of animal “welfare” in which the interest in avoiding pain and suffering is taken extremely seriously, so much so that it overcomes many significant human interests. In fact it is reasonable to think that all or most legal rights qualify as such because of their beneficial effects on welfare, however understood; on this view, legal rights are instrumental to well-being, suitably defined.139 Francione seems wrong to contrast “welfare” and “rights” so sharply. 
What about the notion of animals as property? Here the stakes are a mixture of substantive and rhetorical. If the status of property means the status of means to the ends of others, or a status of human domination and control, animals should not have the status of property. But even inanimate objects are protected against domination and control; you may not burn down your house, and if you have certain kinds of property, you are prevented from destroying it. Animals currently count as property, but on the law as it is on the books, they are nonetheless protected against a wide range of injuries. We can imagine a situation in which animals are 138 Id. 139 This general view is defended in Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (1999). “owned” but in which the right of ownership does not include rights to inflict suffering; indeed that is not far from the law as it now stands. But the rhetoric may matter. In the long term it may well make sense to think of animals as something other than property, partly in order to clarify their status as beings with rights of their own.140 
Let me conclude, however, with a more modest suggestion. A serious problem under the principal national protection against animal suffering—the AWA—is that the Department of Agriculture lacks sufficient resources to enforce it adequately. At a minimum, the Act should be amended so as to create a private cause of action by affected persons and animals, to bring suit against facilities that are operating in violation of the Act. A serious problem with current animal welfare statutes, including the AWA, is an absence of sufficient enforcement activity, a problem that stems at least partly from limited federal resources. At least when a violation of the statute is unambiguous, private parties should be permitted to bring suit directly against violators. This system of dual public and private enforcement would track the pattern under many federal environmental statutes; there is no reason that it should not be followed for statutes protecting animal welfare. 
There is nothing new or unfamiliar in the idea of animal rights. In the last thirty years, protection of animal “rights”—in the form of protection of animal welfare—has become an unmistakable part of federal law. The serious issues are ones of definition (what kinds of rights do animals have?) and of enforcement (who is entitled to enforce existing rights and duties?). 
My principal topic here has involved that aspect of enforcement that comes under the rubric of standing. The conclusions for which I 140 Nothing I have said here deals with the question how to resolve serious conflicts between animal well-being and human well-being—conflicts that might arise when, for example, laboratory experiments on animals are necessary to combat illnesses in human beings. I am suggesting that a great deal could be done to reduce animal suffering—sometimes a product of cruelty, often a product of simple negligence—without attempting to answer the hard questions involving serious conflicts. have argued are best divided into two categories—when Congress has power to confer standing, through explicit statement, and when standing exists under existing law. We have seen that Congress can give people standing to bring suit to obtain information bearing on the treatment of animals. Congress can also give people standing to bring suit to vindicate aesthetic interests in ensuring the humane treatment of animals, so long as such people have an actual plan to see the relevant animals. Congress can give people standing to bring suit to prevent an increased likelihood that members of certain species will decrease in number, so long as such people have an imminent, nonspeculative plan to see or study the relevant animals. Finally, Congress has the authority to grant animals standing to protect their interests, in the sense that injured animals might be counted as juridical persons, to be protected by human plaintiffs initiating proceedings on their behalf. 
Under the APA as it now stands, a person has standing to obtain information involving the well-being of animals, unless the statute gives rise to a contrary inference or the plaintiff cannot distinguish his interest from that of the public at large. Under the APA, a person has standing to protect animals that she likes to see or to study, if the action at issue threatens to diminish the population of the relevant species. The principal qualification to this claim is that the law has a degree of uncertainty with respect to when the relevant injury will be attributed to the government’s conduct.141 Under the APA, a person has standing to protect animals that she likes to see or study, if the plaintiff has an imminent and not merely speculative plan to see or study the relevant animals. 
Under existing statutes, animals do not have standing as such to protect their own interests. But Congress is entitled to grant them standing if it chooses to do so. Building on these claims, I have suggested that Congress should grant a private cause of action, to injured persons and to animals themselves, to prevent practices that are already unlawful. Legislative decisions on such questions will have considerable symbolic importance. But they will not be only symbolic, for they will help define the real-world meaning of statutory texts that attempt to protect animal welfare—statutes that now promise a great deal but deliver far too little. 
Animal Welfare Act, 7 USC 2131-2159 Humane Slaughter Act, 7 USC 1901-1906 Marine Mammal Protection Act, 16 USC 1361-1407 Airborne Hunting Act, 16 USC 742j-1 Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act, 16 USC 1331-1340 Dolphin Protection Consumer Information Act, 16 USC 1385 Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act, 16 USC 668-668d 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence The University of Chicago Law School 1111 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
House Committeeon theJudiciary duringtheHearingon Impeachment InquiryPursuantto H. Res. 581* 
foretheU.S. House JudiciaryCommittee'simpeachmenthearingsduringthefallsessionof the 105th Congress-BruceAckermanofYale UniversityS,amuel Beer of Harvard UniversityM,atthewHolden of the Universityof Virginia,Cass Sunstein of theUniversityof Chicago,and GaryMcDowell of the Universityof London. 
All or portionsof reformatted versionsof theirstatementsare printedhereto illustratepolitical scientists"speakingtruthto power." The statementsof thefivescholars are theirown and do not represent thepositionsof eithertheirinstitutionsor theAmericanPoliticalScience Association. 
The editorsofPS encourageother APSA membersparticipatingin federal and statepolicyprocessesin all substantiveareas to notifyPS of theiractivitiesT.his informatiownill be sharedwithjournalreadersin futureissues. 
* House Resolution581, officialltyitled "H. Res. 581: Authorizingand directingthe Committeeon theJudiciaryto investigate whethersufficiengtroundsexistfortheimpeachmentofWilliamJeffersoCnlinton, PresidentoftheUnitedStates,"made official theresolutionthat:"theCommitteeon the Judiciarya,ctingas a wholeor byanysubcommitteethereofappointedbythechairman forthepurposeshereofand in accordance withtherulesofthecommitteei,s authorized and directedto investigatefullyand completelywhethersufficiengtroundsexistforthe House ofRepresentativesto exerciseitsconstitutionaplowerto impeachWilliamJefferson Clinton,PresidentoftheUnitedStatesof America.The committeeshallreportto the House of Representativessuchresolutions, articlesof impeachmento,r otherrecommendationsas itdeemsproper." 24 
TestimonyBeforethe U.S. Gary L. McDowell 
November9, 1998 
McDowell'tsestimo nisytakenfromthe concludinsgectiont,itled"Oaths andPerjury." 
ingsinwhichevidenceis givenis an ancientpartof the commonlaw. Sir EdwardCoke notedthatthe "word oath is derivedfromthe Saxon word eoth."The oath is nothingless,said Coke, than"an affirmatioonr deniall byanyChristianof anythin glawfulland honest,beforeone or more, thathave the authorityto givethe same foradvancementof truthand rightc,allingAlmightyGod to witness thathis testimon yis true" (1809, 165).1Yet thereis evidence thattheuse of oathsextendsback to Roman times,wherethe law of the TwelveTables providesthat"Whoevergivesfalseevidencemustbe thrownfromtheTarpeian rock" (Stephens1883,1: 11). And Cicero inDe Officiiasrguesthat"in taking an oath it is our dutyto consider notwhatwe mayhave to fearin case ofviolationbutwhereinitsobligationlies: an oath is an assurance backed byreligioussanctitya;nd a solemnpromisegiven,as before God as one's witness,is to be sacredlykept"(1991, III: 104,383). As Samuel Pufendorfemphasized,oaths werenot simplythepreserveof Christians: 
AnoaththeveryHeathenslook'd on as a thingofso greatforce, and ofso sacredauthorityt,hat theybelievedthesinofperjuryto be punishedwiththeseverestvengeance; suchas extendeditselfto theposterityof theoffendera,nd suchas mightbe incurr'dbythe bare thoughtand inclinationwithout theact. (1717, IV. II. 1, 117) 
December7, 1998 
and the distinguishedmembersof thisCommittee.My name is Bruce Ackerman.I am SterlingProfessor of Law and PoliticalScience at Yale. I requestthe Chair'spermissionto reviseand extendtheseremarks. 
Since you have alreadyheardso muchon the subjectof constitutionalstandardsforimpeachmentI, would liketo concentrateon three big mistakesthathave characterized the discussionup to now. 
thepowerof thisCommitteeand thepresentHouse of Representativesto send a case to trialin the Senate. People seem to be assuming thatonce thepresentCommittee and thefullHouse vote fora bill of impeachmentt,he stagewillbe set fora trialin theSenate duringthe comingyear,and thatthenext House willnothave to take anyfurtheractionson thematter. 
Nothingcould be furtherfromthe truthA.s a constitutionamlatter,the House of Representativesis not a continuingbody.When the 105th House dies on January3, all itsunfinishedbusinessdies withit.To beginwiththemostobviousexample, a bill passed bythe 105th House thatis stillpendingin the 105th Senate on January3rd cannotbe enacted intolaw unlessit once again meetsthe approvalof the 106t House. 
This is as it shouldbe. Otherwise lame-duckCongresseswould have a fielddayin situationslike the present,wherethe old House majorityhas had a setbackin thepolls. Recognizingthatitspoliticalpower is on thewane,the dominantparty continueodnpage 29 
constitutionaclonsequencesof impeachmentratherthanitslegal and judicial aspects.The processis judicial in form,impeachmentbythe House beinglikeindictmenbtya grandjury,and trialand conviction bythe Senate beingliketrialand convictionbya court.In fact,however,theconsequencesof successful impeachmentdo not resemblethe usual consequencesof a judicial trial,forinstance,punishmenbty fineand/orimprisonmentA.s Article 
punishmentof thatkindwouldbe invokedafterthepresidenthad become a privatecitizenbyresignation,removal,or expirationof his termof office. 
Removalfromofficet,hegrand and forbiddingconsequenceof successfulimpeachmentd,istinguishes thisprocessradicallyfromthe judgementof a court.It resembles rathera vote of no confidencein a legislatures,uchas theBritishparliament.By sucha vote theHouse of Commonscan bringto an end thelifeof a governmentI.n 1841, Sir RobertPeel summedup this fundamentaclonventionof theBritishConstitutionwhenhe successfullymovedthat"her Majesty'sMinistersdo not sufficientplyossess the confidenceof theHouse of Commonsto enable themto carry throughtheHouse measureswhich theydeem of essentialimportance to thepublicwelfare." 
Like a vote of no confidencei,mpeachmentbringsto an end a president'sadministrationL.ike a vote of no confidencei,t relatesnot merely to some specificfailure,but is a judgmenton his recordand promise as a wholewithregardto those "measureswhichhe deems of essencontinueodn page 33 Matthew Holden Jr. 
November9, 1998 
sor'sHolden'stestimoniys takenfromthe concludingsection,titled"Impeachmenits a CagedLion: ShoulditBe Loose in theStreets?" 
Editor's Note: This excerptfromProfessor'sSunstein'stestimoniys takenfrom theconcludingsection,titled"HowShould We UnderstandImpeachmentToday?" 
Thus farI have suggestedthat boththeoriginalunderstandingand historicalpracticeconvergeon a peachmentis a caged lion,and ask simpleprinciple.The basic pointof seriouslya,nd withoutprejudice, theimpeachmentprovisionis to alwhetherlettingthatlion loose in the low theHouse of Representativesto streetswillleave anyonesafe. impeachthe presidentof the United 
The House of Representativesis Statesforegregiousmisconductthat placed bytheconstitutionaplrescrip- amountsto the abusivemisuseof tionin the role analogousto thatof theprosecutorW.hen is it necessary to go forward?In thenarrowerdomainof ordinarycriminallaw,the criminalprosecutorconsidersmany factorsin decidingwhetherto bring charges.Amongothers,theprosecutorconsiders"the strengthof the evidence,thesuspect'sbackground and characteristicst,hecostsand benefitsof obtaininga conviction, and the attitudeof thecommunity towardtheoffensethesuspectis believedto have committed"(Miller et al. 1991,695). 
The discussionforthepast four years,and especiallyforthe past ten months,has notgottento this,the nexusof themostseriousissue.The discussionhas focusedupon attitudestowardthe personwho now occupiestheofficeof president,and, secondarilyu,pon whatpeople believeis theevidence.But themost seriousissue is differentT.here has been a continualavoidanceof the costsand benefitsof impeachment whenconsideredin relationto the wholepoliticalsystem. 
There is some discussionof the attitudeof thecommunityo,ftenin puzzlementas to thedifferencbeetweenopinionreflectedin mass poll data and opinionexpressedbythose continueodn page 34 the authorityof his officeT.his principle does notexcludethepossibility thata presidentwouldbe impeachable foran extremelyheinous"private" crime,such as murderor rape. 
But it suggeststhatoutsideof such extraordinar(yand unprecedented and mostunlikely)cases, impeachmentis unacceptable.The clear implicationis thatthechargesmade thusfarbyJudgeKennethStarrand 
make out anylegitimatelyimpeachable offensesunderthe Constitution. 
In the presentcontext,itwouldbe possibleto respondto thissuggestionin twodifferenwtays.First,it mightbe urgedthatactual or possible countsagainstPresidentClinton-frequentlies to theAmericanpublic,falsestatementsunderoath, conspiracyto ensurethatsuchfalse statementsare made,perhapsperjury,interactionwsithhis advisers designedto promotefurtherfalsehoods underoath,and so forth-are veryseriousindeed and thatifthese veryseriouschargesare deemed a legitimatebasis forimpeachment, littleor nothingwillbe done to alter thetraditionaclonceptionof impeachment.Perhapssome of these possiblecounts,involvinginteractionswithhis advisersdesignedto continueodn page 37 
25 monyof a witnesscan be received, he is obligedto swear,thatit shall be thetrutht,hewhole trutha,nd nothingbut thetruth." 
The purpose,Wilsonconcluded,is to securetruthfuelvidence: 
Beliefis theendproposedbyevidenceofeverykind.Beliefintesptiomseodnvyiesrparcoitdoyufcheidbmywthheosupdeclaresit.Theopinionofhisveracit y. is shakene,itherwhen, informeirnstancesw,ehave knownhimtodelivertestimony whichhasbeenfalse;orwheni,n thepresenitnstancew, ediscover somestronginducemenwthich mayprevaiolnhimtodeceive. (McCloskey1967,2: 7O2-03)2 cal bearingson thenecessityof oathsto gettingat thetruthfrom 
Moraland PoliticalPhilosophy(1788) was an influentiawl orkof considerable prominenceamongtheearly Americans.WilsonpraisedPaley as an authorityof "highreputation,"a "sensibleand ingeniouswriter,"who was "no undiscerninjgudge of the subject"of the administratioonf [T]hedirectillconsequenceosf lying. . . consist,eitherin some specifiicnjurytoparticulairndividuals,orthedestructioonfthat confidencwe,hichis essentiatlo theintercourosefhumanlife:for whichlatterreason,a liemaybe perniciouisnitsgeneratlendency, andthereforceriminatl,houghit producenoparticulavrisiblemischieftoanyone(.1788,1: 184) 
damagesthatcome fromlying,it is necessarythatoathsneverbe made "cheap in themindsof thepeople." Since "mankindmusttrustto one another"thereis no moreefficacious means thanthroughthe use of oaths: "Hence legal adjudications, grave,of necessityproceed and depend upon oaths."As a result,lying underoath is farmoreseriousthan merelylying;perjuryis,Paley notes, "a sinof greaterdeliberation,"an act that"violatesa superiorconfidence" (1: 193-197). 
Because a witnessswearsthathe will"speak thetrutht,hewhole 
tenon the"excellentwritingso"f 
For Paley,theissue of oathsand justice(McCloskey1967,1: 310, 240, 325). JosephStorywas similarlyimpressedwithPaley as a writerof "practicalsense" whose analysesof politicalinstitutiondsisplayed"great legitimatelyconceal "anytruth, skilland ingenuityof reasoning." whichrelatesto thematterin adjuThroughouthis celebratedCommen- dication"because to so conceal "is tarieson theConstitutioonfthe as mucha violationof theoath,as trutha,nd nothingbut thetruth, touchingthematterin question," thereis no place wherea person underoath can cleverlylie and not commitperjuryT.he witnesscannot to testifya positivefalsehood;and thiswhetherthewitnessbe interrogatedto thatparticularpointor not."It is not enough,Paley observed,forthewitnessafterwardto tal principlesestablishedbynature, whentheydivorceexpediencyfrom moralrectitude"(1991, III: 101, perjurywas one of moralityas well as of law; he expressedviewsnot unlikethatof Cicero whowarned saythathe was notforthcomin"gbecause itwas neverasked of me"; an that"people overturnthefundamen- oath obligesto tellall one knows whetherasked or not.As Paley notes, "the law intends .. . to requireof thewitness,thathe givea Gary L. McDowell continuefdrompage 24 courtsof law was explainedby JamesWilsonin his law lectures: 184). In Paley'sview,theentire questionof perjuryrestedon the definitionof a lie: "A lie is a breach of promise:forwhoeverseriously addresseshis discourseto another, "The courtsofjustice,in almostevtacitlypromisesto speak thetruth, eryage, and in almosteverycountry, because he knowsthatthetruthis have had recourseto oaths,or appeals to heaven,as themostuniver- expected."And theeffectosf lying sal and themostpowerfulmeansto engagemen to declarethetruthB.y thecommonlaw,beforethetestiare notsimplyprivate;theyare public in thedeepestand mostimportantsense: Wilsontookhis moraland histori- whichgovernand affecteveryright and intereston thisside of the completeand unreservedaccountof whathe knowsof the subjectof the trial,whetherthequestionsproposed to himreach theextentof his knowledgeor not" (1: 200-01). 
Nor is it sufficienatn excusethat "a pointof honor,of delicacy,or of reputationm,aymake a witness backwardto disclosesome circumstancewithwhichhe is acquainted." Such a sense of shameor embarrassmentcannot"justifyhis concealmentof thetruthu,nlessit could be shown,thatthe law whichimposes theoath,intendedto allow thisindulgenceto suchmotives"(1: 201). 
Similarlyl,inguisticcontortions withthewordsused cannotlegitimatelyconceal a lie or,ifunder oath,perjuryP.aley's argumenton thispointmeritsa completehearing: 
arenotlies,so theremaybe lies withoultiteraolrdirectfalsehood. Anopeningis alwaysleftforthis speciesofprevaricatiownh,enthe literaalndthegrammaticsailgnificationofa sentenceis different fromthepopularandcustomary meaningsIt. is thewillfudleceit thatmakesthelie;andwewillfully deceivew,hereourexpressionasre nottrueinthesenseinwhichwe believethehearerapprehends themB.esides,itis absurdtocontendforanysenseofwordsi,n oppositiontousage,forallsenses ofwordsarefoundeduponusage, anduponnothineglse.(1: 18889)4 
oathsswornincludea promisenot onlyto tellthetruthb,ut the broaderpromiseto tellthewhole truthand nothingbut thetruth. Willfuldeceitis the keyto whether a witnesscommitsperjuryor not, whateverthe meanschosen.5The moraland legal inheritanceof the foundinggenerationincludedthe beliefthattheviolationof an oath was nothingless than"treachery" (Sidney[1698] 1990,225). 
None of themajorwriterswith whomthefounderswereintimately conversantsaw perjuryas anything butone of themostseriousoffences againstthecommonwealth.I6n his widelycited Treatiseon thePleas of theCrown,forexample,William Hawkinsexplainedthattherewere certainkindsof offencesthatwere 26 "infamous,and grosslyscandalous, proceedingfromprinciplesof down rightdishonestym,aliceor faction"; and itwas underthisrubricthathe included"perjuryand subornation ofperjury."Indeed,he wentfurther arguingthat"perjury... is of all crimeswhatsoeverthemostinfamous and detestable"([1724-26] 1972,1: 
Perjur3y1w8a-s1,9i)n.7thefirstinstance, tiedto jurorswho mightgivea false verdictand "forseveralcenturiesno traceis to be foundof thepunishmentofwitnessesforperjury."And, even afterit originatedin the Star Chamber,itwas onlyby"slow degrees[that]theconclusionthatall perjuryin a judicialproceedingis a crimewas arrivedat" (Stephens 1883,3: 241, 247). In 1562-63there came thefirststatuteprovidingpenaltiesforthosewho committedboth perjuryand subornationofperjury (Holdsworth1966,4: 515-18).Thus werehumanpunishmentmsade to augmentthefearof divinevengeance forlyingunderoath.8This was, in Pufendorf'vsiew,absolutely essential,as he notedbyquoting Demosthenes:"Those who escape yourjustice,leave to thevengeance of thegods; but thoseon whomyou can layhands,neverconsignoverto Providencewithoutpunishingthem yourselves"(1717, IV. II. 2, 118). 
It was bythisjointpowerof the sacredand thesecularthatmen could put theirfaithin oathsas a 
JohnWigmorein histreatiseon evidence,in whichhe notesthattheidea of an oath came fromGermaniclaw: "The employmenotf oathstakesour historyback to theoriginsof Germaniclaw and customwhen,as in all earlycivilizationst,heappeal to thesupernaturalplaysan importantpartin theadministrationofjustice"(1976,V: Sec. 1815,380). 
JamesBradleyThayerobservedthatthe "Normans... foundthatmuchofwhatthey brought[to England]was therealready;for theAnglo-Saxonsweretheircousinsofthe itedpowers.Thus did theylimitthe meansof securingtruthfutlestimony reasonsforwhichan impeachment fromthoseswornto giveit.And by could be undertakento "Treason, suchoathsand thepunishmenttso Briberyo,r otherhighCrimesand be metedout forperjuryt,hecom- Misdemeanors." monwealthcould securetheproper The successof thefoundersin administratioonfjusticewithinthe creatingtheimpeachmentpowerto courtsof law. Perjurywas no longer be bothpoliticallyeffectivaend safe just a sin; itwas a crime. 
Based on theforegoinganalysis and reviewof thehistoricalrecord, theconclusionseems inescapable, based on theexpressedintentof the framerst,hewordingof the Constitution,thewritingosf theprincipal legal authoritiesknownto theframers,and thecommonlaw,thatperjurywouldcertainlybe includedas a "highCrimeand Misdemeanor"in an impeachmenttrialunderthe UnitedStatesConstitutionF. urther, therecordfailsto supporttheclaim thatimpeachableoffencesare limitedto onlythoseabuses thatoccur in theofficiaelxerciseof executive to the demandsof republicangovernmentis seen mostclearlyin how fewhave been theinstancesof its use. Lord Brycedescribedthepower of impeachmentovera centuryago as "theheaviestpiece of artilleryin thecongressionalarsenal"and thus "unfitforordinaryuse." The process seekingto removea president,he said, "is likea hundred-tongun whichneeds complexmachineryto bringit intoposition,an enormous chargeof powderto fireit,and a largemarkto aim at" (Bryce[1893] 1995,1: 190). The constitutional provisionsforimpeachmentwere intended,in part,to securethechief executivefrombeingdrivenfrom officeformerepartisanreasons.To power.As seen in theauthorities, impeachableoffencesi,n bothEnglishand Americanhistoryh, ave get ridof a president-orto tryto been understoodto extendto "per- Congresshas to have good cause. As sonal misconduct"(Story1851,2: Brycesaid, one does notuse im274), "violationof . trust"(Simp- peachmentforlightand transient son 1916,144 n. 6), and "immorality causes, "as one does notuse steam or imbecility("Curtis1854-60,2: hammersto cracknuts"(1: 190). 260) amongothercharges. In theend,thedeterminationof 
There is no powergrantedto the whetherpresidentialmisconduct House of Representativemsorefor- risesto thelevelof "highCrimes midablethan"the sole powerof im- and Misdemeanors,"as used bythe framersi,s leftto the discretionand deliberationof theHouse of RepresentativesN.o smallpartof thatdepeachment."Knowingas theydid the dangersof subjectingthosein highofficeto themerepassionand capriceof themoment,thefounders soughtto createa powerto impeach thatwouldbe capable of "displacing an unfitmagistrate,b"utwithinthe confinesof a writtenand ratified Constitutionof enumeratedand limliberationg,uidedas it mustbe by thehistoryand meaningof "high Crimesand Misdemeanors,"must addresswhateffectheexerciseof thisextraordinarcyonstitutional sanctionwould have on thehealth of therepublic,as weighedagainst thenecessityof makingclear thatin Americano one is above the law. In the end,thatis whatmattersmost and mustbear mostheavilyon the membersof theHouse of Representativesas theyconsiderwhatthey mustdo in theweeksahead. 
thesame legal conceptionsand methodsonly lessworkedout" (1891, 45, 58). This extendedto theuse ofoaths. 
importanceof oaths. For example,Justice Jacob Rush, the brotherof Benjamin Rush, expressedviewsmuch like those of Wilson in a pamphletpublishedin 1796, The Natureand Importanceofan Oath-theCharge to a Jury(Rutland, Vermont): "An oath is a veryserious transaction. . . the nature[of which]. . . is the solemn appeal to God-it is engagingto speak the truth,and calling upon Him to witnessour sincerityt,hatconstitutethe oath and obligation."Thus is it importantthatcivilsocietymaintaina due attentionto "the religioussentimentupon whichan oath is founded"; to allow that sentimentto relaxwill be "injuriousto society"(Hyneman and Lutz 1983, 2: 10151017, 1018). 
69; Sec. 584, II: 65; Sec. 1603,III: 467. See also, forexamples,Secs. 522, 547,558, 572, 575,579,581, 584,587, and 1338. 
27 similarmind:Witnesses,he said, shouldnothave "an opportunitybyinsidiousor equivocalexpressionsto evade theforceof theirobligations."Should theyso breaktheiroath theywilldiscoverthe truththatGod is the"avengerofperjury" (1717, IV. II. III, 121,119). 
presumedthatone wouldcommitperjury withoutdesign"(1730, II. 10,xiv,288-89). commonlaw sourceson "oaths" and "perjury"see underthoseheads in Giles Jacob (1772). 
"Perjuryappears to be a mostmonstroussin, in as muchas byittheforswornwretchshews thathe at thesame timecondemnsthedivine and yetis afraidof humanpunishmentt;hat he is a daringvillaintowardsGod, and a sneakingcowardtowardsmen" (1717, IV. II. 2, 118). 
perjurypenaltyare similarin theiroperation; thatis, theyinfluencethewitnesssubjectively againstconsciousfalsificationt,heone byremindinghimof ultimatepunishmentbya supernaturalpower,theotherbyremindinghim of speedypunishmentbya temporalpower" (Wigmore1976,V: Sec. 1831,432). theCriminalLaw ofEngland.3 vols. London: Macmillan. 
Story,Joseph.1851. Commentarieosn the ConstitutioonftheUnitedStates:Witha PreliminarRyeviewoftheConstitutional HistoryoftheColoniesand States,before theAdoptionoftheConstitution2.nd ed. 
Boston:C.C. Littleand J.Brown. 
Thayer,JamesBradley.1891."The Older Modes of Trial."HarvardLaw Review 
Bruce Ackerman tionalpowerof the currentlame- we take thisamendmentseriouslyi,t continuedfrompage 24 duckHouse to vote out a bill of im- meansthata lame-duckHouse willpredictablyuse itslame-duck peachment.But I do respectfully shouldnotbe allowedto relieveits monthsto pass lotsof controversial submitthattheConstitutiontreatsa freshlyelectedsuccessorof itssollegislationon to the Senate in defi- lame-duckbill of impeachmentin emnobligationto determine ance of thejudgmentmade bythe preciselythe same wayittreatsany whetherthe nation'spoliticallife otherHouse bill thatremainspend- shouldbe disruptedbya lengthy voTtehriss.abuse was verycommondur- ingin theSenate on January3. Like trialof the presidentin the Senate. 
all otherbills,a lame-duckbill of In short,whateverdecisionis liincg.Uthnetfilitrhste1T50wyeneatriesothfAtmheeRndepmuebn-t impeachmentloses itsconstitutional reachedbythisCommitteeand this forcewiththe deathof the House House thismonth,the Constitution was passed in 1933,a newlyelected thatpassed it. requiresthe newlyelectedHouse to mCoonngtrhessbseofrodrieniatrbielygwaanititesdf1i3rst This pointwas rightl yignoredbe- reconsiderimpeachmentafreshin mmeeaentitnimgine,lWamasehdiuncgktsodnidI.nththeena- fexopreetchteedetlhecetnioenw,sCionncegervesesrtyobboedy JaMnuoarreyov.er,ifthenextHouse of tion'sbusinessfora fullsession,of- moreRepublicanthanitspredeces- Representativestriesto evade its sor. On thisassumption,itwas per- fundamentaclonstitutionarlesponsiten in waysthatran againstthe fectlyplausibleforthisdistinguished bilityt,he Senate willnotbe freeto grainof thelast election.This might Committeeto proceed in earnest-if dispensewiththeproblemof lamehave been an acceptablepriceto the 105th House votedto impeach, duckimpeachmentbya simplerefpay in the eighteenthcenturyw,hen therewas everyreasonto suppose erenceto its 1988 decisionin Judge roadswereterribleand it tooktime thatthe 106thHouse would quickly Hastings'case. Not onlydoes this forfarmer-representativteosar- reaffir mitsjudgment,and send the reportfailto confronthebasic israngetheirbusinessaffairsB.ut as matteron itswayto the Senate. But sues,butthe Senate Rules Committhecenturiespassed,theoperation nowthatthevotershave spoken,the tee,whichauthoredthereport,will of lame-duckCongressesprovedto constitutionasltatusof lame-duck not even be the finaljudge of the be an intolerableviolationof demo- impeachmentsdeservesfarmore matterthistimearound.Instead,the craticprinciplesa,nd theywerebasi- attentionthanit has been given. constitutionalitoyf a lame-duckimcallyabolishedbytheTwentieth Worseyet,we cannotrelymuch peachmentwillbe the firstquestion Amendmentin 1933. on thepast forguidance.The closest confrontinCghiefJusticeRehnquist, 
This amendmentanticipatesthat precedentcomes fromthe 1988 im- the designatedpresidingofficerat new Congresseswillbeginmeeting peachmentof federaldistricjtudge the Senate trial.Followingthepreas soon as possibleafterthe elec- Alcee Hastings.The 100th House cedentestablishedbyChiefJustice tions-the textspecifiesJanuary3. had impeachedHastings,butboth Chase beforeand duringthetrialof In enactingit intoour fundamental sideswantedto delaytheSenate PresidentAndrewJohnson,the chief law,Americansbelievedtheywere trialto the 101stsession,and the justicewillrightlyasserthis authorreducingthelame-duckproblemto Senate Rules Committeegranted ityto ruleon all proceduralissues vestigialproportions(Nagle 1997). theirrequest(U.S. Senate 1988). (Ackerman1998,467-68).And the Perhapssome gravenationalemer- The Senate's perfunctorsyix-page firstof theseshouldundoubtedlybe gencymightrequiredecisiveaction, report,however,does not resolve a motionbythepresident'slawyers but theold Congresswould normally anyof thekeyissuesraisedbythe to quash thelame-duckimpeachfade awayas thenationenjoyeda presentcase. mentas constitutionalliynvalidunrespitefrompoliticsbetween JudgeHastingswantedto delay less reaffirmebdythe 106thHouse. Thanksgivingand New Year's Day. hisSenate trialas longas possible, Now, ChiefJusticeRehnquistis in 
Generallyspeaking,lame-duck and did noteven tryto arguethat facta scholarofthe impeachment Congresseshave provedfaithfutlo hisbill of impeachmentexpiredon process,havingwrittenan entire thisexpectationF.or example,dur- January3 forfearthathis Senate book on thesubject.I am surethat ingthe65 yearssincetheTwentieth trialwouldbe expedited.What is he willbe fullyaware of thehistoriAmendmentbecame partofour more,Hastingswas a judge not a cal importanceof his conductof the higherlaw,no lame-duckHouse has president;and he was impeached proceeding,and willquicklygrasp everimpeachedan errantfederal duringa normalsessionof Congress, the obviousdangersof lame-duck judge,muchless a sittingpresident. notbya Congressof lameducks.As impeachmentM.oreover,thereare Such mattershave been leftto the a consequence,theSenate commit- manystrandsin thechiefjustice's judgmentof Congressesthatwere tee understandablyfailedto consider jurisprudencewhichwilllead himto notfullof memberswho had been anyof thecrucialconstitutionails- givegreatweightto the idea thatit repudiatedat thepolls or were retir- sues raisedbythepresentcase. It is onlya trulydemocraticHouse, ingfromoffice. did not even pause to considerthe and not a collectionof lameducks, 
These proceedings,then,are ab- factthatthepeople decisively thathas theconstitutionaaluthority solutelyunprecedentedin thepost- soughtto limitthecapacityof lame- to proceed againsta manwho has lame-duckera. Despite thisfact,I duckCongressesbysolemnlyenact- been fairlyelectedto thepresidency do notquestionthe rawconstitu- ingtheTwentiethAmendmentI.f bythepeople of theUnited States. 
29 
wouldbe wellwithinhis rightsto quash thelame-duckimpeachment and remandthematterback to the House. 
Since the statusof lame-duckimpeachmentshas neverbeforebeen briefedand arguedin themodern era inauguratedbytheTwentieth Amendmenti,t is impossibleto make a firmguessas to thewaythe chiefjusticewillruleon thematter. Onlyone thingis clear.It wouldbe farbetterforthecountryand the constitutio nifthechiefjusticeis neverput to thistest.As Alexander Bickel,mygreatpredecessorin the SterlingChair at Yale, frequently remindedus, the healthofour constitutionaslystemis notmeasuredby thenumberof "hardcases" that have been resolvedbyclear rulings. It is measuredinsteadbythenumber of statesmenin our historywho, seeinga hardcase on thehorizon, act in sensiblewaysso as to avoid everprecipitatinga constitutional crisis. 
If thisCommitteeand thepresent House choose to go forwardand vote in favorof a bill of impeachment,I respectfulluyrgethenew Speaker of the 106thCongressto do the rightthing,and remitthematter once again forconsiderationbythe newHouse. Suppose,however,he does not do so; suppose furtherthat thechiefjustice,whenpressed,upholdsthecontinuingvalidityof the lame-duckimpeachmentdespitethe expirationof the 105th Congress. Even then,thenewHouse of Representativewsillnotbe able to escape the need foranotherup or downvote to determinewhethera majorityofmemberscontinueto favorimpeachment. 
To see why,considerthatthe House mustselecta groupof its members,called "impeachment managers,"to presentitscase againstthepresidentat theSenate trial.Withouttheenergeticprosecutionof thecase bythemanagers, theSenate trialcannotgo forward. No managers,no trial;butonlythe newHouse can appointthemanagers. Thiswas done in JudgeHastings'case, and it certainlyshouldbe requiredin thecase of a sitting 30 presidentfacinga lame-duckimpeachment. 
Thus,even ifthenew House leadershipchooses to relyon a lameduckimpeachmenta,nd refusesto allow anothervote on a freshbill beforesendingthematterto the Senate,thereis no wayit can avoid theneed to testthemajoritysentimentof the newHouse. By voting againsttheslate of managers,a majorityof thenew House willbe in a positionto stoptheimpeachment processdead in itstracks. 
It is a big mistake,then,forthe distinguishedmembersof thisCommitteeand thisHouse to suppose thattheyare thefinaljudges of the billof impeachmentT.o be sure,the recommendationosf thisCommittee and thevote of theentireHouse deserveseriousconsiderationbythe memberstakingofficenextmonth. But so do thejudgmentsof thevoters,as expressedat the electionsin November.I respectfulluyrgeyou to considerthispointas you determine yourpresentcourse. 
To putmypointin operational terms:Ifyou don'tbelievethata bill of impeachmentor theelectionof impeachmentmanagerswillgain the majoritysupportof thenextHouse, thewise thingto do is to stopthe processnow.While it maybe embarrassingto reversegearsafterso muchmomentumhas been generated in favorof a bill of impeachment,theleadershipof thenext House willconfronta muchmore embarrassingsituationifitbecomes evidentthatitsslenderproimpeachmentmajorityhas vanishedoverthe Christmasrecess. 
II 
A secondmistakeinvolvesa persistentconfusionabout impeachment standards.People keep on talkingas ifthestandardsthatapplytojudges also applyto presidentsB.ut a glanceat theconstitutionatlextis enoughto establishthatthisis a mistake.UnderArticleIII of the Constitutiona,nyfederaljudge may be deprivedof his lifetimejob ifhe failsthetestof "good Behavior." Thus,the House and Senate may removea judge even ifhis "bad" behaviorwould nototherwise amountto a "highCrimeand Misdemeanor." 
In contrast,the Constitutiondoes not allow presidentsto be removed forwantof "good behavior"-forthe obviousreasonthathe does not serveforlife,but is underregular electoralscrutinybythepeople. Moreover,thereshouldbe no doubt thatthe Framerswere seriousin restrictintghemselvesto highcrimes and misdemeanorsI.n contrastto the impeachmentclause,othertextual referencesto crimedo not containsimilaremphasison highcrime. Thus,theExtraditionClause applies to anyonewho commits"Treason, Felonyor otherCrime,"and Article I, Section6 giveseverycongressman an immunityfromarrestexceptin cases of "Treason,Felony,and Breach of the Peace." This standsin sharpcontrastto thehighcrimes requiredof presidentsa,nd the mere breachesof good behaviorrequired in thecase ofjudges. It is a bad mistake,then,to assume thattherelativelylow impeachmentstandard applied to judges also applies to the president.The merefactthatthey are undoubtedlyremovableforperjurydoes not implythatthepresidentis also impeachableforthe same offense. 
Whichleads me to thethirdand lastmistake.Perhapsbecause of the role of thespecial prosecutorin this case, therehas been a constant temptationto imaginethatwhatwe are doinghere is considering whetheryou shouldissue something similarto a criminalindictment. This is a mistaketoday,even though therewas a timelongago whenthis viewwas plausible.When impeachmentbegan in the Englishparliamentfivehundredyearsago, this medievalassemblystillthoughtof itselfas a High Court,and often subjectedthevictimsof impeachmentto direcriminalpunishments. 
But theFramersof our Constitutionself-consciouslryejectedthese medievalprecedents.Theycarefully limitedthesanctionsforimpeachmentto removalfrompoliticaloffice,and thelike.Once a president departs,he is fullysubjectto the rigorsof criminalprosecution. 
Ratherthanstandingabove thelaw, 
runsa greaterriskof an indictment forperjuryin theyear2001 thanany otherAmericancitizenalive today. 
This committeedoes notsitas a grandjuryof theDistrictof Columbia, but as a grandinquestrepresentingthenation.It shouldnotfocus on the detailsof a particular crime,but ask itselfa verydifferent question:Does theconductalleged in thiscase constitutesuch a threat to theveryfoundationsof the Republicthatit is legitimateto deprive thepeople of theirfreelyelected choice as president? 
For twocenturies,theCongress has showngreatrestraintin dealing withthisquestion.Fromtheera of George Washingtonto thatof Ronald Reagan, presidentshave often stretchedtheirconstitutionaaluthorityto theverylimits,makingunpopular decisionswhichhave often provedto be in thelargerinterestof thenation.And yetonlyone President-AndrewJohnson-hasbeen impeached,and onlyone-Richard Nixon-has resignedunderthreatof impeachmentT.he presidentialconductinvolvedin bothcases amountedto an assaulton thevery foundationsof our democracyA.ndrewJohnsonsoughtto blockthe enactmentof theFourteenth Amendmenta,nd itsguaranteesof equal protectionand due processto all Americancitizens(Ackerman 1988,chap. 8). RichardNixon soughtto underminetheveryfoundationsof thetwo-partysystem. 
Once we lowerthe impeachment standardto includeconductthat does not amountto suchclear and dangerto our constitutionaolrder, we willdo grievousdamage to the independenceof thepresidency. 
JamesMadison saw this.At the [ConstitutionalC] onvention,he opposed the additionof anylanguage whichwouldwaterdownthesolemn requirementof a "highCrimeand Misdemeanor."A lowerstandard, he said,would transformthePresidencyfroman officewitha fixed four-yeartermto one "whoseterm willbe equivalentto a tenureduring thepleasureof the Senate" (Farrand 1996,550). Indeed,whenthe Foundersvotedon theimpeachment standard,theydid not,in fact,vote on theprovisionthatappears in the of PresidentAndrewJohnsonin texttoday.Instead,theyactuallyap- 1868.Thoughthisimpeachmentefproveda standardthatrequiredthe fortbarelyfailedto gain two-thirds proofof a "highcrimeand misde- supportin the Senate,it drained meanoragainstthestate"[emphasis effectivpeowerfromthepresidenadded]. These last threewordswere cy-tothepointwhereWoodrow latereliminatedbythe Committee Wilson,writingin 1885,could deon Style,whichhad absolutelyno scribeour systemas "congressional authorityto changethesubstanceof government.A"nd it could readily anyprovision.Thus,the Committee happen again. Imagine,forexample, musthave thoughtthatthetext's thatthepoliticalwheel turnsand insistenceon "highcrimeand misde- thata DemocraticCongressconmeanors"alreadyincludedthere- frontsa Republicanpresidentin the quirementof an assaulton thefoun- year2001. Can therebe anydoubt dationsof theAmericanstate. thatenterprisinmgembersof the 
And as we have seen,thisis the House willbe temptedto use the standardthathas, in fact,consis- Clintonprecedentto unseatthe next tentlygovernedtheHouse's actions Republicanpresidentat thefirstpooverthepast twocenturies.If the liticallypropitiousopportunity? House had been operatingunder My studyof historyand human anylowerstandard,our history natureconvincesme thatonce such books wouldhave been litteredwith an abusivecycleof impeachments many,manybillsof impeachment, has begun,itwillbe verydifficultto and notonlytwo.Whenjudged keep thebitterdisagreementgseneragainstthisconsistenthistoryof re- ated byour often-dividegdovernstrainedcongressionalinterpretation mentundercontrol. of the impeachmentclause,there Let me emphasizethat,though can be littledoubtthatthepresent the lawyersforPresidentClinton case fallsfarshortof thestandard asked me to testifytoday,I would set bytheFramerswhentheyin- be equallyemphaticin myopposisistedon "highcrimesand misde- tionto anyfutureefforbtya Demomeanoragainstthestate." craticCongressto impeacha Re 
Indeed, iftheCommitteedoes publicanpresidentforanythingshort findPresidentClinton'sconductim- of an outrightassaulton thefoundapeachable,itwillbe settinga prece- tionsof the Republic.But it is a far, dentthatwillhauntthiscountryfor farbetterthingto cut shorta cycle generationsto come. Under the new of incivilitybeforeit starts.I reand low standard,impeachmentwill spectfullyurgethe distinguished become an ordinarypartof our po- membersof thisCommitteeto defer liticalsystemW.heneverCongress furtheractionon impeachmentto and thepresidencyare controlledby thenextsessionof Congress,when differenptoliticalparties,theCon- our newlyelectedrepresentatives gresswillregularlyuse impeachment willbe in a muchbetterpositionto as a weapon to serveitspartisan decide on thekindof action-ranging purposes. fromimpeachmentto censureto 
Afterall, presidentsare often nothing-thaits mostappropriatein called upon to make fatefuldeci- thiscase. sionsof thefirstimportancea,nd, in theshorttermat least,thesedecisionscan be veryunpopular.Once theHouse's centuries-longtradition ofconstitutionarlestrainthas been destroyedi,tsfuturepoliticalleadershipwillbe sorelytemptedto respondto unpopulardecisionsbyregularlyseekingto forcethepresident fromofficeT.he resultwouldbe a massiveshifttowarda British-style systemofparliamentarygovernment. 
This is in factwhathappenedin the aftermathof the impeachment 
workslike TheLeast DangerousBranch (1962) to hisposthumousTheMorality of Consent(1975). 
Farrand,Max. 1986. TheRecordsoftheFederalConventionof 1787. New Haven: Yale UniversityPress. 
Nagle,JohnCopeland. 1997.A Twentieth AmendmentParable." New YorkUniversity Law Review72(May): 470-94. 
U.S. Senate. Senate Rules Committee.1988. 
Samuel H. Beer continuefdrompage 25 tialimportanceto thepublicwelfare."Because of thesebroad and weightyconsequences,impeachment is primarilya political,not a judicial, act. 
like a vote of no confidencep,asses judgementon and enforcesresponsibilityon the executivepower.In the Britishsystemt,hatresponsibility runsdirectlyto thelegislatureI.n theAmericansystemo,n the contraryt,hatresponsibilitryunsto the legislatureonlysecondarilyand in special circumstancesF.or us, the responsibilitoyf thepresidentis essentiallyand directlyto thevoters. 
separatelyelected,likewiseis held accountablebythevoters.This separationof powersis fundamentailn our constitutionadlesignand is a mainpointof distinctionfromthe 
bilityofbothbranchesto thevoters expressesthesovereigntyof thepeople as theultimateauthorityof our constitutionand of thegovernment establishedunderit. 
As theframersstruggledto give expressionto thisprinciple,theyran intoa problem.How were our libertiesto be protectedagainstmisuse of powerbytheexecutivebetween quadrennialelections?At thePhiladelphiaconventionduringthesummerof 1787,theyexploredvarious possibilitiess,uchas appeals to the SupremeCourtand similarbodies. 
The states,likewise,we maynote, experimentedin theoryand practice witha varietyofmethodsofbridgingthisgap. At thelastmoment,the framersincorporateda structure almostexactlyin theformthenbeingused in Englandin theimpeachmentof WarrenHastings.This device,althoughit had ancientroots, had come to special prominencein theseventeenthand eighteenthcenturieswhenGreat Britainalso fora timedisplayeda separationof powers,as a stillpowerfuland independentmonarchfacedoffagainstthe risingassertionsof theparliament. 
In thosecircumstancesi,mpeachmentwas adopted bytheparliamentariansas a means of enforcingresponsibilityon themonarchthrough actionagainsthisministersW.hen, finallyt,hemonarchwas eased out of politicstheold fusionof executiveand legislativepowerwas taken overbya committeeof theparliament-thecabinet.Now,the interim methodof gettinga hold on theexecutivewas droppedin favorof a vote of confidencewhichperformed moreeffectiveltyhefunctionof en 
Wheretheultimatesovereignis thepeople, the interferencoef one power,thelegislaturein itsexercise of such a direresponsibilitays removalof a popularlyelectedpresidentimposesseveredutieson the legislatureT.he Congressitself,not theprimarysourceof authorityb,ut onlya creatureof thepeople, must act in lieu ofthepeople between quadrennialelections.At theirbest, thelegislatorswilldo whatthepeople, at theirbest,would do, weighingthepluses and minusesof the recordand thepromiseas a whole, asking,"Does the nationalinterest requiretheremovalfromofficeof thispresident?"In thecase of PresidentClinton,theAmericanpeople have twiceansweredthatquestion byelectinghimto theAmerican presidencyI.fwe seek furtherlight on theAmericanmind,surveysof opinioncontinueto confirmthat answerwhichalso in no wayis disturbedbythe outcomeof therecent midtermelections. 
The failureto considerthewhole recordof Clinton'spresidencyin foreignand domesticaffairscould have severelong-runcosts.The removalof a president,thanksto such entsystem. neglectinjudgement,could damage forcingresponsibilitoyn parliament. our democraticsystemC.onsiderthe At thesame timethatimpeachment temptationwshichthisprecedent was dyingout in Britain,itwas wouldexcitein a Congressof a diftakenup byAmericans,who found ferentpartyagainsta futurepresiin it a wayof supplementingthe dentof a differenptarty.As a great principalmechanismof democratic historianH,enryAdams,said, on the responsibilitbyyquadrennialelec- failedattemptof theJeffersoniantso tions.The broad scope of impeach- removeJusticeChase, impeachment mentwas embodiedin a verydiffer- is not a suitableactivityforparty politics. 
Matthew H. Holden Jr. continuefdrompage 25 commentatorwshoseprofessionit is to expressopinion.I can recalla televisioncommentaryi,n August 1998,whenpanelistswereasked about the reasonthatpublicaudiences generallydid nothave the same intensefeelingsabout the Clinton-Lewinskiynformationas the televisionjournalists.One panelist said: "We'll just have to educate them."Such commentaryfailsto considerthatthegeneralpublicmay alreadyhave made itsjudgments, howeverrough,thatthe "cost" of furtheractionagainstthepresident mayexceed the"benefit"to thepoliticalsystemT.he generalpublichas good reasonto believethat,on the basis ofpast performancei,tsevaluationof sucha cost-benefirtatio maybe moreclear-mindedthanthat of manyreportersand editorsfrom whomtheyhave heard. 
To initiatean impeachment([an] accusationof asserted"highcrime" or "highmisdemeanor")againstthe presidentwouldimposefartoo heavya burdenupon thepolitical systemsinceno reasonableperson arguesthattheacts underdiscussion in anywaydisable,or potentially disable,theCongress.NeitherCongressnor [the]courts[are] disabled, or underanypotentialityofbeing disabled,or thepresidentwouldnot nowbe on thedefensiveI.mpeachmentand convictionof a president wouldmean replacingan entireadministration. 
tutionalfeatureshave developed, and it is to theirinterrelationships thattheidea of the"system"refers. 
Constitutionw, itha strongpresidency,has giventheUnitedStatesa remarkablystablegovernmentI.f, forexample,the UnitedStateshad a parliamentaryregime,PresidentReagan probablywouldhave had to yieldin 1982 underthepressureof economicrecession.If thatwereso, he could neverhave evolvedto a de factopartnershipa,s some see it, withGorbachevtowardwinding downthe armsrace. 
The presidenthas a unique com34 binationof formaland informal powersthatrevolvearoundhiscentralityto theexecutivebranch,his role as theprimeleader in national securitypolicy,his leadershipof one of thepoliticalparties,and his twentieth-centurryole in legislativeleadership,[are] stronglyaffectedbyall hisotherpowers,butgroundedin hispossessionof theveto,which effectivelmyakeshimone-thirdof the legislativeprocess. 
The presidentdoes notprevailall thetimein thesedomains,or even in anyone of them.But thepresident'srole in severalof themis almostalwayscritical,and is so even now.1 
The normalrequirementofAmerican governmenetngagesall these resources,as presidentsworkwith, against,and arounda varietyof allies and opponents.If anypresident wereto be removed,no otherperson could exerciseequivalentleadershipuntilthesuccessorhad developed his own relationships. 
The level of cost to thesystem goes farbeyondthis.It is in the intenseanimositythatalmostsurely willhave developed. 
These seventeenth-centucrayses thatI mentionedearlierare not meredecoration,but have direct application.Lawyers,of course,use themto tracetheverymeaningof thelaw itself(U.S. House of Representatives1974). These historical cases help me to statea simplehypothesis:Whatevernewweapon is introducedintothepoliticalbattle tendssoon to become domesticated, evenbanalized,so thatitsuse is moreand morecommonjudgment. It willbe adapted and adopted by manyothergroups.JamesJ.Kilpatrickwas nottalkingabout impeachments,but about [having]... theSupremeCourthold the Paula Joneslaw suitout untiltheconclusion of thepresident'sterm.But his statement[that]thedecision"is likelyto encouragetrumped-upharassmentsof futurepresidentson downtheline" (1998, 46) is apposite. mentalcareerof Lionel Cranfield, also wrotethat"The resurrectionof (this) antiquated weapon . . . produced some fortyimpeachmentbsetween1621 and 1688" (1958, 248). That is sixty-seveynears(67) times twelvemonths(12) fora sumof eighthundredand fourmonths (804). Divided byforty(40), the numberof impeachmentst,he result is,on a straight-linaeverage,one impeachmenteverytwentymonths. In fact,of course,theseimpeachmentscame in clusters,ratherthan on a straight-linaeveragebasis. But theechoes fromseventeenth-century England,withitsfifteento twenty impeachmentdsuringa threeyear period,withnumerousimpeachmentson slenderevidence(Holdsworth1924,260), are notto [be] takenlightlyI.n the slow-moving seventeenthcenturyf,actions broughteach otherto thetestwhetherroutinelyoverlongperiods or moreintenselyin periodicbursts. We shouldnotexpectan impeachmentin 1999 or 2000 to let the 
tranquillity. 
The betterhypothesisis thatwe shouldexpectmoreturmoilT.he twentiethcenturyhas been, since WorldWar II perhaps,somewhat similarto the seventeenthcenturyin one respect:intenseideologicalantagonismsE.ven in thepast twenty years,whenit mighthave been thoughtto decline,thereare intense ideologicalbattlegroupingse,asily activated.The resultantturmoilwill be made farworsebyan impeachmenton thegroundsthatwe now know.Massivedistrustwillfeed it. 
Well-financedpoliticalentrepreneurswillfeed it.Instantaneous communicationof informationd,isinformationa,nd misinformatiownill feedit. Impeachmentas technique willincreasinglybe domesticatedas legal defensefunds,politicalaction committeesa,nd manyothertechniques have been domesticated.Private groupswillurgetheircongressionalfriendsto initiatecalls for 
Impeachmentinvestigations, independentcounselsor otherprotrumped-upand otherwisew,illvir- ceduresto inquireintowhether tuallybe mandatedbygoingforward theremightbe a basis fordeterminon thisone. RichardH. Tawney, ingthatsomeone has violated,or who wrotean accountof thegovern- conspiredto violate,some law. Those who urgethisresurrection independentcounsel,as a civiloffishould,iftheybelievethatthepolit- cer,also withinthescope ofArticle ical systemconcernis worthwhile, II, Section4, ifthereare thosewho have a publicdutyto weighcarefully are motivatedto make the effort? whetherthe resulttheyachieveis Even regulatorycommissioners, theresulttheywantto achieve. beyondpresidentialdirection,are 
It is thuslikelythatwe willsee also civilofficersa,re theynot? attemptsto initiateimpeachment What reasonis thereforaffected actionsagainstotherpresidentsI.n interestsnotto use thisnewlyavaileach instance,one mayassumethat able weapon? While the impeachsuchefforwtillbe made bypeople mentof federaljudges does notprowho genuinelybelievetheircharges, vide muchto go on, as to standards and whobelievetheyhave credible forevaluatingpresidentialimpeachcases. Since all successfuleffortdse- ments,thereis one responsein pend upon coalitions,explicitor de whichthereversesituationbecomes facto,sucheffortwsillbecome suc- partof the systemthreat.The Articessfulonlyas varietiesof other cle III courts[are also] subjectto groupsand personsjoin theefforts thesame threatsof punitiveimon a varietyof grounds.There must peachmentactions-regardlesosf be a numberof upwardlymobile whethertheysucceed-ifsomeone congressmens,enators,and gover- becomesdedicatedto makingtheir nors-Republicanas well as Demo- livesmiserable. cratic-whoshouldexpectto find This is, again,not to be taken themselvesabsorbedin suchcontro- lightlyE.ven underthe stricterstanversiesoverthenexttwo,three,or dardsthatapplyto ArticleIII fourpresidentiaclycles.Congres- judges. There are membersof Consional leadersknowthatimpeach- gresswho have,withinthepast mentdoes nothave to stopwitha threeyears,been knownto argue presidentT.he same provision(Arti- thatjudges making"wrong"decicle II, Section4) also applies to "the sionsshouldbe impeached.2Will Vice President,and all civilOfficers thisapproachbe withheldiffederal of theUnitedStates."Cabinetoffic- trialjudges departfromwhat[have] ers and sub-cabinetofficerasre also been thought[ofas] conventional civilofficersT.here is no reasonfor procedures?For example,a trial adversariesnotto seek to invokethe judge had appointeda special masprocesswhenevertheyare deeply terto conductcertainproceedings angryo,r simplycalculatedlyration- involvingtheJusticeDepartment's al, about some action.Is itbeyond currentlitigationagainstMicrosoft. theimaginationthat,as manypeo- In due course,he was obligedto ple genuinelybelievethatabortionis dispensewiththe special masterby an ultimateevil,impeachmentat- virtueof an appeals courtdecision. temptswouldnotbe initiated The judge has reportedly"told lawagainstsome secretaryof Health yersforbothsides thathe mayask and Human Serviceson thebasis [thisdismissedspecial master]to thathe or she is conductingpolicies writea 'friendof thecourt'brief favorableto thisperceivedevil?Is summarizinghisviewson the case." thereanyreasonto believethat Is itbeyondreasonablebeliefthat, some attorneygeneral,even the underintenseconditions,someone presentone, mightnotbe theobject wouldchoose to impeachsuch a of attemptedimpeachmentactionsif judge in sucha case? he (or, in thepresentcase, she) Clearly,myapproachis framed,as wereresolutelyto declineto initiate statedin thefirstplace, in political some independentcounselinvestiga- systemterms.This does not imply tiondesiredbySenate leaders?Is thatimpeachmentshouldneverbe thereanyreasonto suppose that employed.It does, however,suggest suchan attorneygeneralwouldbe a balancingtest:specificallyt,hatthe even moreat perilforlimitingo,r gravityof thepresidentialoffenses exercisingthelegal discretionto ter- shouldbe weighedagainstthepominate,an independentcounselin- tentialof fargreatercoststo the vestigationiftheindependentcoun- wholecountryT.he assigningof sel wereto wishto continue?Is the some behaviorto thecategoryof PSOnline those"otherhighCrimesand Misdemeanors"-parallelto treasonand bribery-shoulbde done onlywith utmostseriousness,and assessed withmaintainingthe essentialsof thepoliticalsystem(or "the structureof governmento"r "institutional stability"a)s theprimepurpose. 
The maintenanceof thiskindof seriousnesswillbe increasinglyproblematic,in somewhatthe same way of maintaininga highlevelof dignity has alreadyprovedproblematic. 
House leadershiphas, presumably withall seriousness,urgeddignity. 
But sincethebeginningof 1998,everylevelof theinquiryhas become moreraucousthananyonein the leadershippredictedbefore.It will continueto go beyondcontrolunless thereis some clear decisionthat producesthecontraryA.lexander Hamiltonwas rightto sayin Federalist65 (423): "The prosecutionof [actionsdeemed impeachable]... willseldomfailto agitatethepassionsof thewhole communitya,nd to divideit intopartiesmoreor less friendlyor inimicalto the accused." That tellsus thatsuchmatters shouldbe approachedwithprudence and wisdom. 
The impeachmentprocesslends itselfto thepersistentconflictof factions.Each ofwhichwillseek to use theprocessto advance itsown materialgoods and itsown revered symbolst,o pursuevengeanceand feudas iftheywere Capulet and Montague.Case in point:On October 8, 1997,duringtheHouse debate on the resolutionto launchan impeachmentinquiryintotheconductof PresidentClinton,one man fromAlabama called the CNN conservativephone line to saythatwhat he enjoyedwas frustratioannd defeatin theeyesof theliberalswho had been havingit all theirway, havingbeen in powerfor40 years. 
Such a statementshouldbe seen as thecloud no biggerthana man's hand.Again,to citeHamilton:"In manycases itwillconnectitselfwith thepre-existinfgactions,and will enlistall theiranimositiesp,artialities,influencea,nd intereston one side or on theother;and in such cases therewillalwaysbe thegreatest dangerthatthedecisionwillbe regulatedmorebythecomparative strengthof parties,thanbythe real demonstrationosf innocenceor guilt." 
The importanceof prosecution, withimpeachmentas itsleading case, as a weapon of recurrent groupconflictbecomesmoreimportantas each side disputesthe moralityand themethodsof the other. 
Politicalleadershave alreadylost too muchof the lessonsof how to tradewitheach otherand learned insteadto turneach conflictintoa dramaticmoralityplay,or to an occasion of politicalvengeance.The magnificationof conflictis somethingwe have seen before.Congress should[do] nothingfurtherto let thislion loose in the streets.Prudence and wisdomargueforterminatingthisprocess.Close the cage. 
* Communications,ubstantiveor technical, on thisstatementshouldbe directedto the authorat: Departmentof Governmentand ForeignAffairsU,niversityof Virginia,Room 232 Cabell Hall, CharlottesvilleV,A 22903; Fax: 804-924-3359E;mail:mh3q@virginia.edu. impeachmentproceeding. 
immediatelyat hand,buttheywillbe found in theABA Journaland in theNationalLaw Journal. 
Dix, and RaymondParnas. 1991.Prosecutionand Adjudication.4thed. Westbury, CT: The FoundationPress. 
Tawney,RichardH. 1958.Businessand PoliticsunderJamesI: Lionel Cranfieldas Merchantand MinisterC.ambridge:Cambridge UniversityPress. 
U. S. House of RepresentativesC.ommittee on theJudiciary1.974.ImpeachmentS:electedMaterialson Procedure9.3rdCongress,2nd Sess. WashingtonD,C: GovernmentPrintingOffice. 
Cass Sunstein ment.Probablythebest general people can and do findan alleged continuedfrompage 25 statementis thata falsestatement unlawfularmsdeal moreserious, underoath is an appropriatebasis fromtheconstitutionasltandpoint, pidnruqorumailrooybtee,jelviceetnsiooarnmsctooounntthtinteouuenadbdpuersroelcyoeif-ng ffaolrsiemstpaetaecmhmenetinntivfoalnvdedocnolnydiufctthe pthroanbleeimth.Werh.Heenreeviesrtshereiuonudscehralyrginegs wpsChoohownawsteter,wiv.tSeeuerthcsihoiosnontudo'tsl,rdeiytxuamtnntddoigeparhlalsstobttwaepnrstdahatichedtePitcrheeast- umtabhaeloanturbtteaylababitotuiusosetnelafsornhfaiiioplsfal,einfscidsictecearAo.i"nocfsuoeasnnlqsssuepuesiastrltaasitceoeyxn--"s pmadrriraeeyesmcswtuaeirdolelensb,s.bTpeyhapreputrssiecehdirepiidcoatniunastbrispnliaesprpkatoirislctitutihsilcaaesnrreto coverup thatrelationshipi,s not forethat,contraryto theconstitubcoidhcoertanahrttgmiteco,caodbhfeeaonainmnnedepslpseo,arwrcothhoveerenddae,.nvIvioteatarthakheesereu,dirpseiomu-s tuaerxn"ucdhueeifsgraothbrhClteehroCiermooantechsoctereirptMautlaitlsbeidogleneaTm;t.bhiuoeeatnnsistmaomirsa"deneiost ptcrioeeomfonpeearlleeapnwlpachanetro,otihimlseaagvpnieettaaoicmoghlr,amtteoeaeatnrbdgteweuuaimllsletbedoen-btsyby thIefsethtwefoirresstcploainmseissinthsaetqcueerntcaein. ltahwustfoasra.yIttthraitvsioamlizeevstihoelactriiomnisonfal gaAin.special riskof a readyresortto kindsoffalsehoodsunderoath,per- thecriminalaw do notmatter,or the impeachmentinstrumenits that jury,conspiracyto lie, and so forth, mattermuch.But it trivializesthe itwould interacti,n destructive could be a legitimatebasis forim- Constitutionto saythatanyfalse ways,withexistingtrendsin Ameripeachment,therecan be no objec- statementunderoath,regardlessof can democracyT.hose trends-totion.A falsestatementunderoath itssubjectmatter,providesa proper wardan emphasison scandalsand about a practiceof usingthe IRS to basis forimpeachment. towardsensationalisticcharges-have punishpoliticalopponentswould Of coursepeople of good faith characterizedtheconductof memalmostcertainlybe an impeachable could saythatthepresidenthas a bersofbothpartiesin the last deoffenses;o too about a falsestate- special obligationto the truthe,spe- cades. For thosewho love thiscounmentabout the acceptanceof a ciallyin a courtof law,and thatit is tryand itsinstitutionst,heuse of bribeto veto legislationT.hus,false thereforereasonableto considerim- impeachmenti,n suchcases, is quite statementsunderoath mightwellbe peachmentwheneverthepresident ominous-notleast because of the a legitimatebasis forimpeachment. has violatedthatobligation.It is cer- demonstrablegood faithof manyof Indeed,lyingto theAmericanpeo- tainlytruethatas thenation'schief thosewho are recommendin git. ple mayitselfbe an impeachable law enforcemenotfficert,hepresi- Fromthestandpointof theconstioffenseif,forexample,thepresident dentas a special obligationto the tutionalstructurei,t is farbetterto saysthata treatyshouldbe signed truthP.erhapssuchpeople also be- trya kindof line in the sand,one because it is in thebest interestof lievethatfalsestatementsunder thathas been characteristiocf our theUnitedStateswhenin facthe oath,and associatedmisconducta,re constitutionaplracticeforall of our supportsthetreatybecause itssigna- genuinelyunique and thatimpeach- historyA: practiceof invokingimtorieshave agreedto givehima lot mentforsuchstatementsand such peachmentonlyforthelargestcases ofmoney.But it does not diminish misconductwould thereforefailto of abuse of distinctlypresidential theuniversalimportanceof telling do damage to our historicalpractice authority. thetruthunderoath to saythat of resortingto impeachmentonlyin Text,historya,nd longstanding whetherperjuryor a falsestatement themostextremecases. But thispo- practicesuggestthatthenotionof is an impeachableoffensedepends sitionhas seriousproblemsof its "highCrimesand Misdemeanors" on whatit is a falsestatementabout. own.Even ifitwouldbe possible,in shouldgenerallybe understoodto The same is truefor"obstructionof principle,forreasonablepeople to referto large-scaleabuses thatinjustice"or interactionwsithadvisers confinethecurrentallegedbasis for volvethe authoritythatcomes from designedto promotetheunderlying impeachmenti,t is extremelydoubt- occupyinga particularpublicoffice. falsehood. fulthattheline could be held in Thus a presidentwho accepted a 
Anyonecan be prosecutedfor practice.Thus,a judgmentthatthe bribefroma foreignnation-orwho violatingthecriminallaw,and ifthe currentgroundsare constitutionally failedto attendto thepublicbusipresidenthas violatedthecriminal appropriatewould set an exceed- ness duringa war-wouldbe legitilaw,he is properlysubjectto crimi- inglydangerousprecedentforthe matelysubjectto impeachmentP.ernal prosecutionafterhis termends. future,a precedentthatcould jury,or falsestatementsunderoath, But it does notmake sense to say, threatento turnimpeachmentintoa could certainlyqualifyas impeachforexample,thatan Americanpresi- politicalweapon,in a waythat able offensesiftheyinvolved(for dentcould be impeachedforfalse wouldproduceconsiderableinstabil- example)lies about usingthe Interstatementsunderoath in connection ityin theconstitutionaolrder. nal Revenue Serviceto punishone's witha traffiacccidentin whichhe Consider,forexample,thefact politicalopponentsor about giving was involved,or thata falsestate- thatreasonablepeople can and do arms,unlawfullyt,o anothernation. mentunderoath,designedto pro- findtaxevasionmoreseriousthan But themostordinarypredicatefor tecta friendin a negligenceaction, falsestatementsabout a consensual impeachmentis an act,bythepresiis a legitimatebasis forimpeach- sexual activitya,nd thatreasonable dent,thatamountsto a large-scale PSOnline abuse of distinctlypresidentialauthority. 
If thereis everto be impeachmentoutsideof thatcategoryof cases, it shouldbe exceedinglyrare. 
The currentallegationsagainstPresidentClintondo notjustifya departurefromour traditionaplractices. 
Such a departurewouldbe not triviallybutprofoundlydestabilizingi;t 
Economics Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 91 
(2D SERIES) The Law of Group Polarization 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=199668 Preliminary draft 12/7/99 All rights reserved In a striking empirical regularity, deliberation tends to move groups, and the individuals who compose them, toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by their own predeliberation judgments. For example, people who are opposed to the minimum wage are likely, after talking to each other, to be still more opposed; people who tend to support gun control are likely, after discussion, to support gun control with considerable enthusiasm; people who believe that global warming is a serious problem are likely, after discussion, to insist on severe measures to prevent global warming. This general phenomenon -- group polarization -has many implications for economic, political, and legal institutions. It helps to explain extremism, “radicalization,” cultural shifts, and the behavior of political parties and religious organizations; it is closely connected to current concerns about the consequences of the Internet; it also helps account for feuds, ethnic antagonism, and tribalism. Group polarization bears on the conduct of government institutions, including juries, legislatures, courts, and regulatory commissions. There are interesting relationships between group polarization and social cascades, both informational and reputational. Normative implications are discussed, with special attention to political and legal institutions. 
“The differences of opinion, and the jarrings of parties in [the legislative] department of the government . . . often promote deliberation and circumspection; and serve to check the excesses of the majority.” Alexander Hamilton1 “In everyday life the exchange of opinion with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things form the standpoint of others and the limits of our vision are brought home to us. . . . The benefits from discussion lie in the fact that even representative legislators are limited in knowledge and the ability to reason. No one of them knows everything the others know, or can make all the same inferences that they can draw in concert. Discussion is a way of combining information and enlarging the range of arguments.” * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. The author is grateful to Timur Kuran, Andrei Marmor, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for valuable comments, and to David Schkade and Daniel Kahneman for many helpful discussions. Participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago also provided a great deal of help. 1 The Federalist No. 70, at 426-37 (Alexander Hamilton) (Clnton Rossiter ed. 1961). 2 John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 358-59 (1971). 
“Each person can share what he or she knows with the others, making the whole at least equal to the sum of the parts. Unfortunately, this is often not what happens . . . . As polarization gets underway, the group members become more reluctant to bring up items of information they have about the subject that might contradict the emerging group consensus. The result is a biased discussion in which the group has no opportunity to consider all the facts, because the members are not bringing them up. . . . Each item they contributed would thus reinforce the march toward group consensus rather than add complications and fuel debate.“ 
Consider the following events: • • • • • • 
professors at a particular branch of the University of Texas, inclined to be supportive of affirmative action, meet to exchange views and to plan further action, if necessary. What are these professors likely to think, and to do, after they talk? After a nationally publicized shooting at a high school, a group of people in the community, most of them tentatively in favor of greater gun control, come together to discuss the possibility of imposing new gun control measures. What, if anything, will happen to individual views as a result of this discussion? A local group of citizens, all of them Republicans, meet in 1998 to discuss whether President Clinton should be impeached. Before discussion begins, a strong majority is leaning in favor of impeachment, but they are not firmly committed to this view. A minority is entirely undecided. If a group resolution is required, what is it likely to look like? A jury is deciding on an appropriate punitive damage award in a case of recklessly negligent behavior by a large company; the behavior resulted in a serious injury to a small child. Before deliberating as a group, the jurors have chosen appropriate awards, leading to an average of $1.5 million and a median of $1 million. As a statistical generalization, how will the jury’s ultimate award tend to compare to these figures? A group of women are concerned about what they consider to be a mounting “tyranny of feminism.” They believe that women should be able to make their own choices, but they also think that men and women are fundamentally different, and that their differences legitimately lead to different social roles. The group decides to meet every two weeks to focus on common concerns. After a year, is it possible to say what its members are likely to think? There is an Internet discussion group, consisting of people concerned about the behavior of certain activities by Americans apparently associated with 
China. Over half of the participants are fearful that China might be engaged in spying and that under President Clinton, the Department of Justice has turned a blind eye, in part because of campaign contributions from Americans whose loyalties are suspect. In what directions are these Internet discussions likely to lead? 
Every society contains innumerable deliberating groups. Faculties, juries, legislative bodies, political organizations, regulatory commissions, multimember courts, faculties, student organizations, religious sects, Internet discussion groups, and others engage in deliberation. A pervasive question has to do with the likely consequences of the deliberative process. It is a simple social fact that sometimes people enter discussions with one view and leave with another, even on political and moral questions.4 Emphasizing this fact, many recent observers have embraced the traditional American aspiration to “deliberative democracy,” an ideal that is designed to combine popular responsiveness with a high degree of reflection and exchange among people with competing views.5 But for the most part, the resulting literature has not been empirically informed.6 It has not much dealt with the real-world consequences of deliberation, and with whether any generalizations hold in actual deliberative settings. 
The standard view of deliberation is that of Hamilton and Rawls, as stated above. Group discussion is likely to lead to better outcomes, if only because competing views are stated and exchanged. Aristotle spoke in similar terms, suggesting that when diverse groups “all come together . . . they may surpass – collectively and as a body, although not individually – the quality of the few best. . . . When there are many who contribute to the process of deliberation, each can bring his share of goodness and moral prudence; . . . some appreciate one part, some another, and all together appreciate all.”7 An important question is whether this view is naïve or excessively optimistic. Perhaps economic, psychological, and social mechanisms lead deliberating groups in unexpected and undesirable directions. If so, it would be necessary to rethink current enthusiasm for deliberation as a social phenomenon, and also to reassess and perhaps to restructure institutions that are designed as deliberating bodies. 
My principal purpose in this Article is to investigate a striking but thus far almost entirely neglected8 empirical regularity – that of group polarization -- and to relate this phenomenon to a number of issues in law and political theory. In brief, group polarization arises when members of a deliberating group move toward a more extreme point in whatever direction is 4 Sometimes it may seem that moral and political arguments are unlikely to have an effect; the evidence discussed here shows that on this proposition is quite wrong as an empirical matter. 5 See Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1997); Deliberative Democracy (Jon Elster ed. 1998); Jurgen Habermas, Between Law and Norms (1997). 6 Exceptions include James Fearon, Deliberation As Discussion, in Deliberative Democracy, supra, at 44; Susan Stokes, Pathologies of Deliberation, in id. at 123; Lynn Sanders, Against Deliberation, Political Theory. Of special interest is James Fishkin’s continuing experiments with the “deliberative opinion poll,” in which groups of diverse people are asked to deliberate on public issues. See James Fishkin, The Voice of the People (1998); The Poll With A Human Face (Maxwell McCombs and Amy Reynolds eds. 1999). Fishkin’s groups do not polarize, at least not systematically; this result is undoubtedly a product of the distinctive setting, in which materials are presented on each issue, with corresponding claims of fact and value. In the experiments discussed here, the relevant arguments are introduced by the participants, not by any third party. See below for discussion of Fishkin. 7 Aristotle, Politics 123 (E. Barker trans. 1972). 8 I have been unable to find any sustained discussions in the relevant literature in law or political theory. indicated by the members’ predeliberation tendency. “[L]ike polarized molecules, group members become even more aligned in the direction they were already tending.”9 Group polarization is the conventional consequence of group deliberation. Thus, for example, the first deliberating group is likely to become more firmly committed to affirmative action; the second group will probably end up favoring gun control quite enthusiastically; any group resolution from the third group will tend to favor impeachment; the punitive damages jury will likely come up with an award higher than the median and perhaps higher than the mean as well; the group of women concerned about feminism is likely to become very conservative indeed on gender issues; the Internet group is likely to fear something like a conspiracy to cover up the relevant activities.10 
Two principal mechanisms underlie group polarization. The first points to social influences on behavior; the second emphasizes limited “argument pools,” and the directions in which those limited pools lead group members. An understanding of these mechanisms provides many insights into legal and political issues; it illuminates a great deal, for example, about likely processes within multimember courts, juries, political parties, and legislatures – not to mention insulated ethnic groups, extremist organizations, student associations, faculties, workplaces, and families. At the same time, these mechanisms give little reason for confidence that deliberation is making things better than worse; in fact they raise some serious questions about deliberation from the normative point of view.11 If deliberation simply pushes a group toward a more extreme point in the direction of its original tendency, do we have any systematic reason to think that discussion is producing improvements? 
As we will see, one of the principal lessons of the group polarization phenomenon is to cast new light on an old point, to the effect that social homogeneity can be quite damaging to good deliberation.12 When people are hearing echoes of their own voices, the consequence may be far more than support and reinforcement. Another lesson is that particular forms of homogeneity can be breeding grounds for unjustified extremism, even fanaticism. To work well, deliberating groups should be appropriately heterogeneous and should contain a plurality of articulate people with reasonable views – an observation with implications for the design of regulatory commissions, legislative committees, White House working groups, and even multimember courts.13 But there is a conceptual problem here: It is difficult to specify appropriate heterogeneity, and the appropriate plurality of views, without making some antecedent judgments about the substantive question at issue. I offer some comments about how to resolve that problem. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part II offers some brief notations on the general question of social influences on individual judgments, with particular reference to the 
10 Compare R. Hightower and L. Sayeed, The Impact of Computer-Mediated Communication Systems on Biased Group Discussion, 11 Computers in Human Behavior 33 (1995). 11 I am speaking here of real-world deliberation, not of deliberation accompanied by preconditions of the sort that have been influenced by those thinking of it in ideal terms. See Jurgen Habermas, supra. A particular point to emphasize here is the need for full information. See id. 12 A classic discussion is John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859). 13 Compare Irving Janis, Groupthink (1972) (coming to the same general conclusion, but without discussing polarization). phenomenon of social cascades. A central point here is that any particular’s persons deeds and statements create an informational externality.14 When a number of people have acted or spoken, observers who lack much private information are highly likely to follow their lead. Part III offers a basic account of group polarization, with particular reference to some new data in the legal context. Part IV discusses the mechanisms that account for group polarization. Part V traces the implications for a number of issues, involving feuds, ethnic strife, juries, commissions, multimember courts, legislatures, and deliberation via the Internet. Part VI shows in what sense group polarization raises doubts about the idea that deliberation is a social good; it traces the implications of the phenomenon for proper structuring of deliberative institutions. Part VII is a brief conclusion. 
II. 
A great deal of attention has recently been devoted to the topic of social influences on individual behavior.15 Because many of these influences are at least roughly analogous to what happens in group polarization, and because they have some bearing on deliberation as well, it will be worthwhile to offer some brief notations here. 
The simplest point is that people frequently do what they do because of what they think (relevant) others do. Thus, for example, teenage girls who see that other teenagers are having babies are more likely to become pregnant themselves16; littering and nonlittering behavior appears to be contagious17; the same is true of violent crime18; those who know other people who are on welfare are more likely to go on welfare themselves19; the behavior of proximate others affects the decision whether to recycle20; a good way to increase the incidence of tax compliance is to inform people of high levels of voluntary tax compliance21; and students are less likely to engage in binge drinking if they think that most of their fellow students do not engage in binge drinking, so much so that disclosure of this fact is one of the few successful methods of reducing binge drinking on college campuses.22 14 See Andrew Caplin & John Leahy, Miracle on Sixth Avenue: Information Externalities and Search, 108 Econ. J. 60 (1998). 15 See, e.g., Dan Kahan, Social Influence, Social Meaning, and Deterrence, Va L Rev. (1998). For extended overviews., see Eliott Aronson, The Social Animal (7th ed. 1995); Lee Ross and Richard Nisbett, The Person and the Situation (1991); group polarization is a surprising omission from both of these lengthy and highly illuminating treatments. 16 See, e.g., George A. Akerlof, Janet L. Yellen & Michael L. Katz, An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in the United States, 111 Q.J. Econ. 277 (1996). 17 See Robert Cialdini et al., A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of Norms to Reduce Littering in Public Places, 58 J Pers. And Soc. Psych 1015 (1990). 18 See Washington Post (December 1999). 19 See Marianne Bertrand, Erzo F.P. Luttmer & Sendhil Millainathan, Network Effects and Welfare Cultures (unpublished manuscript, Apr. 9, 1998). 20 See Ardith Spence, Wants for Waste (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1999). 21 See Stephen Coleman, The Minnesota Income Tax Compliance Experiment State Tax Results (Minnesota Department of Revenue, April 1996). 22 See H. Wesley Perkins, College Student Misperceptions of Alcohol and Other Drug Norms Among Peers, in Designing Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention Programs in Higher Education 177-206 (US Dept.of Educ. ed. 1997); Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683, 767 (1999). 
Social influences affect behavior via two different mechanisms.23 The first is informational. As noted, what other people do, or say, carries an informational externality; if many other people go to a certain movie, or refuse to use drugs, or carry guns, observers are given a signal about what it makes sense to do. The second mechanism is reputational. Even if people do not believe that what other people do provides information about what should be done, they may think that the actions of others provide information about what other people think should be done. Thus each person’s expressive actions come with a reputational externality. People care about their reputations, and hence they may do what they think other people think they should do, whether or not they believe that they should do it. Reputational considerations may, for example, lead people to obey or not to obey the law, smoke cigarettes, buy certain cars,24 drive while drunk, help others, or talk about political issues in a certain way. They exert a ubiquitous influence on behavior.25 
In the most vivid experiments involving group influences, conducted by Solomon Asch, individuals were willing to abandon the direct evidence of their own senses.26 In the relevant experiments, a certain line was placed on a large white card. The task of the subjects was to “match” that line by choosing, as identical to it in length, one of three other lines, placed on a separate large white card. One of the lines on the second white card was in fact identical in length to the line to be matched to it; the other two were substantially different, with the differential varying from an inch and three quarters to three quarters of an inch. The subject in the experiments was one of eight people asked to engage in the matching. But unbeknownst to the subject, the other people apparently being tested were actually there as part of the experiments. 
Asch’s experiments unfolded in the following way. In the first two rounds, everyone agreed about the right answer; this seemed to be an extremely dull experiment. But the third round introduced “an unexpected disturbance,”27 Other group members made what was obviously, to the subject and to any reasonable person, a clear error; they matched the line at issue to one that was obviously longer or shorter. In these circumstances the subject had the choice of maintaining his independent judgment or instead yielding to the crowd. A large number of people ended up yielding. In ordinary circumstances subjects erred less than 1 percent of the time; but in rounds in which group pressure supported the incorrect answer, subjects erred 36.8% of the time.28 Indeed, in a series of twelve questions, no less than 70% of subjects went along with the group, and defied the evidence of their own senses, at least once. 23 See, e.g., Elliott Aronson, supra note, at 22; Lee and Ross, supra note, at 44-45. 24 See Robert Frank, Luxury Fever (1999). 25 Timur Kuran, Public Truth, Private Lies (1998), emphasizes this point. 26 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995). 27 Id. at 15. 28 Id. at 16. 
Several refinements are important here. Susceptibility to group influence was hardly uniform; some people agreed with the group almost all of the time, whereas others were entirely independent in their judgments. Significantly, the existence of at least one compatriot, or voice of sanity, mattered a great deal. When just one other person made an accurate match, errors were reduced by three-quarters, even if there was a strong majority the other way.29 By contrast, varying the size of the majority mattered only up to a number of three, and increases from that point had little effect. Thus opposition from one person did not increase subjects’ errors at all; opposition from two people increased error to 13.6%; and opposition from three people increased error to 31.8%, not substantially different from the level that emerged from further increases in group size. 
Both informational and reputational considerations appear to have led people toward these errors. Several people said, in private interviews, that their own opinions must have been wrong. On the other hand, experimenters find greatly reduced error, in the same basic circumstances as Asch’s experiments, when the subject is asked to give a purely private answer.30 
Asch concluded that his results raised serious questions about the possibility that “the social process is polluted” by the “dominance of conformity.”31 He added, “That we have found the tendency to conformity in our society so strong that reasonably intelligent and well-meaning young people are willing to call white black is a matter of concern.”32 Notably, however, Asch’s experiments did not involve deliberation, for people were not exchanging reasons; indeed, we might expect that reason-giving would have severely weakened his results. What reasons could have been given for incorrect matches? But the existence of substantial numbers of mistakes, as a result of mere exposure to the incorrect conclusions of others, raises questions about whether and when deliberation will lead people in the right directions. 
Some of the most interesting recent work on social influence involves the possibility of informational and reputational “cascades”33; this work has obvious relevance to law and politics.34 Indeed, it is possible to interpret Asch’s work as having demonstrated considerable individual susceptibility to cascade effects. What is striking about such effects is that their ripplelike nature, or the quality of contagion. Group polarization is sometimes, but not always, a product of cascade effects; it will be useful to understand the former against the background of the latter. 
The question explored in the cascades literature is why individuals and social groups sometimes move quite rapidly in some direction or another. A starting point is that when individuals lack a great deal of private information (and sometimes even when they have 29 Id. at 18. 30 See Aronson, supra note, at 23-24. 31 Id. at 21. 32 Id. 33 See Sushil Biikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, J. Econ. Persp., Summer 1998, at 151 34 See id.; Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev (1999). such information), they tend to rely on information provided by the statements or actions of others. If A is unaware whether abandoned toxic waste dumps are in fact hazardous, he may be moved in the direction of fear if B seems to think that fear is justified. If A and B believe that fear is justified, C may end up thinking so too, at least if she lacks independent information to the contrary. If A, B, and C believe that abandoned hazardous waste dumps are hazardous, D will have to have a good deal of confidence to reject their shared conclusion. The result of this process can be to produce cascade effects, as large groups of people end up believing something – even if that something is false – simply because other people seem to believe it too. There is a great deal of experimental evidence of informational cascades, which are easy to induce in the laboratory35; real world phenomena also seem to have a great deal to do with cascade effects.36 Notice here that when a cascade is occurring, large numbers of persons end up with a shared view, not simply because of social influence, but via a particular process, in which a rivulet ends up as a flood; this is what makes cascades distinctive. 
Though the cascades phenomenon has largely been discussed in connection with factual judgments, the same processes should be at work for political, legal, and moral questions; we can easily imagine political, legal, and moral cascades. Suppose, for example, that A believes that affirmative action is wrong, that B is otherwise in equipoise but shifts upon hearing what A believes, that C is unwilling to persist in his modest approval of affirmative action when A and B disagree; it would be a very confident D who would reject the moral judgments of three (apparently) firmly committed others. Sometimes people are not entirely sure whether capital punishment should be imposed, whether the Constitution protects the right to have an abortion, whether it is wrong to litter or to smoke. Many people, lacking firm convictions of their own, may end up believing what (relevant) others seem to believe. Recent changes in social attitudes toward smoking, recycling, and sexual harassment have a great to do with these effects.37 The same process may work for the choice of political candidates, as a fad develops in favor of one or another – a cascade “up” or “down,” with sensational or ruinous consequences. We can easily imagine cascade effects in the direction of certain judgments about the appropriate course of constitutional law; indeed such effects seem to have been at work in the legal culture in the 1960s (with mounting enthusiasm for the Warren Court) and the 1980s (with mounting skepticism about that Court). It is even possible to imagine cascade effects with respect to questions of constitutional method (eg, textualism, originalism). 
Thus far the discussion has involved purely informational pressures and informational cascades, where people care about what other people think because they do not know what to think, and they rely on the opinions of others, to show what it is right to think. But there can be reputational pressures and reputational cascades as well.38 Here the basic idea is that people care about their reputations, and they speak out, or remain silent, or even engage in certain expressive activity, partly in order to preserve those reputations, even at the price of failing to say what they really think. Suppose, for example, that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious 35 See Lisa Anderson and Charles Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory, 87 Am Econ Rev 847 (1997). 36 See Bikhchandani et al., A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades, 100 J Polit Econ. 992 (1992); Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 37 See Spence, supra note; Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles, in Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice ch. 2 (1997). 38 See Timur Kuran, Public Lies, Private Truths (1996). environmental problem; suppose too that B is skeptical. B may keep quiet, or (like some of Asch’s subjects) even agree with A, simply in order to preserve A’s good opinion. C may see that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious problem, and that B seems to agree with A; C may therefore voice agreement even though privately she is skeptical or ambivalent. It is easy to see how this kind of thing might happen with in political life with, for example, politicians expressing their commitment to capital punishment (even if they are privately skeptical) or their belief in God (even if they are agnostic on the question). Here too the consequence can be cascade effects – large social movements in one direction or another -- when a number of people appear to support a certain course of action simply because others (appear to) do so. What is true for factual beliefs can be true as well for moral, legal, and political judgments. People might say, for example, that affirmative action violates the Constitution simply because of perceived reputational sanctions from saying the opposite; they might support or oppose the death penalty largely in order to avoid the forms of social opprobrium that might come, in the relevant community, from taking the opposing view. 
Are social cascades good or bad? No general answer would make sense. Sometimes cascades are quite fragile, precisely because people’s commitments are based on little private information; sometimes cascades are rooted in (and greatly fuel) blunders. Sometimes cascade effects will eliminate public torpor, by generating concern about serious problems; but sometimes cascade effects will make people far more worried than they be, or otherwise produce large-scale distortions in private judgments, public policy, and law. The antislavery movement had distinctive cascade-like features, as did the anti-apartheid movement in South Africa; so too with Mao’s Cultural Revolution and the rise of Nazism in Germany.39 The serious risk with social cascades, both informational and reputational, is that they can lead to widespead errors, factual or otherwise. Cascades need not involve deliberation; but related problems infect processes of group deliberation, as we will now see. 
Group polarization is among the most robust patterns found in deliberating bodies, and it has been found in many diverse tasks. Polarization is said “to occur when an initial tendency of individual group members toward a given direction is enhanced [by] group discussion.”40 The result is that groups often make more extreme decisions than would the typical or average individual in the group (where “extreme” is defined internally, by reference to the group’s initial dispositions). There is a clear relationship between group polarization and cascade effects; as we will see, the former, like the latter, seems to have a great deal to do with both informational and reputational influences. A key difference is that cascade effects lead people to fall in line with an existing tendency, whereas polarization leads them to a more extreme point in the same direction. 
Notice that group polarization refers not to variance among groups of any kind, but to what happens within a group discussing a case or problem.41 Consider some examples of the basic phenomenon, which has been found in an array of nations.42 (a) A group of moderately profeminist women will become more strongly profeminist after discussion.43 (b) After discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid.44 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.45 (d) After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question.46 As statistical regularities, it should follow, for example, that that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort will, after discussion, sharply oppose the war; that a group moderately predisposed to hire a certain job candidate will, after discussion, support the application with considerable enthusiasm; that people tending to believe in the inferiority of a certain racial group will be entrenched in this belief as a result of discussion. 
The phenomenon of group polarization has conspicuous importance to the operation of deliberating bodies of relevance to law and politics, including legislatures, commissions, multimember courts, and juries. I will return to this point shortly; for now notice a few obvious possibilities. Members of a political party, or of the principal political parties, may polarize as a result of internal discussions; party-line voting is sometimes explicable partly on this ground. A set of judges with similar predilections on a three-judge panel may well produce a more extreme ruling than any individual member would write if he were judging on his own. Extremist groups will often become more extreme; as we will soon see, the largest group polarization typically occurs with individuals already inclined toward extremes. With respect to deliberating juries, a recent study47 found significant group polarization with respect to “numerical punishment ratings” on a bounded numerical scale. For high punishment ratings, groups tended to generate numbers higher than the median of individual predeliberation judgments; for low punishment ratings, groups tended to generate numbers lower than the median of individual predeliberation judgments. This is precisely the pattern that group polarization would predict. 
Group polarization was first found in a series of experiments involving risk-taking decisions.48 Before 1961, conventional wisdom had been that as compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decision-makers – for example a committee or board – would be 41 Of course, when different deliberating groups polarize in different directions, the consequence can be great among-group variance. 42 These include the United States, Canada, Germany, and France. Of course it is possible that some cultures would show a greater or lesser tendency toward polarization; this would be an extremely interesting area for empirical study. 43 See D.G. Myers, Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization, 28 Human Relations 699 (1975). 44 Brown, Social Psychology 224 (2d ed. 1983). 45 D.G. Myers and G.D. Bishop, The Enhancement of Dominant Attitudes in Group Discuission, 20 J Personality and Soc. Psych. 286 (1976), 46 See id. 47 See David Schakde et al., Are Juries More Erratic Than Individuals?, Colum L Rev (2000). 48 I draw in this and the following paragraph on Brown, supra note, at 200-206. likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. But the relevant experiments, originally conducted by Stoner, found otherwise; they identified what has become known as the “risky shift.”49 Deliberation tended to shift group members in the direction of greater risk-taking; and deliberating groups, asked to reach a unanimous decision, were generally more risk-inclined – sometimes far more risk-inclined – than the mean individual member, predeliberation. 
In the original experiments, male graduate students of industrial management were asked a range of questions involving risk: whether someone should choose a safe or risky play in the last seconds of a football game; whether someone should invest money in a low-return, highsecurity stock or instead a high-return, lower security stock; whether someone should choose a high prestige graduate program in which a number of people fail to graduate or a lower prestige school where everyone graduates. In one problem, for example, people were asked to say whether a person now having a secure, lifetime job should take a new job, with a new company with an uncertain future. People were asked about the lowest probability of “financial soundness” that would justify the person with the secure job from taking the new position. In Stoner’s studies, people first studied the problems – twelve total – and recorded an initial judgment; they were then asked to reach a unanimous decision as a group. People were finally asked to state their private judgments after the group judgment had been made; they were informed that it was acceptable for the private judgment to differ from the group judgment. 
For twelve of the thirteen groups, the group decisions showed a repeated pattern toward greater risk-taking -- that is, after discussion, the unanimous outcome tended to assess the necessary likelihood of financial soundness as consistently lower than the median judgment of the group predeliberation. In addition, there was a clear shift toward greater risk-taking in private opinions as well. Only 16% were moved toward greater caution; 45% did not change at all; and a full 39% moved in the direction of greater risk-taking. This shift – the “risky” shift – was promptly duplicated in a number of diverse studies, some involving all men and some involving all women. 
We should distinguish at this point between two aspects of these findings, not always separated in the psychological literature and both of relevance to law and policy. The first involves the movement of deliberating groups, for whom a group decision is necessary, toward the group’s extreme end; call this (inelegantly) group polarization toward within-group extremes. This means that if a group decision is required, the group will tend toward an extreme point, given the original distribution of individual views. Undoubtedly the group’s decision rule will matter here; a requirement of unanimity may well, for example, produce a shift toward the most extreme points, at least if those with the most extreme views are least tractable and most confident. The second involves the movement of (even private) individual judgments as a result of group influence; call this individual polarization toward within-group extremes. This means that to the extent that private judgments are moved by discussion, it will be toward a more extreme point in the direction set by the original distribution of views. 49 See J.A.F. Stoner, A Comparison of Individual and Group Decisions Including Risk, unpublished master’s thesis, School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; J.A.F. Stoner, Risky and Cautious Shifts in Group Decisions, 4 J Experimental Social Psych. 442 (1968). 
A possible (and contemporaneous) reading of Stoner’s early studies would be that group dynamics are such as to move people – both groups and individuals within them -- in the direction of greater risk-taking. But this conclusion would be much too simple. Later studies showed that under certain conditions, it was possible, even easy to induce a “cautious shift” as well. Indeed, certain problems reliably produced cautious shifts. The principal examples involved the decision whether to marry and the decision whether to board a plane despite severe abdominal pain possibly requiring medical attention. In these cases, deliberating groups moved toward caution, as did the members who composed them. 
As yet there is no simple account of what kinds of problems will produce what kinds of shifts; but the identification of risky and cautious shifts has helped produce a general account of how much, and in what direction, people will tend to move. In Stoner’s original data, subsequent researchers noticed, the largest risky shifts could be found when group members “had a quite extreme risky initial position,” in the sense that the predeliberation votes were weighted toward the risky end, whereas the items “that shifted a little or not at all started out near the middle of the scale.”50 Thus the direction of the shift seemed to turn on the location of the original disposition, and the size of the shift depended on the extremeness of that original disposition. A group of very cautious individuals would produce a significant shift toward greater caution; a group of individuals inclined toward risk-taking would produce a significant shift toward greater risk-taking; and groups of individuals in the middle would produce smaller shifts in the direction indicated by their original disposition. In short, ”group discussion moves decisions to more extreme points in the direction of the original inclination . . . , which means shift to either risk or caution in the direction of the original disposition, and the size of the shift increases with the degree of the initial polarization.”51 Similar results have been found in many contexts, involving, for example, questions about economic aid, architecture, political leaders, race, feminism, and judgments of guilt or innocence.52 Polarization has been found for questions of obscure fact (eg, how far Sodom on the Dead Sea is below sea level) as well as for evaluative questions, including political and legal issues53 and even the attractiveness of people in slides.54 
What explains group polarization? It is tempting to think that conformity plays a large role, and as the Asch experiments suggest, individual judgments have been found to be greatly influenced by the desire to conform. Perhaps conformity is sometimes at work, but group polarization is not a matter of conformity; people do not shift to the mean of initial positions. The relevant movement goes to one or another side. Indeed, this is what defines, and what is most interesting about, group polarization. 50 Brown at 211. 51 Brown, supra, at 211. 52 See id. 53 A relatively recent treatment is Russell Spears, Martin Lee, and Stephen Lee, De-Individuation and Group Polarization in Computer-Mediated Communication, 29 British J Soc Psych 121 (1990 54 Turner et al., supra, at 153. 
There have been two main explanations for group polarization, both of which have been extensively investigated.55 Massive support has been found on behalf of both explanations.56 people want to be perceived favorably by other group members, and also to perceive themselves favorably. Once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such by comparison to other group members.57 With respect to risk-taking activity, people want to occupy a certain position in comparison to others, and before they hear what other people think, they assume that they do in fact occupy that position. But when they hear what other people think, they find, often, that they occupy a somewhat different position, and they shift accordingly. The result is to press the group’s position toward one or another extreme, and also to induce shifts in individual members. The same appears to happen in other contexts. People may wish, for example, not to seem too enthusiastic, or too restrained in their enthusiasm for, affirmative action, feminism, or an increase in national defense; hence their views may shift when they see what other group members think. The result will be both group and individual polarization toward within-group extremes. 
The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort – in the case of risk-taking, for example, they may want to be perceived (and to perceive themselves) as moderate risk-takers, and their choice of position is partly a product of this desire.58 No one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.59 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. A key claim here is that information alone about the actual positions of others – without discussion -- will produce a shift. Evidence has confirmed this fact; mere exposure induces a substantial risky shift (though it is less substantial than what is produced by discussion – about half as large).60 This effect helps explain a shift toward caution (the “cautious shift”) as well.61 While highly suggestive, the “mere 55 Isenberg, supra, and Brown, supra, review this literature; see also Turner et al., supra, at 142-70, for an overview and an attempt to generate a new synthesis. 56 Note that conformity does not explain group polarization. People are not attempting to conform, even under the social comparison theory; they are attempting to maintain their relative position, and the revelation of the views of others shifts people’s conception of what judgment is necessary to maintain that position. See Myers, supra note, at 562, indicating that people “want to perceive themselves as somewhat different from others” and that “people want to differentiate themselves from others, to a small extent and in the right direction.” 57 On signalling generally, see Eric Posner, Symbols, Signals, and the Law (forthcoming 2000). 58 For a quite vivid demonstration of such a process in the enactment of the Clean Air Act, one that does not, however, identify the mechanisms, discussed here, see Bruce Ackerman, John Millian, and Donald Elliott, Toward a Theory of Statutory Evolution: The Federalization of Environmental Law, 1 J. L. Econ. & Organization 313 (1985). 59 “Once the real locations of the mean was known, should it not be the case, granting that everyone wanted to see himself as reasonably audacious, that those who were really below the mean would be motivated to adopt riskier positions and so change the mean and produce the risky shift?” Brown, supra, at 214. 60 Teger and Pruitt (1967). 61 Investigations of social influence have emphasized both one-upmanship and the removal of pluralistic ignorance, that is, ignorance of what other people think (or are willing to say they think). Note that it is implicit in these findings that people seem to want not to conform, but to be different from others in a desirable way. “To be virtuous . . . is to be different from the mean – in the right direction and to the right degree.” Brown, supra note, at 469. exposure” finding does not confirm the social influence account; it is possible that the views of others simply provide an informational signal, quite apart from arguments, and hence that people move not in order to maintain reputation, but to do what is right. (Recall the discussion of informational cascades.) 
The social influence explanation invokes factors similar to those that underlie the reputational cascade. A major difference is that the social influence explanation concerns presentation to self as well as presentation to others. Note also that group polarization may or may not be a result of any cascade effect; the question is whether the accumulation of views from others operates in the form of a cascade. Existing work on group polarization does not answer this question. 
arguments, is based on a common sense intuition: that any individual’s position on an issue is partly a function of which arguments presented within the group seem convincing. The choice therefore moves in the direction of the most persuasive position defended by the group, taken as a collectivity. Because a group whose members are already inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that same direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. The key is the existence of a limited argument pool, one that is skewed (speaking purely descriptively) in a particular direction. 
The persuasive arguments theory begins with the suggestion that if a group is deliberating about some difficult question with a factual answer (how many countries are there in Africa, for example, or how many people were on the planet in 1900), discussion will typically produce some movement, not toward the mean, but toward the minority view on which one or a few members have accurate information. There is, moreover, empirical evidence that with respect to facts, deliberation produces movements toward accuracy.62 Of course many of the questions involving group polarization do not have purely factual answers. But a key aspect of those discussions is that the person with the correct answer is likely to state his view with a high degree of confidence, and also be able to make some argument in favor of that view. Novel arguments, bringing up fresh points, are especially likely to be persuasive. In any case members of a group will have thought of some, but not all, of the arguments that justify their initial inclination; consider the question whether to take risks or to be cautious. In discussion, arguments of a large number of individuals are stated and heard, but the total argument pool will be tilted in one or another direction, depending on the predispositions of the people who compose the group; hence there will be a shift in the direction of the original tilt.63 
When people hear arguments that they perceive as valid, or find to be memorable, vivid, new, or weighty simply by virtue of emphasis and repetition, they will shift in the direction suggested by those arguments. If a group of moderately feminist women becomes more feminist, a group moderately opposed to gun control more extremely so, and so forth, one reason is that the argument pool of any such group will contain a preponderance of arguments in the direction 62 See James Fishkin and Robert Luskin, Bringing Deliberation to the Democratic Dialogue, in The Poll With A Human Face 3, 29-31 (Maxwell McCombs and Amy Reynolds eds. 1999). 63 Brown, supra, at 219. suggested. The suggestion is that group polarization will occur when convincing arguments produce a shift in the direction of prediscussion inclinations, revealed in the means of the initial decisions 
There is an obvious analogy here to the informational cascade. In fact we can safely assume that group polarization sometimes occurs via a kind of informational cascade, as the statements of particular people begin a cascade process that culminates in extremism. The difference is that for cascade effects, what is crucial is the very fact of the belief, not its grounds, whereas for persuasive arguments to work, what is crucial is that arguments be offered and be found persuasive. It is also unclear whether any particular group polarization involves cascade effects at all; undoubtedly what sometimes happens is not a cascade effect, in which a large number of people successively “fall,” but a simple accumulation of arguments, eventually imposing weight on people whose views are subject to change. 
These are statistical regularities, no more. Of course not all groups polarize; some groups end up in the middle, not toward either extreme. Note that in Stoner’s original experiments, one of the twelve deliberating groups showed no polarization at all. Nor is it hard to understand why this might be so. If the people defending the original tendency are particularly unpersuasive, group polarization is unlikely to occur. If the outliers are especially convincing, groups may even shift away from their original tendency and in the direction held by few or even one.64 In addition, affective factors appear to be quite important and complementary to persuasive arguments. People are less likely to shift if the direction advocated is being pushed by unfriendly group members; the chance of shift is increased when people perceive fellow members as friendly, likeable, and similar to them.65 Physical spacing tends to reduce polarization; a sense of common fate and intragroup similarity tend to increase it, as does the introduction of a rival “outgroup.”66 Part of the reason for group polarization appears to be that as a class, extreme positions tend to be less tractable and more confidently held. This point is an important complement to the persuasive arguments theory67: The persuasiveness of arguments depends, not surprisingly, not simply on the grounds given, but also on the confidence with which they are 64 This is of course the theme of the movie Twelve Angry Men, where the single hold-out, played by Henry Fonda, shifts the judgment of the jury. 65 See Hans Brandstatter,, Social Emotions in Discussion Groups, in Dynamics of Group Decisions (Hans Brandstatter et al. ed. 1978). Turner et al., supra note, at 154-59, attempt to use this evidence as a basis for a new synthesis, one that they call “a self-categorization theory of group polarization,” id. at 154. In this account, “persuasion is dependent upon self-categorizations which create a common identity within a group,” and polarization occurs “because group members adjust their opinion in line with their image of the group position (conform) and more extreme, already polarized, prototypical responses determine this image.” Id. at 156. The key point here is that when a group is tending in a certain direction, the perceived “prototype” is determined by where the group is leaning, and this is where individuals will shift. Id. at 156. As Turner et al. suggest, their account shows “overlap with many aspects of social comparison and persuasive arguments models,” and because of the overlap, I do not discuss it as a separate account here. For possible differences in predictions, and supporting evidence, see id. at 158-70. An especially interesting implication, perhaps in some tension with the persuasive arguments theory, is that a group of comparative extremists will show a comparatively greater shift toward extremism. See id. at 158. 66 See Turner et al., supra note, at 153. 67 See Maryla Zaleska, The Stability of Extreme and Moderate Responses in Different Situations, in Group Decision Making, supra, at 163, 164. articulated. (Consider here both juries and multimember courts.) Group polarization can also be fortified through “exit,” as members leave the group because they reject the direction in which things are heading. If exit is pervasive, the tendency to extremism can be greatly aggravated. 
Notably, the persuasive arguments theory implies that there will be “depolarization,” or convergence toward the middle, if and when new persuasive arguments are offered that are opposite to the direction initially favored by group members. There is evidence for this phenomenon as well. 68 Depolarization, rather than polarization, will also be found when the relevant group consists of individuals drawn equally from two extremes (a point to which I will return).69 Thus if people who initially favor caution are put together with people who initially favor risk-taking, the group judgment will move toward the middle. 
Group members with extreme positions generally change little as a result of discussion or shift to a more moderate position.70 Consider a study71 consisting of six-member groups specifically designed to contain two subgroups (of three persons each) initially committed to opposed extremes; the effect of discussion was to produce movement toward the center. One reason may be the existence of partially shared persuasive arguments in both directions.72 Interestingly, this study of opposed subgroups found the greatest depolarization with obscure matters of fact (e.g., the population of the United States in 1900) -- and the least depolarization with highly visible public questions (e.g., whether capital punishment is justified). Matters of personal taste depolarized a moderate amount (e.g., preference for basketball or football, or for colors for painting a room).73 
These findings fit well with the persuasive arguments account of polarization. When people have a fixed view of some highly salient public issue, they are likely to have heard a wide range of arguments in various directions, producing a full argument pool, and an additional discussion is not likely to produce movement. Hence “familiar and long-debated issues do not depolarize easily.”74 With respect to such issues, people are simply less likely to shift at all. 
It also matters whether people think of themselves, antecedently or otherwise, as part of a group, with a degree of solidarity. If they think of themselves in this way, group polarization is all the more likely, and it is likely too to be more extreme.75 Thus when people are “de68 A third possibility is that hearing other similar opinions produces greater confidence in individual positions, opening members to a more extreme judgment in the same direction. raised recently by Heath and Gonzales . See Chip Heath and Richard Gonzales, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence But Not Decision Quality: Evidence Against Information Collection Views Of Interactive Decision Making, 61 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305-326 (1997). 69 See H. Burnstein, Persuasion As Argument Processing, in Group Decision Making (H. Brandstetter, J.H. Davis, and G. Stocker-Kreichgauer eds., 1982). 70 Ferguson and Vidmar, Effects of Group Discussion on Estimates of Risk Levels, 20 J Pers and Social Psych 436 (1971). 71 Brown, supra, at 225. 72 Amiram Vinokur and Eugene Burnstein, The Effects of Partially Shared Persuasive Arguments on Group-Induced Shifts, 29 J Personality & Social Psych. 305 (1974). 73 Amiram Vinokur and Eugene Burnstein, supra, at 884. 74 Brown, supra, at 226. 75 See Russell Spears, Martin Lee, and Stephen Lee, De-Individuation and Group Polarization in ComputerMediated Communication, 29 British J Soc Psych 121 (1990); Patricia Wallace, The Psychology of the Net (1999). individualized,” in the sense that the context emphasizes each person’s membership in the social group engaging in deliberation, polarization increases.76 
An especially interesting experiment attempted to investigate this point by manipulating two variables.77 First, some subjects were “de-individualized” by having to work on computers in separate rooms, whereas others were asked to work in a single office with desks facing each others (the “individualized” condition), In the de-individualized condition, visual anonymity was increased. Second, some subjects were given instructions in which group membership was made salient (the “group immersion” condition), whereas others were not (the “individual” condition). For example, subjects in the group immersion conditions were told that their group consisted solely of first-year psychology students, and that they were being tested as group members rather than as individuals. All conditions were held constant in one respect: Every subject was told that people like them tended to support one or another view. The relevant issues involved affirmative action, government subsidies for the theatre, privatization of nationalized industries, and phasing out nuclear power plans. 
The results were quite striking. There was the least group polarization in the deindividuated-individual condition; group polarization was greatest in the de-individuated/group immersion condition, when group members met relatively anonymously and when group identity was emphasized. Interestingly, there was no significant difference in polarization between the two individuated conditions (with and without emphasis on group immersion). From this experiment, it is reasonable to speculate that polarization is most likely to occur, and to be most extreme, under circumstances in which group membership is made salient and people have a high degree of anonymity. There is obviously a potential lesson here about the effects of group deliberation on the Internet,78 a point to which I will return. 
These remarks suggest some general, common-sensical conclusions about how and when group discussion will move predeliberation opinions. Views based on a great deal of thought are least likely to shift; depolarization can occur with equal subgroups tending in opposite directions; groups will usually shift in the direction of an accurate factual judgment where one or more members knows the truth; where views are not firmly held, but where there is an initial predisposition, group polarization is the general rule. Undoubtedly generalizations of this sort bear on shifts in individual views among many deliberating bodies. 
The logic of group polarization suggests that if participants engage in repeated discussions – if, for example, they meet each month, express views, and take votes – there should be repeated shifts toward, and past, the defined pole. Thus, for example, if a group of people is thinking about genetic engineering of food, or the minimum wage, or the World Trade Organization the consequence of their discussions, over time, should be to lead in quite extreme directions. In these iterated “polarization games,” deliberation over time should produce a situation in which individuals hold positions more extreme than those of any individual member before the series of deliberations began. 
This is only a thought experiment; there appears to be no study of such iterated polarization games. But the hypothesized outcome is less fanciful than it might seem. In the jury study referred to above, deliberating groups frequently came up with punishment ratings, and with dollar awards, as high as or even higher than that of any individual, pre-deliberation.79 And it is not difficult to think of real-world groups in which the consequence of deliberation, over time, appears to be to shift both groups and individuals to positions that early on, they could not possibly have accepted.80 Iterated polarization games seem to be an important real-world phenomenon. But this raises two questions: Why and when do groups stop polarizing? Why and when do they end up at a certain point, or even shift in the opposite direction? Nothing in the literature on group polarization adequately answers these questions.81 But it is possible to speculate that polarization often ends or reverses as a result of some external shock – as, for example, when new members add new arguments, or when the simple self-interest of political leaders produces a shift in direction,82 or when new circumstances, of fact or value, alter the perspectives and incentives of group members. Social cascades often change direction as a result of such external shocks, as through the release of new information83; the same processes seem to terminate or to reverse group polarization. 
Interestingly – and in a noteworthy qualification of the general literature on group polarization – the previously discussed study of punitive damage awards by juries found a striking pattern for dollar awards.84 For any dollar award above zero, the general effect of deliberation was to increase awards above those of the median voter. Dollar awards did not simply polarize; while higher awards increased dramatically, as compared to the median of predeliberation votes, low awards increased as well. Why is this? 
Both the original experiment and a follow-up experiment suggest that this result is a product of a “rhetorical asymmetry” that favors, other things being equal and in any contest, the person or persons urging higher awards. Thus the fact of systematic increases in dollar awards in strongly suggested of a general tendency toward upward movement; a subsequent experiment, limited to University of Chicago law students, confirmed this effect, with a substantial majority of subjects agreeing that it was easier, other things being equal, to argue for higher awards than 79 David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries More Erratic Than Individuals?, 100 Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2000). 80 For a relevant discussion of deliberating groups in the 1960s, see James Miller, Democracy Is In The Streets (1993); see also Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cascades, 27 J Legal Stud 623, 648 (1998). 81 See Turner et al., supra, at 152, suggesting that there is no clear answer to the question for “what range of situations” polarization is predicted. 82 See the discussion of legislators below; and note, as inevitably noisy real-world examples, the centrist shift of the Democratic Party in 199101992, and the apparent centrist shift of the Republican Party in 1999-2000. 83 See David Hirschleifer, The Blind Leading The Blind, in The New Economics Of Human Behavior (1997). 84 See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries More Erratic Than Individuals?, 100 Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2000). for lower ones.85 In our culture, and in light of existing norms, the person favoring the higher amount for punitive damages appears likely to be more convincing than the person favoring the lower amount. It is important to emphasize that this asymmetry operates independently of any facts about the individual case. The reason appears to be that with respect to dollar awards involving a corporate defendant, stronger arguments – “we need to deter this kind of conduct,” “we need to send a powerful signal,” “we need to attract their attention” – tend to have comparatively greater weight. 
Undoubtedly there are many other contexts containing rhetorical asymmetry, and undoubtedly the asymmetry can affect outcomes, as it did in the jury study. A great deal of empirical work remains to be done on this question; too little is known to say why and when such an asymmetry is at work. Existing cultural norms are the underlying source of any rhetorical asymmetry, and such norms vary over space and time, producing shifts in rhetorical asymmetry. In any case it is not difficult to generate possible examples. Legislative judgments about criminal punishment may, for example, involve an asymmetry of exactly this kind. In certain settings, those favoring lower taxes, or more aid for scholarship students, or greater funding for environmental protection may have a similar rhetorical advantage. Much remains to be explored. For present purposes the point is that group polarization may be aggravated or attenuated if one or another side has a systematic advantage in rhetoric. Perhaps the most striking implication is that when there is an initial distribution of views in a certain direction, and when a more extreme movement in that direction has a rhetorical advantage, quite extreme shifts can be expected.86 
In both economics and law, a great deal of attention has recently been paid to the question whether human beings are “rational,” or “quasi-rational,” or subject to irrationality.87 There is an obvious question whether the phenomenon of group polarization raises doubts about rational actor models in economics or law. The answer is that for the most part, individual behavior within groups, as described thus far, creates no such doubts. It is certainly rational to make assessments on the basis of arguments offered; if the most numerous and convincing arguments seem to justify a shift, individual shifts are entirely rational.88 More difficult questions might seem to be raised by “social influence” accounts of group polarization. But it is certainly rational for people to care about their reputations. If they are changing their assessment because of reputational considerations, what must be said is that maintaining a certain reputation is part of what people care about (and there is nothing irrational about that). If people shift not for reputational reasons but because of a certain self-conception – if, for example, they think of themselves as people who are bold, or committed to a strong national defense, or left of center on 85 See id at XX. 86 Data from id. strongly support this speculation, with many deliberating juries producing dollar awards higher, and sometimes significantly higher, than that of the higher individual pre-deliberation. Data to be added. 87 Within economics, see, e.g., Gary Becker, Accounting For Tastes (1998); Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1993). Within law, see Symposium, The Legal Implications of Psychology, 51 Vand. L. Rev. 1499 (1998); Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 88 Compare Hirshleifer, supra note (emphasizing the rationality of participation in informational cascades). issues of race – a change in position, after exposure to the views of others, also seems entirely rational. 
The problem with group polarization is not that people subject to it suffer from some cognitive or motivational defect. The problem is instead that people may be shifted, as a result of entirely rational processes, in the direction of factual, legal, or moral mistakes. 
Notwithstanding the rationality of those subject to polarization, it should be emphasized that in laboratory studies, polarization occurs in terms of a specified issue and a specified scale. The issue for exploration is therefore framed in a certain way, and here there is a potential for manipulation. The same group of individuals, for example, might be inclined to be supportive of greater employment opportunities for women and also inclined to be skeptical about “feminism”; and polarization could drive otherwise identical groups toward more extreme positions on both questions, so much so that, in theory, one group could become very strongly committed to women’s employment opportunities that it embraced feminism, whereas another group could become so skeptical of feminism that it raised questions about greater employment opportunities for women. Here there is a lesson about the pervasive importance of “framing” in generating positions about disputed questions.89 But there is a twist on the conventional view: In the presence of polarization, questions can be framed in such a way as to shift groups, and individuals who constitute them, in distinctive and even inconsistent directions. 
Now if people attempt to square their various judgments with one another, in an attempt to reach reflective equilibrium,90 inconsistent shifts are less likely, and people ought to be less vulnerable to framing effects. In the real world, however, it is likely that polarization occurs around issues as socially framed; cultural movements of various sorts – toward greater ethnic identification, in favor of stronger national defense, on behalf of taxpayer support for the arts – are a likely consequence. Undoubtedly political entrepreneurs, with self-interested or altruistic agendas, are in some sense aware of this fact, and attempt to produce shifts along the scale that has been made salient. 
Group polarization should have a large effect on any deliberating group or institution; its effects are hardly limited to the laboratory. Religious organizations tend, for example, to strengthen group members’ religious convictions, simply by virtue of the fact that like-minded people are talking to one another.91 Indeed religious groups amplify the religious impulse, especially if group members are insulated from other groups; the result can be to lead people in 89 See Donald A. Redermeier et al., Understanding Patients’ Decisions, 270 JAMA 72, 73 (1993). 90 See John Rawls. A Theory of Justice (1971). 91 See David G. Myers, Polarizing Effects of Social Interaction, in Group Decision Making 125, 137-38 (Hermann Barndstatter et al. eds 1982). quite bizarre directions.92 Survey evidence shows that dramatic social events, like the assassination of Martin Luther King and civil rights disturbances, tend to polarize attitudes, with both positive and negative attitudes increasing within demographic groups.93 A similar process can harden attitudes toward outsiders and social change; thus proposals “for establishment of a halfway house or a correctional facility have typically elicited private apprehensions which, after discussion, become polarized into overt paranoia and hostility.”94 
Group polarization has particular implications for insulated “outgroups.” Recall that polarization increases when the deliberating group is able to define itself by contrast to some other contrasting group95; outgroups are in this position – of self-contrast to others – by definition. Excluded by choice or coercion from discussion with others, such groups may become polarized in quite extreme directions, often for no better reason than group polarization. Extremism on the part of such groups (not excluding murders and suicides) is a possible result,96 especially if we consider the fact that extreme groups show comparatively greater polarization.97 There is also likely to be some rhetorical asymmetry within such groups, so that arguments in a certain directions have the automatic upper hand. Consider, for example, a group of people who tend to believe that academic freedom is threatened by the tendency to “political correctness” in university life; in a debate about how much attention should be paid to (say) gender studies in the curriculum, skeptics are likely to have the upper hand. 
The tendency toward polarization among outgroups raises some doubts about the idea that certain group discussion produce “consciousness raising.” It is possible, at least, that the consequence of discussion is not to raise consciousness (an ambiguous term to be sure), but to produce group polarization in one direction or another -- and at the same time to increase confidence in the position that has newly emerged.98 This does not mean that consciousness is never raised; undoubtedly group discussion can identify and clarify problems that were previously repressed, or understood as an individual rather than social product. But nothing of this sort is established by the mere fact that views have changed and coalesced, and are held, post-discussion, with a high degree of confidence.99 
Some of the relevant processes are at work in feuds of all kinds; one of the characteristic features of feuds is that the feuding groups tend to talk only to one another, fueling and 92 See Leon Festinger et al., When Prophecy Fails (1956). 93 See R.T Riley and T.F. Pettigrew, Dramatic Events and Attitude Change, 34 J Personality and Social Psych 1004 (1976). 94 Myers, supra, at 135. 95 See Turner et al., supra note, at 151. 96 Cf. Aronson, supra note (discussing mass suicide at Jones Beach). 97 See supra; Turner et al., supra, at 158, 167-70. 98 See Chip Heath and Rich Gonzalez, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence But Not Decision Quality: Evidence Against Information Collection Views of Interactive Decision Making, 61 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305 (1995). 99 See id. amplifying their outrage, and solidifying their impression of the relevant events.100 Informational and reputational forces are very much at work here, producing cascade effects, and group polarization sometimes leads members to increasingly extreme positions. It is not too much of a leap to suggest that these effects are also present within ethnic groups and even nations, notwithstanding the obvious fact that here there is a high degree of heterogeneity, and deliberation cannot occur among all members at the same time. 
Timur Kuran, for example, has explored the phenomenon of “ethnification.” Kuran’s basic claim is that in many nations, including Turkey and the former Yugoslavia, ethnic strife is not a reawakening of long-suppressed resentments, but instead a product of reputational cascades. In this process, a failure to engage in ethnically identified activity produces reputational sanctions, which grow in intensity over time, as increasing numbers of people join the cascade. Hence “the fears and antagonisms that accompany high levels of ethnic activity may be a result of ethnification rather than its root cause.”101 Kuran does not refer to group polarization. But an understanding of this phenomenon would much fortify his analysis, by showing how within-group discussion (which is, under conditions of ethnification, an increasingly large percentage of total discussion) can ensure that ethnic groups, and individual members of ethnic groups, end up with a far stronger ethnic identification than the median member, before discussions began. In the extreme case, the result might be war.102 And when a war begins, group polarization, if it operates at the national level, can help ensure continued hostility and antagonism. 
Many people have expressed concern about processes of social influence on the Internet.103 The general problem is said to be one of fragmentation, with certain people hearing more and louder versions of their own preexisting commitments, thus reducing the benefits that come from exposure to competing views and unnoticed problems.104 But an understanding of group polarization heightens these concerns and raises new ones. A “plausible hypothesis is that the Internet-like setting is most likely to create a strong tendency toward group polarization when the members of the group feel some sense of group identity.”105 If certain people are deliberating with many like-minded others, views will not be reinforced but instead shifted to more extreme points. This cannot be said to be bad by itself – perhaps the increased extremism is good – but it is certainly troublesome if diverse social groups are led, through predictable mechanisms, toward increasingly opposing and ever more extreme views. It is likely that processes of this general sort have threatened both peace and stability in some nations106; while dire consequences are unlikely in the United States, both fragmentation and violence are predictable results. As we have seen, group polarization is intensified if people are speaking anonymously and if attention is drawn, 100 See Jon Elster, The Cement of Society (1994). 101 See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cascades, 27 J Legal Stud 623, 648 (1998). 102 See id. at 650-51. 103 See Lawrence Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace 186 (1999); Andrew Shapiro, The Control Revolution (1999). 104 See id. 105 See Patricia Wallace,, supra note, at 73-84. 106 See Timur Kuran, supra note, at 635-650. through one or another means, to group membership. Many Internet discussion groups have precisely this feature. It is therefore plausible to speculate that the Internet may be serving, for many, as a breeding group for extremism. 
Consider in this regard a study not of extremism, but of serious errors within working groups, both face-to-face and online.107 The purpose of the study was to see how groups might collaborate to make personnel decisions. Resumes for three candidates, applying for a marketing manager position, were placed before the groups; the attributes of the candidates were rigged by the experimenters so that one applicant was best matched for the job described. Packets of information were given to subjects, each containing only a subset of information from the resumes, so that each group member had only part of the relevant information. The groups consisted of three people, some operating face-to-face, some operating on-line. Two results were especially striking: Group polarization was common; and almost none (!) of the deliberating groups made what was conspicuously the right choice, because they failed to share information in a way that would permit the group to make an objective decision. In on-line groups, the level of bias was especially high, in the sense that members tended to share positive information about the winning candidate and negative information about the losers, while also suppressing negative information about the winner and positive information about the losers. These contributions served to “reinforce the march toward group consensus rather than add complications and fuel debate,”108 This tendency was twice at large within the online groups. 
It is much too early to offer a confident account of the consequences of group deliberation via computer and on the Internet. But what has been said thus far should be sufficient to show that group polarization may be especially pronounced under conditions of anonymity, in a way that magnifies mistakes and biases. Though the study just described did not involve political or moral issues, the results are plausibly taken to suggest that one-sidedness, and consequently extremeness, can be heightened when communication occurs via computer. 
With respect to legal and political institutions, there is generally little direct evidence; but it is possible to venture several points. 
institution for which direct evidence exists. In experimental settings, polarization has been found in numerous settings with respect to guilt and innocence, and indeed this appears to be an uncontradicted finding.109 Outside of the experimental setting, we know that the predeliberation verdict predicts the final outcome 90% of the time, in cases where juries do not hang; this provides “powerful presumptive evidence that group polarization occurs in real juries.”110 
As noted, a more recent study of 300 deliberating juries found massive group polarization with respect to bounded punishment scales; groups whose median pre-deliberation vote was 3 or 107 See Hightower and Sayeed, supra note. 108 Wallace, supra note, at 82. 109 See Brown, supra note, at 227-29 (collecting studies). 110 Id. at 239. less tended to generate verdicts below that of the median voter, whereas groups whose median pre-deliberation vote was above 3 tended to generate verdicts above that of the median voter. Indeed, many such juries ended up with verdicts as low or lower (for the low verdicts) as that of the lowest predeliberation voter, and as high or higher (for the high verdicts) as that of the highest predeliberation voter. I have also noted that with respect to dollars, this study did not find group polarization, at least in any simple form; positive dollar amounts generally increased, because of the rhetorical asymmetry referred to above. On the other hand: As compared to the median of predeliberation judgments, dollar amounts increased far more at the high end, and this effect is broadly consistent with the idea of group polarization. 
number of “independent” regulatory commissions, including the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and the National Labor Relations Board. These commissions have attracted attention mostly because their members are immune from plenary removal power by the President.111 An equally striking but generally overlooked provision of the relevant statutes requires bipartisan membership: The independent commissions must be divided between Republicans and Democrats. A simple and undoubtedly correct explanation of this unusual requirement is that Congress wanted to ensure that no commission would be dominated by any single party. But an understanding of group polarization would strengthen any such concern on Congress’ part. An independent agency – the FCC, the NLRB, the CPSC -- that is all-Democratic, or all-Republican, might polarize toward an extreme position, likely more extreme than that of the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any member standing alone. A requirement of bipartisan membership can operate as a check against movements of this kind. 
Notwithstanding platitudes about judicial neutrality, judges often have a great deal of latitude, sometimes in the ultimate outcome, more often in determining the reach of their decision. If a court consists of three or more like-minded judges, it may well end up with a relatively extreme position, more extreme in fact than the position it would occupy if it consisted of two likeminded individuals and one of a different orientation. 
There is no direct confirmation of this general proposition. But some support comes from an intriguing study of judicial behavior on the D.C. Circuit.112 Under Chevron v. NRDC,113 courts are supposed to uphold agency interpretations of law so long as the interpretations are “reasonable.” When do courts obey this stricture? The study strongly suggests that group polarization plays a role. The most important finding is a dramatic difference, on the United States court of appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, between politically diverse panels (with judges appointed by Presidents of more than one party) and “unified” panels (with judges appointed by Presidents of only one party). On divided panels in which a majority of the court might be expected, on broadly speaking political grounds, to be hostile to the agency, the court 111 See, e.g., Lawrence Lessig and Cass R. Sunstein, The President and the Administration, 94 Colum L Rev 1 (1994). 112 See Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine, 107 Yale LJ 2155 (1998). 113 See US (1984) deferred to the agency 62% of the time. But on unified panels in which the court might be expected to be hostile to the agency, the court upheld the agency interpretation only 33% of the time. Note that this was the only asymmetry in the data; when courts were expected to uphold the agency’s decision on political controls, they did so over 70% of the time, whether unified (71% of the time) or divided (86% of the time). There is no smoking gun here, but it seems reasonable to speculate that the seemingly bizarre result – a mere 33% validation rate in cases in which the panel was unified – reflects a process of group polarization. A group of like-minded judges may well take the relatively unusual step of rejecting an agency interpretation, whereas as a divided panel, with a check on any tendency toward extreme outcomes, is more likely to take the conventional route. 
because of the effects of limited argument pools, perhaps above all because of social influence (and the importance of conveying a proper signal to fellow legislators and above all constituents). Imagine, for example, that a group of Republicans and a group of Democrats are thinking about how to vote on a proposed law – perhaps involving military spending, or an increase in the minimum wage, or mandatory parental leave legislation, or greater environmental protection. If Republicans are speaking mostly with Republicans, and if Democrats are speaking mostly with Democrats, we should expect a hardening of views toward the more extreme points. Undoubtedly this is part (certainly not all) of the explanation of party-line voting. And it is easy to imagine similar effects on Congress as a whole. 
A result of this general kind has been documented with the original passage of the Clean Air Act.114 In the relevant period, there was a great deal of electoral pressure to enact some kind of clean air legislation. Both President Nixon and Senator Muskie attempted to signal to voters that they cared a great deal about the environment. The difficulty was that both of them found themselves in a kind of “politicians’ dilemma,” in which they had to urge more and more aggressive regulation – more aggressive, in fact, than either of them sought – precisely in order to maintain the preferred relative position vis-a-vis the electorate. Congress itself polarized accordingly, toward a more extreme position than most or even all individuals would have sought beforehand. 
There are significant differences between the legislative process and the contexts in which group polarization has been studied, above all because members of Congress are subject to external political sanctions. Even if members are persuaded that a certain course of action makes best sense, they may vote otherwise, simply because of what their constituents want. Hence a limited argument pool, for members of a particular party, may matter much less than a clear signal from people back home. This point may explain occasional defections on both sides; certainly it explains why some members are able to resist both party pressures and the logic of group polarization. Unambiguous electoral signals can be a powerful buffer against that logic (though the signals themselves may be a function of group polarization within the electorate). 
The same point bears on the relevance of social influence. Members of the Republican Party are likely to care a great deal what fellow Republicans think of them; but they probably 114 See E. Donald Elliott et al., supra note. care still more about what local voters think of them. To be sure, the two are not independent of one another. If a certain Republican seems like an outlier among Republicans generally – for example, if he seems less sympathetic to the religious right than his colleagues – his electoral prospects might be damaged simply by virtue of this signal. But analytically, the two are different. Here too the votes of constituents may matter more than group deliberations (taking members of the same party as the relevant group). 
It is important to underline here the fact that the mechanisms of group polarization may sometimes be at work with constituents as well. We can imagine a society in which Republicans speak mostly with each other; we can imagine a society in which Democrats speak mostly with one another too. If this is the situation, polarization should occur within political camps. We might think that group polarization supplies one of the many factors behind the sharp split between Republicans and Democrats on the impeachment of President Clinton.115 
The phenomenon of group polarization, alongside the phenomenon of social cascades, raises severe doubts about the value of deliberation. Note here that deliberation might be justified, as a social practice, on one of two grounds. It may be that on the question at issue, there is a truth of the matter – a correct answer – and deliberation might be justified as the best way of reaching it.116 Group decisions are more likely to be right than decisions made by individuals. Alternatively, we might favor deliberation for the opposite reason; doubting whether there is a truth of the matter, a society might seek a deliberative process on the theory that this is the only reasonable and fair way to reach a decision that will be imposed on the group.117 Group polarization raises no difficulty for the second sort of account; but it poses real problems for the first. If the effect of deliberation is to move people toward a more extreme point in the direction of their original tendency, why is it anything to celebrate? Nor do the mechanisms provide much reason for confidence. If people are shifting their position in order to maintain their reputation and self-conception, is there any reason to think that deliberation is making things better rather than worse? If shifts are occurring as a result of partial and frequently skewed argument pools, the results of deliberative judgments may be far worse than the results of simply taken the median of predeliberation judgments. 
To be sure, those who emphasize the ideals associated with deliberative democracy tend to emphasize its preconditions, which include political equality and the goal of “reaching understanding.”118 In real-world deliberations, behavior is often strategic, and equality is often 115 For more detailed discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Group Dynamics, forthcoming in Aftermath (2000). 116 This is the tendency in Gutmann and Thompson, supra note 117 See the discussion of imperfect procedural justice and pure procedural justice in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971). 118 See Jurgen Habermas, A Theory of Communicative Action 99 (1984). Thus Habermas distinguishes between strategic and communicative action and stresses “the cooperatively pursued goal of reaching understanding”; compare the treatment in Gutmann and Thompson, supra note, at 52-94, emphasizing the idea of reciprocity, which emphasizes the desire to justify one’s position by reference to reasons. absent in one or another form. But group polarization is likely to occur even in the face of equality and entirely conscientious efforts at reaching both truth and understanding. The existence of a limited argument pool, strengthening the existing tendency within the group, will operate in favor of group polarization even if no individual behaves strategically. By itself this will produce group polarization whether or not social influence is operating. In any case social influences need not be inconsistent with the effort to produce truth and understanding; when people attempt to position themselves in a way that fits with their best self-conception, or their preferred self-presentation, nothing has gone wrong, even from the standpoint of deliberation’s most enthusiastic defenders.119 Perhaps group polarization could be reduced or even eliminated if we emphasized that good deliberation has full information as a precondition; but that requirement is extremely stringent, and if there is already full information, the point of deliberation is greatly reduced.120 In any case the group polarization phenomenon suggests that in real-world situations, deliberation is hardly guaranteed to increase the likelihood of arriving at truth. 
Of course we cannot say, from the mere fact of polarization, that there has been a movement in the wrong direction. Perhaps the more extreme tendency is better; recall that group polarization is likely to have fueled the antislavery movement and many others that deserve to meet with widespread approval. Extremism need not be a word of opprobrium, and in any case a group of moderates is likely, as noted, to become entrenched in its moderation by virtue of the mechanisms discussed here. In addition, group polarization can be explained partly by reference to the fact that people who are confident are likely to be persuasive; and it seems sensible to say that as a statistical matter, people who are confident are more likely to be right. But when group discussion tends to lead people to more strongly held versions of the same view with which they began, and if social influences and limited argument pools are responsible, there is little reason for great confidence in the effects of deliberation. 
As a thought experiment, imagine a deliberating body consisting of all citizens in the relevant group; this may mean all citizens in a community, a state, a nation, or the world. By hypothesis, the argument pool would be very large; it would be limited only to the extent that the set of citizen views was also limited. Social influences would undoubtedly remain; hence people might shift because of a desire to maintain their reputation and self-conception, by standing in a certain relation to the rest of the group. But to the extent that deliberation revealed to people that their private position was different, in relation to the group, from what they thought it was, any shift would be in response to an accurate understanding of all relevant citizens, and not a product of a skewed group sample. 
This thought experiment does not suggest that the hypothesized deliberating body would be ideal. Perhaps all citizens, presenting all individual views, would offer a skewed picture from the normative point of view. Perhaps weak arguments would be made and repeated and repeated again, while good arguments would be offered infrequently. But at least a deliberating body of 119 See Robert Goodin, Laundering Preferences, in Foundations of Social Choice Theory 75, 77-90 (Jon Elster and Aanund Hyllund eds. 1986). 120 Not eliminated. There remains the question of what to do, given a certain understanding of the facts. all citizens would remove some of the distortions in the group polarization experiments, where generally like-minded people, not exposed to others, shift in large part because of that limited exposure. 
A possible conclusion would return to the need for full information, not only about facts but also about possible options and values, and suggest that in any deliberating body, it is important to ensure a wide mix of views, so as to ensure that a distorted argument pool does not produce unearned or unjustified shift. For a leader of any institution, it makes sense, in any ordinary circumstance, to try to ensure a broad array of views, simply in order to ensure against the predictable entrenchment of private judgments. The idea of a “public sphere” can be understood as an effort to ensure a domain in which multiple views can be heard, and can be heard by people having multiple perspectives.121 Thus there is reason for caution about any institutional practice that insulates people from competing arguments.122 Indeed, an understanding of group polarization suggests that it would be desirable to take steps to reduce the likelihood that panels on federal courts of appeals do not consist solely of appointees of presidents of any single political party. 
Of course any argument pool will be limited; no one has time to listen to every point of view. But perhaps the largest lesson involves the need for caution about the effects of deliberation within groups all or most of whose members already have an extreme tendency. Heterogeneous groups are a far better source of good judgments. The principal qualification here is that heterogeneity is by itself neither here nor there; the question is how to ensure appropriate heterogeneity. For example, it would not make sense to say that in a deliberating group attempting to think through issues of affirmative action, it is important to allow exposure to the view that slavery was good and should be restored. The constraints of time and attention call for limits to heterogeneity; and – a separate point -- for good deliberation to take place, some views are properly placed off the table, simply because they are so invidious and implausible. This point might seem to create a conundrum: To know what points of view should be represented in any group deliberation, it is important to have a good sense of the substantive issues involved, indeed a sufficiently good sense as to generate judgments about what points of view must be included and excluded. But if we already know that, why should we not proceed directly to the merits? If we already know that, before deliberation occurs, does deliberation have any point at all? 
The answer is that we often do know enough to know which views count as reasonable, without knowing which view counts as right, and this point is sufficient to allow people to construct deliberative processes that should correct for the most serious problems potentially created by group deliberation. What is necessary is not to allow every view to be heard, but to ensue that no single view is so widely heard, and reinforced, that people are unable to engage in critical evaluation of the reasonable competitors. In this way an understanding of group polarization provides no simple view of deliberation as a social process, but does provide an important lesson to those interested in the construction of public spaces or a well-functioning public sphere. 121 See Jurgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere 231-50 (1991). 122 See Lessig, supra note, at 186. 
Of course the provision of diverse views does not guarantee good deliberation. Among other things, most people are subject to “confirmatory bias,” in accordance with which exposure to competing position will not dislodge and may even strengthen the antecedently held position.123 On questions of morality and fairness, and undoubtedly less as well, those who listen to diverse opinions may well emerge from the experience with an enhanced belief in the soundness of their original commitment.124 But this is not a universal phenomenon, and at least an understanding of competing views is likely to weaken the forms of fragmentation and misunderstanding that come from deliberation among the like-minded. 
In an interesting combination of theoretical and empirical work, James Fishkin has pioneered the idea of a “deliberative opinion poll,” in which small groups, consisting of highly diverse individuals, are asked to come together and to deliberate about various issues. Fishkin finds some noteworthy shifts in individual views; but he does not find a systematic tendency toward polarization. In England, for example, deliberation led to reduced interest in using imprisonment as a tool for combating crime.125 The percentage believing that “sending more offenders to prison” is an effective way to prevent crime went down from 57% to 38%; the percentage believing that fewer people should be sent to prison increased from 29% to 44%; belief in the effectiveness of “stiffer sentences” was reduced from 78% to 65%.126 Similar shifts were shown in the direction of greater enthusiasm for procedural rights of defendants and increased willingness to explore alternatives to prison. These are not the changes that would be predicted by group polarization. The probable reason is that in Fishkin’s studies, participants were presented with a set of written materials that attempted to be balanced but that would likely move people in different directions from those that would be expected by simple group discussion. Indeed, the very effort to produce balance should be expected to shift large majorities into small ones, pressing both sides closer to 50% representation; and this is in fact what was observed.127 
In other experiments with the deliberative opinion poll, shifts included a mixture of findings, with larger percentages of individuals concluding that legal pressures should be increased on fathers for child support (from 70% to 85%) and that welfare and health care should be turned over to the states (from 56% to 66%).128 Indeed, on many particular issues, the effect of deliberation was to create an increase in the intensity with which people held their preexisting convictions.129 These findings are consistent with the prediction of group polarization. But this was not a uniform pattern, and on some questions deliberation increased the percentage of people holding a minority position (with, for example, a jump from 36% to 57% of people favoring 123 See Jonathan Baron, Thinking and Deciding (1994). 124 See id. 125 Fishkin, supra note, at 206-07. 126 Id. 127 See id. 128 Fishkin and Luskin, supra note, at 23. 129 See id. at 22-23 (showing a jump, on a scale of 1 to 4, from 3.51 to 3.58 in intensity of commitment to reducing the deficit); a jump, on a scale of 1 to 3, from 2.71 to 2.85 in intensity of support for greater spending on education; showing a jump, on a scale of 1 to 3, from 1.95 to 2.16, in commitment to aiding American business interests abroad). policies making divorce “harder to get”).130 Taken as a whole, a great deal of Fishkin’s data seem to support the group polarization hypothesis; what does not is probably a product of some combination of statistical noise, effects of external presentation, and deviations produced by members of the particular groups involved. 
In this essay I have attempted to discuss the phenomenon of group polarization and to trace some of its implications for law and political theory. The basic point is that group deliberation can create polarization of both groups and individuals. The underlying mechanisms have a great deal to do with skewed and limited argument pools, and with people’s desire to maintain relative position of a certain kind (perhaps as a heuristic, perhaps for reputational reasons, perhaps because of self-conception). Group polarization can occur on juries, within legislatures, and on multimember courts and commissions. The phenomenon helps explain why many groups go, quite surprisingly, in extreme directions. 
In the abstract, and without knowing about the underlying substance, it is impossible to say whether this tendency is good or bad. But the mechanisms that underlie group polarization raise serious questions about any general enthusiasm for deliberative processes. If the argument for deliberation is that it is likely to yield correct answers to social questions, group polarization suggests the need for attention to the background conditions in which this is likely to be the case. Like-minded people, engaged in discussion with one another, may lead each other in the direction of error and falsehood, simply because of the limited argument pool and the operation of social influences. I have suggested that the best response to this problem is to attempt to ensure against social balkanization and fragmentation, through mechanisms providing a “public sphere” that is used, at once, by people with competing perspectives on facts and values. If a general public sphere is unavailable or not feasible, it becomes all the more important to ensure that in the course of deliberation, people are exposed to a range of reasonable competing views. 
Of course it might seem hard to know what counts as a reasonable competing view without knowing what is actually right, and if we already know that, there might seem to be little point to deliberation. But short of knowing what is right, it is possible to know something about the range of reasonable candidates, and about who might learn from whom. Perhaps the largest lesson provided by group polarization involves the need to structure processes of deliberation so as to ensure that people are exposed, not to softer or louder echoes of their own voices, but to a range of reasonable alternatives. By itself, that lesson is very far from new; but an understanding of the potential effects of group polarization argues in favor of fresh thinking, and possible reforms, in many contemporary institutions. 130 Id. at 23. See also id at 22 (showing an increase , on a scale of 1 to 3, from 1.40 to 1.59 in commitment to spending on foreign aid ; also a decrease, on a scale of 1 to 3, from 2.38 to 2.27 in commitment to spending on social security). 
Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
(September 1991). 
Contract (February 1992). 
Common Pools (February 1992). 
of AIDS (April 1992). 
1992). 
Economic Analysis (July 1992). 
Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
(November 1992). 
(January 1993). 
Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
(April 1993). 
(The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). 
(October 1993). 
(March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). 
(June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
(August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). 
Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
and Biotechnology (November 1995). 
1996). 
in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other 
Collectibles (July 1996). 
Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). 
Overview of the la and Economics of Financially Distressed 
Firms (March 1997). 
1997). 
Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 
Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative 
Races (May 1997). 
Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). 
Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and 
Valuation in Law) (December 1997). 
Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal 
Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). 
Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting 
Bigger (February 1998). 
to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). 
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). 
Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Decisions (June 1998). 
Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
1998). 
Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
the Tax Law (November 1998) 
International Law (November 1998) 
Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) 
Evidence (February 1999) 
Information Goods (February 1999) 
Enterprise (February 1999) and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
(March 1999) 
Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation 
Costs (March 1999) Cost 
Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law 
Enforcement (April 1999) 
Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Back Together Again (May 1999) 
Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) 
People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, 
Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Intel (October 1999) 
(October 1999) 
Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable Recommended Citation 
The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-All Society 
A DEBATE 
Each year The Roundtable sponsors symposia on topics in which law and some other academic or social interest intersect. "The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-All Society" is our first symposium of 1999, and it focused on how the "Winner-Take-All" phenomenon affects lawyer salaries and faculty hiring and how both relate to the overall legal profession, legal representation, income inequality, and other issues. 
The "superstar?' or "winner-take-all" phenomenon is the idea that, under certain market conditions, a small increase in talent can result in a disproportionately large economic benefit to the "winner," presenting problems to both economic efficiency and social equality. On Friday, February 26, 1999, The Roundtable invited four renowned scholars to debate whether, and to what degree, the superstar/winner-take-all phenomenon exists and affects the legal community. Cass R_ Sunstein, the Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago Law School, acted as our moderator. Professor Sunstein is widely regarded as one of the nation's foremost legal scholars in the fields of constitutional law, administrative law, environmental law and how laws influence human behavior and vice versa. A few of his recent books includeAfter the Rights 
H. Frank is a professor of economics at the Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University and is Goldwin Smith Professor of Economics, Ethics, and Public Policy at Cornell's College of Arts and Sciences. Professor Frank, more than anyone, has brought the debate about the "winner-take-all" phenomenon to the public eye, particularly with the 1995 book he co-authored with Philip Cook, The Winner-Take-All Society. His most recent book is the widely acclaimed Lsuy Fever Why Mony Fails to Satisi in an Era of Excess. Sherwin Rosen is the Edwin and Betty Bergman Distinguished Service Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago and Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution. He is considered one of the world's foremost experts in the fields of labor economics, applied microeconomics and income distribution. In 1981, Professor Rosen started the academic debate on our topic with his article "The Economics of Superstars" in The Ameican Economic Review. Kevin M. Murphy is the George Pratt Shultz Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. In 1997, The American Economic Association awarded Professor Murphy the John Bates Clark Medal, a prize given every two years to the best American economist under the age of forty. He is widely recognized as one of the top economists in the world for his work on the causes and consequences of income inequality, unemployment and economic growth, and his research on labor, minimum wages, human capital and education are considered groundbreaking. 
Both Robert Frank and Cass Sunstein argued that the Superstar/WinnerTake-All phenomenon is real and poses serious problems for society-problems that perhaps government intervention can solve. Sherwin Rosen and Kevin Murphy were more skeptical about this problem and argued that the free market can take care of any such distortions. 
WENDY MOORE: Good afternoon, my name is Wendy Moore and I am the interdisciplinary programs editor of The University of ChicagoLaw School Roundtable. I would like to thank all of you for coming out and would like to welcome you to our winter symposium: The Wages of Stardom. 
The other day, Robert [Peterson], Ariana [Almajan] and I were talking with Professor Uoseph] Isenbergh and he pointed out the obvious irony that all of our panelists were superstars. I guess that goes to show how far this phenomenon has permeated our society and also the law school. Indeed each of our panelists is a superstar in his field. Sherwin Rosen is a Professor of Economics here at the University of Chicago and he first wrote about the superstar phenomenon in his 1981 article, "The Economics of Superstars."' Professor Robert Frank of Cornell University followed up these ideas and expanded on them in a number of his works including a 1995 book he co-authored with Philip Cook called The Winner-Take-AllSodety.2 Kevin Murphy is a professor here at the business school and he is widely regarded as one of the best young American economists and is widely renowned for his work in labor economics. Finally, Professor Sunstein here at the law school is well known to all and is widely respected for his work in constitutional law and law and human behavior. 
Each of our panelists will give a brief speech on the topic and then we will turn it over to our audience and your questions. Now I will turn it over to Cass Sunstein our moderator and participant. Thank you. 
CASS SUNSTEIN: Welcome to all of you and a special thanks to the Roundtable whose members have done a wonderful job with this and have made it a pleasure for all of us. We have opening statements that are reasonably short. That may be a surprise to our panelists because I haven't told them about it. Do 1999] 
they look sad or happy? [Laughtej The statements will be about ten to fifteen minutes each. We'll begin with Professor Frank. 
ROBERT FRANK. Thank you Cass, I am pleased to be invited to talk with you today and special thanks to Wendy for calling me a superstar. That, I think, illustrates an important point in the superstar phenomenon and that is it is highly local. The only reasonable sense in which I could be considered a superstar is that I am the best at what I happen to do in economics, but since nobody else does that it is a modest claim to fame. [aughtej 
As Wendy pointed out, Sherwin wrote a very important article in the American Economic Review in 1981 called 'The Economics of Superstars." He picked up on an idea that Alfred Marshall had actually developed in the late 19t century and the idea is a very important and simple idea. In the 19th century most of us listened to music in person. I heard an interesting statistic on an NPR program about a year ago that in the State of Iowa alone in the year 1900 there were 1300 opera houses. I had to get on the Intemet the next day to make sure that I had heard right. After a little digging, I came to find out that the program director didn't mean opera houses in the traditional sense, but more like live music halls. In the State of Iowa this is still a very impressive number in such a small, largely rural state. That was the difference: if you wanted to hear music back then, you went to hear it live. Everyone at that time would have been delighted to hear the best soprano, no doubt, but the best soprano couldn't be everywhere at once. So there was a very brisk market for hundreds, literally thousands of sopranos. The best earned more, to be sure, but the ones down in the ranking around 2,000 were actually able to make a living because of the demand. 
Not so any longer, when most of the music that you now hear is recorded. You can take Kathleen Battle's master tapes-no one does the Mozart arias any better, at least not that I've heard--and can stamp out copies of them at near zero marginal cost. Thus, there is really no purpose at this point, ifyou're listening to recorded music, to listen to the second-best soprano. You may have some desire to hear a few sopranos but really it is a short list. The best players, because of the ability to expand their reach, have, over time, captured a larger share of the national income. 
In 1979, the 95th percentile earner earned ten times the 5th percentile earner. By 1993, that ratio had grown to 25. It doesn't matter how you slice itI.n every category, occupation, or region that you look at, movements in that ratio have been similar. The standard human capital model that we use as economists tries to explain differences in wage earners, or why we earn more over time. That model, taken in its narrow form at least, doesn't seem to give much purchase on the change in wage distribution. There doesn't seem to have been, according to my human capital friends, any huge change in the distribution of human capital, this loose amalgam of all those personal characteristics that determine how productive you are. The smartest people aren't any smarter than they were before, the ambitious are not any more ambitious. The mix of stuff is pretty much the same there. The return to certain kinds of human capital has changed. For example, if you look at the return to education, college graduates earn a larger return on their degrees than they did in the seventies. But even if you look within the distribution of college graduates, you will see that the college graduates at the top are doing very well and those at the bottom are struggling to hold their own, even losing ground. It is clearly better to be in some fields rather than others. If you are a computer scientist, then you have done well over the last fifteen years. If your master's degree was in English literature, then it has been a tougher struggle for you. There was a New Yorker cartoon that I clipped about two or three years ago--there are two young men standing in a field on sticks, scarecrows essentially, one calling out to the other, "English Lit, how about you?" as in, what is your major? But slice it a different way, look at the English literature majors. Those who are making it in that field are making it in a way that people didn't in the past. 
Cook and I suggested that one explanation that seems common in many of these changes in income distribution is the phenomenon of increased leverage. Technology is enabling top players to extend their reach in a variety of other fields as well. Top players are more productive now so that a good executive decision at one time only meant being able to do well in your local market, then your regional market, then national market and now finally a global market. A bad executive decision, at one time, meant that there was not much of a threat of reprisal because there were not many competitors in your local market and others didn't even know who you were. Now a bad decision at the top means many potential rival firms ready to pounce on your operation, seize market share from you and so on. So as both the value of a good decision and the penalty for a bad one has increased, I think that we have seen the penalty for mistakes grow higher. 
That doesn't explain why executive salaries in the U.S. have risen with respect to executive salaries in Europe, where the ratio is not as pronounced. Another important ingredient to the process, Cook and I argued, was the free agency system, which, as you will recall in sports, was the gateway event that led to the explosion in star salaries in sports. It was not until the courts awarded free agency rights to players that we saw the real escalation of player's salaries. It is similar in business where it used to be the norm-not any legal requirement, a fairly little-violated norm-that promotion took place from within the company. It wasn't believed that an executive from a tobacco company could run a computer company. That has all changed in a profound way, I think, in the last twenty years. The number of CEOs promoted from the outside has risen about 50 percent during that period. It is not uncommon any longer to see a Lou Gerstner to go from RJR to IBM because he is a good manager and to have seen the stock of IBM go up many fold. It is also no surprise to see his compensation package go up with the value added. It is this combination of greater technological leverage, the ability to expand your reach and have more of a difference on the bottom line, and the added competition that attends the transactions as people bid for talent in the market today. 
What we see in the law is that there are similar expansions. It is in the law, I think, less due to any technological breakthroughs that allow people to expand their reach and just more of a case of the stakes being so much higher in many important legal arenas. Thus a lawyer who once sued on behalf of a client with a stiff neck for $10,000, now heads up a class action where there may be two or three billion dollars at stake. The mergers and acquisitions lawyers now arrange deals not in the tens of millions of dollars but in the tens of billions of dollars and the crumbs from that cake add up to real money. 
This is a good development for the students at the U of C law school. Many of you will take jobs with the mergers and acquisitions firms and other highprofile firms and those firms control the gateways and the entry-level positions that lead to seven figure salaries in fairly short order and with fairly high regularity. It is a very much sought after career path, and, not surprisingly, it is harder to get on that career path. What Cook and I discovered is that the credentials that you need to present in order to get into an elite school are now much more formidable than they were twenty years ago. You have to occupy a much higher position on the percentile range in terms of your test scores and grades and your activities. 
You will apply for these positions, there will be mail-sack after mail-sack unloaded in the admissions personnel office. They will not have time to interview everybody; they won't even have time to give each application careful consideration. Whom will they contact? The easy cut is to talk to the people from U of C, from Harvard, Yale and a handful of other schools. They are the ones, after all, who are more likely to be the top players in the next generation of lawyers. They have been screened carefully by those schools. Not only that, they have a credential that identifies them to the client without a moment's further discussion that they are from the elite. The firms that recruit know perfectly well that there are extremely talented law students coming out of the University of Illinois, many of them smarter than you are. However, that doesn't count if you have a brief time to persuade the client that if there is $25 billion worth of deal at stake and you want the very best law firm that you can find to manage it, who are you going to call? There is a brisk competition for the reputation of premier law firms to manage the premier deals. As long as that competition goes on--and there is no reason to think that it will get less intense--I think that you people are in the driver's seat. 
There are some problems that have emerged in society as a result of these forces-incomes have grown more disparate; people in the middle are feeling more pressed. They are attempting to keep up with consumption standards that are further and further out of reach. People feel that they can't vote tax increases to pay the teachers or to fix the potholes in the roads and this will be an issue that you will confront. Do you want to have seven figure private salaries and sit for an hour in a traffic jam on your way to work? Or do you want to consider the possibility of taking fiscal steps to try to clean up the overall social investment picture? That is a decision that you will confront and I think that when you make that decision try to bear in mind how lucky you have been to have arrived at the point were you are now. It is very hard to claim the moral high ground from where you sit. Sure you've worked hard, but why do you work hard? That is explained by genes and environment. We don't know what mix of genes and environment explains why you are here, but it is some mix of those two and which of those two do you think you are morally entitled to claim great credit for? So rather than protect these seven figure salaries to the last breath, consider what might be done with them in the public arena. 
SHERWIN ROSEN: We have a saying around here: "One is world famous in Hyde Park." We are all world-famous here. [aughterj 
We had a nice Ph.D. dissertation last year by Mark Fisher, who also has a law degree. From either here or Harvard. He gathered some nice data, for those of you who are lawyers, about earnings among lawyers in top law firms. He himself is working at Sullivan & Cromwell, which pays among the highest salaries. An average associate there earns about $150,000. This figure does not just reflect the new hires but the associates as a whole group. The average partner income, profit per partner, is about $1.5 million. 
I basically agree with Bob [Frank]. I had written down some remarks because I am sort of verbally challenged. I would rather read than think of things extemporaneously-that is why I'm not a lawyer, I guess. Bob said so many things that I agree with, except those towards the end. [In a loud voice] Do not work for any non-profit organizations! Make as much money as you can and give it to worthy causes! [Laughter] The invisible hand works here, too. 
Basically, let me reiterate the point that all income distributions and all earnings distributions in every society that have ever been studied-and this probably includes the Soviet Union, but nobody ever studied it I guess-is right skewed. That is, it looks like a log normal; at the right tail there are some very high income earners, and that is universal. Now sometimes the tail is longer in some societies than in others, but they all look like that. A lot of the people who make a lot of money are lawyers and doctors, where there is great expense in learning the trade. But these other things, when you look at the real huge earners like Marcia Clark, one of the great lawyers, and the guy in the coonskin cap that she talks to-what characterizes those types of activities is that the cost of production has the characteristic that average cost is much bigger than marginal cost. There is kind of a scale economy: once you get by the first unit, everything else is gravy. 
It is like that old joke about why the guy who is selling something to you so cheap, he is losing a nickel on each item, but he's making it up in volume. Paughted] That is how these things work. How much would you pay to watch Oprah Winfrey on television? A couple of bucks maybe? But there are millions of people who are willing to do that, and it is that volume effect that allows her income to be so large. Her services are not congested because they go on television. 
If I write a book... [Looking at Frank]How much money did you make on that book, anyway? [Laughter] I bet it isn't so much, but it is still a great book. 
Once you write the book-all of the cost in writing it is in the first copy. Then the marginal cost of producing another copy is basically zero. I was reading in The New York Times that there is a movie in China that Disney is showing. It is a story taken after Chinese legend, and it was thought that the Chinese government wouldn't let it into China, but they finally did. However, nobody is paying to watch it in Shanghai because it was pirated before they allowed it in. Now you can buy a copy of this movie for two bucks, which is much less than the price that they are charging to let people at the theater see it. 
That is the nature of these kinds of activities and for control decisions in big businesses as well as on Wall Street, where if I can invest a dollar better than you, well then I'll invest a billion better than you, and I'll get all the business. I won't make much money per dollar, but I've got a lot of dollars on the table. These hedge funds, they make very small margins-I mean they work on practically nothing. But they are rolling over an incredible amount of money on each transaction. That is how they make it 
Now for lawyers, I think it is in the size of the claims. The top lawyers work on big claims. The people at Sullivan & Cromwell, Kirkland & Ellis and those firms that you are going to enter if you go into that line of work are handling enormous claims because they are probably the most talented people as far as anyone can tell. 
You can't run up a bunch of store-front lawyers into a major big-time law firm partner. When I was thinking of going into the law, all the lawyers that I knew were second-story lawyers, above stores. The trade has changed a fair bit since that time. You can't take those kind of lawyers and make a good one. You have to go hire one of the top people. Thus, it is economic to allocate the big claims to the big talent because that is where the stakes are the biggest and where the input makes the most difference. These lawyers have very large marginal products. They're worth the money to the clients that hire them. As the disputes get bigger, as Bob said, then the income gets bigger. 
What's been surprising to me in the law is that the incomes of lawyers has been rising for so long. I had once studied it Since the mid-sixties, litigation went crazy, nobody understands exactly why, and I don't understand why, either. But lawyers' incomes haven't missed a beat since then. There was a little dropoff in the early nineties, but when the economy took off, so did the income of lawyers. As a result, what seems to me to need explanation, and relative to some of the remarks in Cook and Frank's book, is that you've had a huge increase in supply of lawyers, and yet apparently the demand keeps racing ahead of supply. It is hard for me to understand that; I wish that I had a better understanding of what it is that makes legal services so valuable. I suspect that it has to do a lot with the growth of wealth. The services of lawyers are only interesting when there is wealth on the table, and we are the richest society in the world. We are also the most competitive, and so we are going to have a lot of disputes. That is what sustains the high lawyer population here, which is higher than anywhere else in the world. But other than that, I do not have many thoughts on the matter. 
There is another thing that I would like to bring to the table, again emphasized by Bob. What I see-and this is completely speculative-when I see the increase in inequality in the U.S. (and the U.S. is the economy that I know the best) I think that we have seen a lot more stratification in higher education and maybe lower education. I have a friend, a very distinguished academic, whose kid is in sixth, maybe seventh grade, who spends half of his time doing her homework for her in order to build her credentials so that she can get into the U of C Law School one day. The cram schools in Japan have this quality. I think the Koreans banned the use of cram schools at one point. I think that this is troublesome, and something that I would like to get you to think about because I don't understand it. 
There are only about ten schools, when we are talking about big time money in elite law partnerships-we're talking about this place and Harvard and Boalt Hall and Yale and a few other places. And then there is a tremendous drop-off. If you get an M]BA from U of C business school, the average guy is making $125,000, which is almost what Columbia offered to pay Robert Barro. However, if you go to just the University of X and get an MBA, then you're going to get a job for $60,000, if you are lucky. There is a tremendous concentration. Since I went to kind of crummy schools, except the University of Chicago where I got my Ph.D., I feel that the talent is a lot more spread out than that. Thus, I find it kind of curious about Sullivan & Cromwell-I looked it up-that 80 percent of their lawyers are from the top fifteen schools and maybe half are from the top five. There is this enormous heaping. 
Now let me just close with the statement that this is true in graduate schools all over the place-even in Economics-where there really is not very much money in it. We live a quiet life instead. A lot of top economists come from only five or six or ten schools, of which we are one and MIT is one and so on. Law is a much bigger profession than economics, so in some sense law is much more concentrated in sorting people than Economics is. Law must be fifty times the size of-more than fifty, hundreds of times the size of-the Economics profession, so this concentration in law schools is a bit troublesome to me. 
KEVIN MURPHY Thank you. What I'd like to do is broaden things out a bit and try to put today's discussion into a wider context. I do most of my work on income inequality and relative wages. It is kind of funny-sometimes I get drawn into things like this symposium today where we think about the "superstars," or sometimes it is the "super-rich," and we hear these stories that the top two percent is getting everything and everybody else is getting nothing. Then I bounce around and go to some poverty discussion, and we talk about the underclass and how the bottom guys are falling away from the rest of us, while "we" are still doing okay. 
This is the reason, I guess, that the story I try to tell people is that the growth in inequality is really a much broader phenomenon than what everyone typically talks about It is not a story of the super-rich; and it is not a story of the underclass. Rising income inequality is really a story in which the higher up the income ladder you are the better you have done, and the lower down you are the worse you have done. If I were to make a graph--and those of you who have been in my class have seen this graph--and I put what income percentile you are in, from the first percentile to the 99th percentile, on this axis [drawingan imaginay Xa~ds], and how much your wages have gone up over the past thirty years on this axis [drawing an imaginay Y-axis], you would basically get a straight line. You would see that wage growth has been highest at the top and lowest at the bottom, but there has been expansion between the guy at the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile; expansion between the guy at the 50th and the 10th. While we might think that the superstar phenomenon is relevant in certain places, it is dearly not the whole story. There is a much broader set of phenomena going on out there than the superstar phenomenon. 
Also, many people talk about growing income inequality along another dimension-the growth in income inequality both within and between groups. Probably the most important area here to think about is education. There certainly has been a growth in the premium paid for education. The premium paid for college graduates over high school graduates roughly doubled from 1980 to the early nineties. The premium paid for a graduate degree has gone up even more. In fact, in recent years, this is probably the education level that has done the very best---graduate degrees relative to the college degrees. 
Nonetheless, we are not talking about the very tip-top as opposed to everybody else. In terms of inequality, we are talking about a widening of the distribution generally. The notion is that among lawyers, earnings inequality has gone up-but it is also true that earnings inequality has gone up among secretaries and among janitors as well. I don't know, maybe there is competition to have the utmost greatest janitor in the world, but somehow that one missed me. aughtej 
I guess what I'm saying is that I believe the superstar phenomenon is real. I think it is important But I don't think it is as important even if inequality hadn't grown. 
I think we have to know that it's there. But why is it? People talk about the growth in inequality, but I don't think they realize the level of inequality that is there to begin with. We talk about one person earning twenty times what another does. Or talk about basketball players where one earns a hundred times or a thousand times what another basketball player does. What these figures don't mention is that it has to be that somehow these people can do something in a different way. It's not that Michael Jordan can play basketball against a thousand guys and beat them. He's good, but he's not that good. With a thousand guys on the court, he couldn't move. [Laughted The point is--and it is like that courtroom-you can't have a thousand storefront lawyers in that courtroom competing against that one guy. It is really the existence of congestion on the numberof-people margin without congestion on the other resources margin that really is the game being played in the superstar phenomenon. 
Now what might have caused this phenomenon to grow over time? Improved capital markets-that is something that people might think about. Improvements in information and the flow of information are other possibilities. The ability of mass media, clearly. 
Why does Michael Jordan make so much? Well, you think about the difference between Michael Jordan and another player on the team. Surely Jordan makes it more likely that you are going to win, but he also sells a completely different product. He is a hero. You could have a combination of players who contribute just as much to winning, but they wouldn't be a hero. Jordan is a national spokesman. He sells products. In essence, he is able to make that record that is replicated for thousands and thousands or millions of individuals. 
So the superstar phenomenon is there, we know that it is part of the story. However, in my opinion, it is not dear that it is the major part of the story of overall growth in inequality. 
One of the things we know, for example, is that a lot of the growth of inequality occurs across occupations. That is that certain occupations, historically the high-skilled occupations, have done better than the less-skilled occupations. Surely there has been growth in inequality among the high-skilled jobs, but there also has been growth among the low-skilled ones. Again, one of the amazing facts is how similar the growth in inequality is among the low-skilled occupations as it is among the high skilled occupations. It is also interesting as to how similar the growth in inequality is in occupations where there is this economy of scalefor example in one area of academics, as opposed to something like the law-as it is in other areas. 
Secondly, I'd like to say that just because these forces are at work, doesn't mean that we are immune to the laws of supply and demand. I think that that is important. One thing that we have seen is that the faster the college-educated population grows, the slower the premium for college graduates increases. The faster the premium grows, the more people want to go on to college. The supply side does respond. 
I think that this is important to realize because we now have a growing premium for education. That means that we are going to have more people going on to school, and more people going to school is going to improve people's earnings and the productivity of the economy as a whole. In fact, the notion that as you get more educated you do different things is really a big part of progress, right? The point is that when you go to school you don't learn how to dig a hole faster than the other guy, you learn how to build a bulldozer to dig the hole for you-that is the idea. But this is important, right? It has to be important, otherwise you would not see such vast earnings differentials if it was just a question of how much better you could do a particular activity. It has to be that you can do it in a differentway-that you can bring in other resources to work with you. That is the essence of the superstar phenomenon. That is the essence of progress generally. That is, we did not just learn how to do better what we used to know how 
to do; we learned how to do it in a different way which allowed us to substitute other resources-economists call it capital-for our own human resources. 
So where am I going with this? I guess that I would say two things. First, we have seen a broad across-the-board growth in inequality in the U.S.: low-end, high-end, middle, within groups, between groups, across education levels, within education levels. Message one is that we need a broad story. 
Second, I would also say that it seems that some of that growth is due to the fact that we have had growth in the demand for those high-skilled occupations and industries. That is where the growth has been. What sector of the economy has grown the fastest? Professional services. Why is that surprising, then, that the inputs hired by that sector have done very well-namely educated, professionally educated, individuals? The laws of supply and demand still seem to apply, still seem to fit with the data of who seems to do better. 
I think, actually, if you are going to emphasize the superstars point, it is critical to understand why there are such big differences at a given point in time-even more so than understanding growth over time. I actually think that in explaining growth over time, the supply and demand stories, to me, make a lot of sense. There may be particular areas-for example, the media-where there has been technical change far more complementary with the superstars-type effects. However, in general, I would say that the more traditional forces of the relative demands and supplies of highly skilled and less-skilled individuals have been driving things. 
Finally, there is always the tendency to look at the down side of wealth and relative wages. When the premium for schooling goes up or when inequality rises we say, "isn't that terrible." We agree that there are some bad elements, but you have to remember there also are some positive consequences. As we've seen growth in the premium for schooling, more people have gone on to school and we will continue to see that take place. Also, if we don't have improvements in the quality of human capital and the amount people invest in it, it is hard to see how we are going to continue to improve our standard of living generally. Thank you. 
CASS SUNSTEIN: Okay, the last speaker. This set of ideas has a lot of implications for law. You might think that it shows that competition can produce unjust inequalities by magnifying small differences in capacity or willingness to work hard. Also, maybe more interestingly, it produces inefficiencies as well as unjustified inequalities. These inefficiencies may take the form of overcrowding, as when a lot of people enter winner-take-all markets inflicting externalities on one another. Another set of inefficiencies may take the form of arms races as when people use steroids to be better in football and are in a difficult position in reaching a voluntary agreement not to up the ante. That probably captures more segments of economic markets that are familiar to us. I think what the Frank and Cook book does is to lay down a challenge for those of us who are interested in the appropriate role of law to think what might be done to handle these problems. [6:1 
I am going to talk about the broadcasting market. What I am going to suggest in particular is that there ought to be not a law but a code. There oughta be--"ou-g-h-t-a"-be a code, by which broadcasters engage in self-regulation; they cartelize themselves. This shouldn't be a violation of the antitrust laws. The Justice Department should be thrilled. 
There was a Presidential Advisory committee on public interest obligations of broadcasters in the last couple of years. Here are two puzzles: the broadcasters on the committee were extremely happy with the idea of a code-in fact they pushed it, it is what they liked the best. Their self-defense was that this is a winner-take-all market, which creates some social pathologies. (I'll get to those in a minute.) 
But the National Association of Broadcasters, the trade organization, hated the idea. They came within half-an-inch of killing it. As they hated it, they said, with a big smile in their face, this would violate the antitrust laws. 
The puzzle is that usually members of an industry are not smiling when they talk about how an activity, which they might voluntarily engage in, would violate the antitrust laws. Why were they smiling then, and why were the broadcasters on the committee so enthusiastic about something that the National Association of Broadcasters despised? 
The second and related puzzle is that one way of making legal controls on this market, with winner-take-all features, less damaging to profits is to tell ABC or CBS or Fox you can do something good for the culture or you can pay if you are not going to, thus providing an economic incentive. You can provide some educational programming for kids or, if not, you give some money to PBS. That would be a replacement for current legal regulation, which is rigid. It is "play." It is not "play or pay." The oddity was that most of the broadcasters on the committee didn't like play or pay. They liked play. Now why was that? I mean here to try to untangle those two puzzles. 
Why might we think that broadcasting markets aren't something that will serve our culture entirely well? Off-hand, there are pervasive problems with broadcasting markets. For example, there is relatively little educational programming for children, at least on non-cable stations, and about 40 percent of Americans don't get cable at all. There is very little educational programming, and what little there is tends not to be so good. Television programming is pervasively violent. The level of murders per hour is high, not low. Also, there are now a series of studies linking, plausibly, violence on television to violence in the world. 
With respect to democratic processes, it is very expensive for a candidate for political office to get on television, and this creates a couple of problems. One is an arms race to raise more and more money, sometimes illegally, and also a system in which democratic or civic broadcasting on television is infrequent. And when it is there, it tends to be really fast and sensationalistic rather than substantive. We might think that with respect to children, the level of criminal activity, and the level of democratic or civil programming, our media market is doing very poorly. And by objective measures, in America it is worse, not better, than in European nations. 
Is there a market failure here, or are we complaining about market success? There is a little of both in the account that I would give. We don't have an ordinary market with respect to television programming. One problem is that individual viewers infrequently purchase programs. Individual viewers are a commodity. Eyeballs are a commodity delivered by networks to advertisers. 
Does that introduce distortions? Both no and yes. No, it does not, in the sense that advertisers, other things being equal, want more people to be watching rather than fewer. You might think that it is a proxy, but it is a crude proxy. It is a crude proxy, in the sense that advertisers are willing to sacrifice something in terms of viewer volume in order to do something good for product sales. Thus, if they can get somewhat fewer viewers but happier-buying-mood viewers, they are very willing to do that So advertisers will sometimes not sponsor a show that would get a lot of viewers because the people wouldn't be in a very receptive buying-mood. 
One reason that we don't have much controversial programming on ABC, CBS, NBC or Fox-substantively controversial programming-is that advertisers are very nervous about supporting it. That is a bit of a market failure if we think that what we want to do is promote viewer sovereignty. We don't quite have that. 
There are also externalities-both positive and negative-from broadcasting, and those externalities won't be controlled by an unregulated market A system in which we have civic or democratic programming can produce civic and democratic benefits. But those aren't things that are fully internalized by broadcasters or advertisers. The fact that eyeballs are a commodity--and the presence of externalities-point to something like a democratic failure. 
We might think also that what is on television helps form preferences. There is a preference forming role to popular media, everybody knows that, and the public might have aspirations-in fact it does-that preferences be formed in a desirable rather than undesirable way. That might point in the direction of educational programming, civic and democratic programming and less in the way, just as an example, of violence. 
Now why might we think that a code would be a good solution to this? Well, we might think that it is a little more flexible than rigid governmental commands in the sense that it can be both designed and implemented by the television industry. 
The idea of a code is actually not new-it was followed by the National Association of Broadcasters between 1928 and 1979. The idea was that it would respond to all of these concerns with an unrestricted market These concerns are heightened, not lowered, in an intensely competitive, winner-take-all market where one bad program dealing with, say, South Africa, can kill a career and one good program dealing with Monica [Lewinsky] or actually getting Monica to speak can make or fortify a career. 
A code is less intrusive than direct regulation, and it would be a way of controlling the problems just identified without getting bureaucrats involved in dictating content. We could think off-hand of what it would look like. It might say, for example, there should be four hours of educational programming each week. The code would be administered by the National Association of Broadcasters. It might say that in the two months before a Presidential election, each week there shall be two hours of free broadcasting time for candidates for public office. You could imagine vaguer provisions dealing, with, let's say, gratuitous or sexualized violence-especially, but maybe not only, at times when children are likely to be in the audience. That actually borrows from the old N.A.B. code. 
My suggestion is that this notion would counteract some of the pathologies in our current television market. It would counteract some of the difficulties faced by those who don't have cable, ensuring programming for kids. It would probably have beneficial results in reducing violence at least a little bit and reducing anxiety maybe more than a little bit. It would promote civic and democratic aspirations. It could be and should be administered by the National Association of Broadcasters. If they are unwilling to do it, then there should be a watchdog group that gets a lot of attention that can do the same thing. And in the environmental area, this kind of response to externalities has often had tremendous payoff because of the sheer fact of publicity. 
Okay, now I think we are in a position to say something about the puzzles with which I began. Why is it that the broadcasters on the committee were enthusiastic about the idea of a code but the National Association of Broadcasters hated the idea? You might think that economic self-interest is not disconnected from this seemingly anomalous pair of results. The broadcasters on the committee were selected by virtue, in part, of their commitment not to government regulation, which they don't much like, but to civic-minded broadcasting. Their economic enemy, in part, is cable television and other broadcasters who have different goals in mind. They are threatened by competition from people who wouldn't obey a code, which they themselves in their individual capacity are probably implicitly acting in accordance with, whether or not it exists. For each of these broadcasters, a code is a benefit and probably not a harm. It would prevent competition that might harm them. 
The National Association of Broadcasters, by contrast, is in a position of protecting the broadcasting industry against, most importantly, the cable industry. And the broadcasting industry is a net loser from a code even if individual broadcasters are neutral or net gainers. 
But why on earth, now we might ask, would the broadcasters not want the kind of flexibility that would be introduced by "pay or play"? The reason appears to be-this is a speculation-that these broadcasters were going to play anyhow. Either because that was their commitment as a matter of principle, or because their particular constituency demanded it. They were going to have some educational programming, some civic-minded programming, some free air time programming whether or not there is a code. 
On the other hand, what they were frightened by is the prospect that their competitors wouldn't be bound by the obligation that government currently imposes. A pay or play option would give their competitors, who are not civicminded, an opportunity to "pay," maybe not them, but maybe PBS. And the good broadcasters would be stuck "playing" with a lower audience share. It makes perfect sense for them to reject pay or play options on the grounds that it puts them at a competitive disadvantage compared to "pay"! Exclamation point! Just as it makes perfect sense for them to favor a code, or at least not to be disturbed by a code, when the industry itself is unhappy with it. 
A few general, very brief thoughts. The first suggestion is that a code-much more than governmental regulation because of its flexibility-would help counteract some of the adverse effects of winner-take-all pressures with respect to the mass media, especially with respect to programming for kids and programming that serves democratic functions. The second suggestion is that all this contains a quite general lesson about the uses of the antitrust laws to prevent voluntary actions by public spirited producers designed to counteract some of the baleful effects of races to the bottom and winner take all pressures. I'm hearing a lot of whispering there [from the otherpane-ts]and I would like to hear it aloud, if it is whispered, well-is this a little cartel on our left? [Laughte] 
MURPHY: This is the first time that Sherwin and I have been on the left. [More laughter 
SUNSTEIN: The last suggestion is that it is unclear whether American government will emerge with anything like a third way between unrestricted-let's call it Reaganism---and command and control government of the sort that arose in the Johnson era. My suggestion is that cooperation of the kind discussed can, in winner-take-all contexts, provide such a third way between frequently disastrous competition on the one hand and excessive bureaucratic mandates on the other. 
Now I think we should take questions and feel free to talk among ourselves. If anyone would like to say anything but maybe we should just take questions. Yes, sir? 
QUESTION: Professor Sunstein, you mentioned that one of the bad things about winner-take-all is that there is overcrowding in the industry. How do you define overcrowding and could you elaborate on that, and then could the other panelists say whether they think that overcrowding in fact exists and whether that is a good or a bad thing? 
SUNSTEIN: I'd be happy to take that but since it is Professor Frank's argument, probably he could best answer... 
FRANK: Okay, you don't automatically get overcrowding in a winner-take-all market, and by winner-take-all market I guess we understand that we mean that it is a market where your reward depends in large measure on your relative performance in addition to perhaps your absolute performance. If contestants in a winner-take-all market get paid the value of what they produce, then there is a general set of conditions that does result in overcrowding in the market. 
Essentially it is this: if I'm trying to decide whether to enter a market to compete, let's say, for a recording contract, I think about the expected payoff for me in doing that. What are the odds of winning number one? How much I will win if I win? I will weigh that against whatever else I might do, which might be to pursue some career that entailed less risk of failure and, albeit, a smaller salary in return for that. So that means that I'll just enter the market if the expected return beats what I could do otherwise. I won't take into account the fact that my presence competing for the trophy makes other competitors less likely to win it. In that sense it is like an over-fishing example. The fishing boat doesn't worry about the fact that some of the fish it will catch would have been caught by others had it stayed in port. You get this excessive effort at fishing as the common result there. 
There is another kind of behavioral factor that drives overcrowding, which is that if you are going to choose between a safe career path like teaching in a law school or a risky career path like trying to become a mergers and acquisitions lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell (if they even have them, I don't know), you've got to estimate your odds at succeeding if you enter that riskier arena. There is a very powerful set of evidence that suggests that when you consider your chances in risky ventures like that you're very likely to overestimate them. That ninety percent of drivers think that they are above average is the common statistic. That extends to factory workers: 92 percent of them think that they are more productive than the median colleague. Information doesn't seem to help that: 94 percent of college professors report in surveys that they are more productive than their median colleagues. Which is why, by the way, merit pay doesn't seem to work. It's a recipe for more than half the people being very disappointed with their pay. 
On those scores, you tend to get too many people entering the competition, which has a cost in the lost output that you don't get if they had gone into some other line of occupations. So that's the basic overcrowding argument. 
MURPHY: I just want to make a couple of points that tie into some of Cass' comments and some of the comments that just came up. I think when we start talking about what makes... first of all, there are things that create a superstars market, and then there are things that create a superstars market that are, to an economist's point of view, inefficient. And those two things are not at all the same. I want to make sure that's clear. 
For example, when Cass started his comments, he started talking about unjustified gains. That is, small differences in skill that generate big differences in rewards. However, when I can produce a better television show for a hundred 1999] ]Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodey million people, that's not a small difference. It's a small difference to any one person, but it's still cumulative. That ten cents every day I'm worth to ten million people is still a million dollars a day in value that is being created! So don't think that it is only ten cents better, so why am I getting a million dollars a day? No, I'm a million dollars better, and I'm getting a million dollars a day to pay for it! The fact that other people are not going to collect, the fact that we don't havewhat was it, how many thousand people singing in Iowa?-is probably a great thingl [Laughted I think that the fact that we all are listening to the CD in the car and not having to trudge down there and listen to some awful person singing in Podunk, Iowa is a good idea. [Laught] 
Second, we often talk about arms races. Now, arms races are arms races. It doesn't matter if we're competing to have the best general, or if we're seeing who can amass the biggest pile of foot soldiers--either way it's a wasteful race. But it's not a wasteful race because it's being fought by who has the best general rather than being fought by who can pile up the most men in a trench, either way it's wasteful. 
Nor is it a winner-take-all notion. If we had five billion dollars on the table, and the strength of your argument determines whether you are going to get 50.1 percent of it or 49.9 percent of it, the debate would still command enormous resources. But it's not winner-take-alL It's just that there is going to be one guy in the courtroom making the argument and you can't have ten thousand lawyers competing against him. 
When is this a problem? It is a problem when people only care about the relative position-that it's the relative position that generates the value. That being the winning team is what's important Yet, don't confuse this with being the best in the end. That is, who is going to be successful in making computers? It is going to be the guy who is the best at that point in time in making computers. Does the fact that over time we compete and produce better and better computers mean that there is no value in that, even though at any point in time it is always just being the best that matters? What does it take to compete in the market? It is always a matter of being the best Being better than the competition. That doesn't mean that there is no value to improving quality and no value to being better. Don't confuse those. It's very much a more narrow set-for winnet-take-all to be a problem, you have to establish that consumers care directly about the relatives, not that the relatives are just a characteristic of who wins when consumers ultimately only care about absolutes. 
ROSEN: Let me answer that, too, since I'm fourth. The fact is that there is no way of recognizing excess competition. There is no empirical test that anyone has ever been able to devise for it, that could be routinely used by, say, a regulatory agency. In terms of media and competition, I think we're talking about a race to the bottom-that is what it sounded like to me. However, the movie industry used to keep out communists, and the industry had a code-because they would corrupt youth and so on. This seems to me to be treading on very strange grounds about free speech and so on. I don't see that it is related to winner-take-all. Maybe I missed something.. .maybe we should regulate rap music. 
SUNSTEIN: There is a lot there. I will address a couple of points. I meant to separate the efficiency argument from the equality argument. And when Kevin says that someone is a million dollars better-well that depends on whether social and legal institutions allow that person to be a million dollars better. God didn't say that it's just to give a million dollars to the person who can produce two dollars more value for, say, 500,000 people. Give me a theory of justice that says that that person deserves a million dollars more! 
It is right that we should separate the efficiency argument from the inequality argument, but we shouldn't disparage the inequality argument because it isn't an efficiency argument. That would be hasty. The inefficiency argument... 
ROSEN: Tax them! 
SUNSTEIN: That's a possible solution. The inefficiency argument has to do with arms races on the one hand and overcrowding on the other. Those are the two points. With respect to the code and communists-that wouldn't be unconstitutional. The lawyers in the room know, because the constitution only applies to the government and I can report that no one has suggested that any kind of political control of that sort should be a part of any code... 
ROSEN: It is political... 
SUNSTEIN: ... and the N.A.B. would resist, with many fans from all sides, any effort to control through government regulation. For example, between 1929 and 1979, there was never any kind of government control. If there were such an effort to control, Sherwin and I could join hands and urge that they eliminate that. 
The connection to winner-take-all is that broadcasting markets, as the broadcasters are well aware, have a winner-take-all feature where relative position matters a lot, and it can be magnified into huge disparities with no... 
MURPHY: I just disagree in terms of what is the definition of winner-takeall. What's key in the over-fishing case is that when I go out and fish, you catch less fish but the overall number of fish in the market remains the same. Nobody benefits from that. When I go out and compete against you in the computer market and we drive down the price of computers, that makes you less profitable but the consumer benefits from that. There is a technical externality in the terms of economics in the case of fishing that doesn't happen in the case of computers. You have to convince me why there is a technical externality in broadcasting. The fact that people want to watch the best TV shows is no different than that they want to go get the best haircut or to go eat the best dinner or anything else. 1999] 
That doesn't mean that there is an over-fishing problem in the creating of restaurants or cutting hair. I ... 
FRANK- What matters, Kevin, is that some of the payoff you get from consuming the thing depends on the ranking per se. 
MURPHY: That's key, but that is not so dear that it's true on TV. I enjoy 'flTe Simpsons"! I don't know what else is on TV, that's the only show I watch. 
FRANK- There is, I think, less disagreement then it sounds like at least on some issues. I think that Kevin is totally right that the fact that we all can listen to the best soprano now is a good thing. If you had a relative with a serious illness and you could turn to the reigning expert on the planet for advice about what to do, you would count yourself lucky for that-rather than have to go to the expert at the Tompkins Community Hospital [in Ithaca, New York], which is where we go when we get sick. If you can go on-line and send the data to London and that is where the person who knows the most is, and you can get that advice, then that is exactly what you want and there is enormous value in that. So the fact that technology allows the best performers to extend their reach is a terrific thing. There is no quarrel about that. 
However, think about the quest to be Number One. Think about a lawsuit between Ford and General Motors. There is a new fuel injection system that Ford came up with, GM thinks that it violates a patent. It's a close call-maybe they invented around the patent, no one's really sure. There is no terrific social interest at stake in how the suit is resolved, but it is for a billion dollars. In that case, each of the two companies has an enormous interest in hiring the better lawyer. If it's such a dose case that the better lawyer is almost certain to win it, then the equilibrium salary for the better lawyer will be a billion dollars, and the other lawyer gets nothing. In that case, there is such a premium to coming out ahead if you're competing for that job that you will invest on every margin that you can to position yourself to be better than the other lawyer. However, it's not dear, if the social value of resolving the case is a toss-up, that society gains anything from those investments. 
MURPHY: I've got an alternative scheme. Let's decide who wins that case by how many janitors we can pile in a room. [Laughter What is going to happen? We are going to spend a helluva lot building big rooms putting lots of janitors in, right.' It doesn't have anything to do with the fact that there's a big thing on the table. There's a lot of models that'll dissipate that-whether it is spent by trying to get the best lawyers or spent trying to pile janitors into a room. Now, what you're saying is that because of technology, there's an implication for the income distribution of the nature of that competition in the growth in the size of the pie-because of the technology. However, the inefficiency associated with competition for that pie would be there independent of whether it was that technology or the other one. 
FRANK 
Yes. 
MURPHY: So there's a decoupling between the efficiency/inefficiency question-which has to do with splitting a pie-and the winner-take-all notion, which has to do with the technology of how you win the pie. 
FRANK: Technically, the distinction is that, as in the fishing case where you send ten boats out, each boat comes back with a tenth of the total catch. The average catch is greater than what the tenth boat added to the total catch. If your average payment exceeds the marginal contribution that you make, then you will get this overcrowding inefficiency. That's doubly true in the case of searching for the best contestant in a field of ten contestants. Doubling the number of contestants does not double the value of the quality of the decision that you get in the closely contested legal decision. You get the decision, which may be a better decision. You're going to have more talent trying to get the job of writing the decision, so it probably won't be a worse decision, but, still, the social value of that decision doesn't go up in proportion to the number of people who competed to write it. 
ROSEN: You can't even show that. I mean, there has been a lot of work in economics about patent races and whether people work too fast to discover things. There are no results there. You can't show that they work too fast. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don't. It depends on the way that you structure the model. If you tweak the models a little here or there, you get a different result. There's nothing that you can say. 
Now, in these labor market phenomena, I think that what Kevin is saying is that there's no standard for judging whether it's only rank that matters or absolutes. You can't think of an example where it's only rank. You know, if we only care who is the... 
ROSEN: Then you're going to get some efficiency from allocating these... 
FRANK Oh, you get a gain, but if rank matters, then there is this tendency to spend too much. 1999] 
FRANK- An example along the idea that a cartel is always a bad thing for the public interest New England Auto Racing Association at one time had an agreement to try to limit the amount that competitors-auto racers-spent on tires. Auto racing has lots of limits of this sort You have a limit on the size that your engine can be-weight restrictions, so on. These seem sensible. They are kind of like anti-steroid laws in athletics. Why spend more and more to put big engines in? Why not fix the size of the engine and see who can drive the car the best? That is the goal, to try to keep the cost of anointing a champion within bounds, and they found that they had pretty much controlled all of the competitive dimensions of auto-racing save one-namely the type of tires that the racers used. Naturally, that was the active margin. People spent more and more on tires-2,000 per tire, $3,000 per tire, stickier tires, 'wider tires and so on. So they proposed, finally, to set out a standard specification for tires. They were going to call on companies to bid who would supply tires, all according to the same spedfications, to the people who competed in these races. They chose a company to supply the tires. However, one of the losing bidders filed an antitrust suit and won relief in a district court. 
Ivy/MiIT. The Ivy/MIT agreement was that financial aid should go on the basis of need, not merit. It was a collusive agreement because without that agreement there would be very strong pressure for the schools to bid amongst themselves for the students with highest.SAT scores. 
FRANK. Yes, of course-Ivy/MIT. If you think that a social purpose is served by steering financial aid to the students whose families are neediest rather than to the students whose SAT scores are highest among a group, all of whom have good credentials, then that cartel wasn't necessarily a bad thing. 
FRANK- It was price fixing, absolutely! But by that fact alone we can't condude necessarily that it was contrary to the public interest, which is my point. 
MURPHY: But that is kind of like an argument that we should let poor guys have cartels or something. I mean, that's basically the argument! That as long as it's a bunch of poor guys getting together to raise the price of hot dogs, it's worth it. [Laughter] Come on, that's the same argument! 
SUNSTEIN: And why is it so dear to you that that is a bad argument? 
MURPHY: I'm just making a point. You guys decide. I'm just trying to make clear what we're arguing. 
SUNSTEIN: There may be better ways to help poor people than allowing them to cartelize. 
MURPHY: Yes, that's probably the best answer to that! See, I didn't even need to say it! [Laugbte] 
FRANK: On the justice thing, I think that the framework that most people argue about this is in terms of the standard Rawlsian thought experimentwhere you've got people who don't know how good they are at the outset. They go behind a "veil of ignorance" that shields them from the knowledge of whether they'll come in first or second in the race. They're supposed to cook up rules behind the veil about how the pie should be split up once they find out who's got what talents. 
Typically people would not vote for equal sharing of the pie when they go behind the veil of ignorance because, especially in a set up where there were a million people and everybody got one-millionth of the pie, the question would become: why should you bother to go to work? There would be little incentive if you were going to get essentially the same result whether you worked hard, took risks, or not. Rawls pointed out, I think correctly, that we are willing to allow some inequality, because, without it, we don't get any pie because nobody is going to have any incentives to work. The question is how much inequality? How much inequality do we think would be justified in the name of making the pie bigger? I think that the point I heard Cass making was that we're all comfortable if somebody has ten percent more talent and works ten percent harder, then that person should get ten or twenty or maybe even thirty percent more. 
However, is it intuitively clear to our sense of justice that if you have one percent more talent or work half a percentage point harder that you ought to get a thousand times more? I think that's where the intuition about what is a "just" distribution of income comes into conflict with the distribution that results when we pay people-as Kevin pointed out--exactly what they are worth in a competitive sense. What you are worth to the enterprise isn't necessarily the same number that we would come up with as what seems fair given what people need to live on in a society. 
ROSEN: There's a concept called "economic rent" and there's a theorem that if you have pure rent, you can tax the hell out of it and nothing will happen. Everybody agrees that it's true. If talent is all God-given and nobody ever does anything to acquire it and so on. Murphy has so many brains I want to tax them... [Laughte] 
MURPHY: You won't be collecting much. [Laughter] 
FRANK- I can't believe I just heard it! I'm going to walk away and say no more! The debate is over. [More laughtej 
ROSEN: The question is, what is the elasticity of supply? It's not zero. If it's not zero, then the optimum tax is not a hundred percent. 
FRANK: It is not a hundred percent, but we see the argument made that if an aspiring CEO for a Fortune 100 company were taxed not 40 percent but 42 percent, he or she would decide to take Friday afternoon to play golf. I think that vision of what drives the vice-presidents who are queuing up trying to be CEOs misses something fundamental. Their incentive to work harder isn't much affected by that marginal tax rate at those levels. We know that when the marginal tax rates in the U.S. were 60 percent or 70 percent, VPs trying to become CEOs didn't take time off.Japanese CEO aspirants face even higher tax rates than that, and they work harder... 
FRANK: ... if we measure hours worked-than American aspiring CEOs. So I think that it is true that you need to pay the talent, if you don't want to lose the talent to a rival bidder. So yes, what you pay is critically important for getting the job done, but if the reward were lower by two percent for everyone there's no evidence that people would put forth significantly less effort in their attempt to become CEO. There's just absolutely no evidence for that. 
QUESTION: It seems to me that there is a certain intuitive logic that in negotiating with somebody who has no other alternatives, you have a lot of control over the negotiations. My impression is that a lot of superstars aren't exactly autistic savants, but they really don't have another industry to go to or that they don't have another comparable industry to turn to. What is Cindy Crawford going to do or... 
QUESTION: ... or Michael Jordan-it turns out that he couldn't even play baseball Since we sort of have these people over a barrel where they have nowhere else to go, no comparable alternatives-or, at least, in certain industrieswhy that isn't factored in the equation at least in certain industries? 
ROSEN: Like lawyers. 
MURPHY: I think that there is a big thing that is being missed here. Which is one of the things that in economics is pretty clear-that when you get the superstar phenomenon.. .now, we're talking realsuperstars here! Remember, a big part of the growth in inequality has not much to do with the guys making $8 million. It has to do with the guys making $65,000 rather than $60,000 or the guys making $13,000 rather than $15,000. 
Putting that aside, let's focus on the guys making over ten million. One of the problems is that the way that you collect so much is you sell yourself to a very big market. Unfortunately, what we know from economics is that as we expand sales in the market, prices tend to go down. Therefore, you are unable to capture a large part of what you create. Even though Michael Jordan captured-what, $50 million or $100 million last year-I would venture to say that the true value of having him to society was far in excess of that. Thus, if you cut back on Michael Jordan ten percent, then maybe that tax revenue that you would raisewhich would be ten percent of what he gets-would be far less than what we would lose as a society. The same is true with Oprah Winfrey and with a lot of these people. They only capture a small part. They capture a lot but they create enormous value--great value generated solely by the fact that that market is so large. I mean, how much would each of us be willing to pay for Michael Jordan to be here rather than not? How much was he worth to have last year, rather than not? 
FRANK- Kevin, do you think that if the top rate had been 42 percent, he would have made a different career choice or expended any less effort to win? 
MURPHY: Yeah, a little bit. He would have put in a little less effort to have been "Michael Jordan." That's the point-it doesn't have to be a big jump. 
FRANK- Why? Do you think that he was weighing $30 million versus $31 million in deciding how high to jump that time? I mean, this doesn't seem intuitively plausible. 
MURPHY: I think people make those decisions when they decide when they're going to retire. 
FRANK It could in principle be true, but it just doesn't seem plausible. 
MURPHY: You know, this is like the old story-whenever I teach my students the law of demand, they say, "Well, do people really buy less when you raise the price of a computer a nickel?" And I say, "Yeah, they buy less when it goes from $1,000 to $1,000 and five cents." They say, "Come on, no it doesn't!" 
FRANKI Sherwin had it right-he said, when it's a rent, you can tax it and it will still be offered. 
MURPHY: No-that is the same argument that people do not respond to raising it [the price of a computer] by a nickel. Nobody's going to walk into a computer store and say, "Yeah,I'd buy it for $1,000 but a $1,000 and a nickel, no way!" [Laughter But the problem is that this argument falls down because if the nickel doesn't matter, let's go two nickels, ten nickels, a thousand nickels. We'll raise it a nickel at a time-pretty soon we're at a million dollars, and it had to matter at some point The same is true of tax rates. The argument that going from 40 percent to 40.01 percent doesn't matter, does not imply that it is logically inconsistent to say that it matters going from 40 to 50. 
FRANK: If you go to a hundred, you might say to hell with itT.here's a point beyond which you wouldn't push. 
ROSEN: It's a difference between the intensive margin and the extensive margin. Michael Jordan isn't going to do much if we take a few nickels away from him, but the probability of MichaelJordan being there at all is going to fall. 
ROSEN: Well, we see it in law. When wages in law went up, you've had enormous entry into law. For instance, a lot of smart women now come in and displaced a lot of dumb men. You've had an enormous increase in talent coming into itT.he elasticity of supply into law is very high. 
SUNSTEIN: But there is an argument by analogy here-which may or may not be true-that Kevin gave. It is true that if you raise the price of bread by a nickel, the demand for bread will fall. However, it doesn't follow from that analogy that if the marginal tax rate on people who make millions is raised a little bit, that the number or activity of those people will fall in any material way. It would be surprising if it went up, though that is conceivable; but that's an empirical question that can't be argued apriori. 
MURPHY: But neither can bread. The supply of bread can't be argued either. There's an argument for both that's equally apriori. 
SUNSTEIN: Yes but they're both empirical questions. We have a lot of evidence with respect to bread, but we don't have much evidence with respect to slightly higher tax rates on millionaires. 
ROSEN: Well, you're talking about something like a capital levy. As whenthis is a nice problem that has gotten a lot of discussion-I say that I am never going to tax capital. As a result, I'm going to get a lot of capital created and I'm going to tax it once. 
ROSEN: But it's inelastic-it'sinelastic at that point, but never again. That's kind of the argument we're having here. It seems crazy. 
MURPHY: I guess my problem with this is that this is really not a discussion of superstars. Superstars may be the reason why there is so much inequality, but, in fact, the more this is due to the superstar phenomenon, the more that it's due to investments, the more it's due to the combination with complementary resources, then the more elastic that response is likely to be and therefore the bigger the effect things like taxes would seem to be in that kind of situation. 
Thus, it seems to me, if you're really going to emphasize the superstar side, it is not clear as to why that argues for higher tax rates. If people were just born and one guy was a thousand times as good a basketball player as another, I could tax the hell out of that and I would never reduce the supply. The fact that it's due to investments and the fact that it's due to bringing complementary resources to bear with that person, is going to make the tax consequences in an efficiency sense larger, not smaller. 
FRANK You could ask this question-what if every basketball player on the planet had a vertical leap half an inch shorter than the current? By how much would the national wealth be smaller? It seems to me that there is a frame of reference that we need in order to decide whether... 
aughte] 
FRANK If the vertical leap becomes a foot smaller, then yes. We take pleasure in watching Michael Jordan, in part, because of the absolute height of his vertical leap, but more prominently because he hangs in the air longer than anyone else. The characteristics that define his being noteworthy are strictly positional. 
MURPHY: But we have to be a little careful here. There are two examplesthe car racing example that you gave and, really, to some extent, Michael Jordan, are somewhat different because competition is part of the product there. The product that we are talking about is who is going to win, and by definition there is going to be one winner. Now in a lot of other areas-for example, in making great movies and things like that-it's not that I want to go see the best movie. 1999] 
If the best movie is terrible, then I don't want to see it, right? I want to see agood movie. The same analogy that you could make for a basketball player wouldn't apply, for example, to actors-would not apply to TV performers-because in those cases it is not that I sit down and say, "Boy, this person's terrible, but they're the best so I love-it!" [Laughter You get my point? 
SUNSTEIN: Isn't that local news? You just described local news. [Laughter MURPHY: I cheer for the local high school team because they're going to win, and that's because the competition in the contest is part of the product That's not the same as in a lot of other areas that are, quote, "winner-take-all." That's my point 
FRANK. Two quick responses. It's not just places like sports where competition is the defining feature. This is not an isolated thing. You want a car, that's all you want-something to get you from point A to point B, or there are other things that you care about Most people like a stylish car and a car that performs well. 
Think about a car that performs well. What does a car have to do in order to be counted as one that performs well? In 1920, if your car would get to 60 mph eventually, you would experience that subjectively as an excitingly fast car. There would be people you could take for a ride and impress them with how fast it was-you'd feel the acceleration when you put your foot on the accelerator. Everybody would experience a jolt of pleasure at driving that car. Today driving such a car would seem slow. There would be no jolt of satisfaction at all. Today a car has to accelerate to 60 mph in under seven seconds in order to feel moderately quick and under five seconds to be down there. 
The other point that I wanted to make, just quickly, was that I think that to call it "winner-take-all" versus "superstar,"- in which superstar sort of concentrates attention on Michael Jordan. Phil Cook and I had a, chapter in our book called minor league superstars, and I think that a lot of this phenomenon plays out at a very ordinary level of scale. If you think of a salesperson, what really counts in whether a salesman earns a lot or a little is not so much how he performs compared to his co-workers but what kind of task is he assigned to do. Is he assigned to a high-value task-is he selling bonds for a pension fund? Or is he selling shoes at a JC Penney? If you're a good salesman, you're a lot more valuable the further up that hierarchy they move you. Right now because of changes in technology if you're a little bit better than another salesman, you've got a fax, you've got a cell-phone, you've got a beeper, you've got e-mail, you can service a larger client base. As a result, slightly better salesmen are knocking off slightly worse salesmen all the way down the ladder. You're getting this leverage effect-it's not just at the very top that it's pervasive. It's all through the labor market. 
QUESTION: I have a question for Professor Murphy. I don't see how the question above was really answered. Because if a person doesn't have more lucrative options, then it doesn't matter how much you tax because they're not going to get out of the field until they amass a certain amount of wealth. If they don't have more lucrative options, it depends on how you value that wealth. 
MURPHY: Well, this is the ex ante-expost problem that Sherwin was talking about. Once people have made the investment, once they've gotten there, then maybe they don't have options. But what's going to be the extent to which people strive to reach those places, or strive to get to those goals? That's what's going to be affected. You know, when Michael Jordan was in high school he didn't know.. .if he had known he was going to earn eighty million, if he had known he was going to earn the most in the NBA, then what you've got in the NBA wouldn't of mattered. That is, even if NBA players had been paid half of what they were going to get paid, it wouldn't have mattered. When he was in high school, though, it did matter. You have to distinguish ex ante versus expost. 
What happens with people trying to go on to become Cindy Crawford? We don't know who the next Cindy Crawford is going to be. They don't know, either. What the next Cindy Crawford is going to earn and what the potential prize is does matter. In fact, it's kind of odd because I hear this talk about tax rates not mattering, but then one of the big inefficiencies of the big payoffs that you talk about in your book is that it draws all of these people in. 
FRANK Where they matter is for that person who is on the edge. The untalented contestant who is just barely thinking about trying for the NBA as opposed to taking some math courses. 
MURPHY: But who's untalented? You don't know up front-that's the problem. I mean, I barely got out of high school...and I'm still untalented. [Laughte] 
QUESTION: Back to a legal perspective here-I'm not really seeing the direct tie to the superstars, that is, if the case is worth $50 billion, then a percentage of that increases in absolute terms as the value of the cases increase over time. The other question is, suppose that we have five top-tier law schools putting out a thousand students a year, does that period of entry have an effect on overcrowding, have an effect on the superstars within the thousand and then the thousand versus the rest? 1999] 
ROSEN: The question is why are there five? That's the thing that is troubling me. I guess I'm closer to Bob on this than I'd like to admit [aughtej But there's free entry into high-quality law schools. There are no barriers there. It's not a cartel. It's not a group. Cass doesn't meet with Harvard, Yale professors like he wants to do for the broadcasters, to keep people out. 
SUNSTEIN: Isn't it about information? 
FRANK- Many of these things are very path dependent. Once you get good, it is easier to get better. Students are choosing you based on how good you are, then, if you get a little better, more people choose you. Then you can become more selective, which causes still more people to choose you and better faculty to want to work for your university and so there is enormous comparative advantage to the people who got there first and established reputations. It's not to say that they're impregnable. There have been movements in the rankings in academia, but if you aspire to be a top five law school, which of those five schools do you think that you're going to knock off, if you're the number 25 school? It's real tough prospect to think about knocking them off. 
ROSEN: Why shouldn't it be the top 100? There's enough talent out there. Maybe there isn't... 
FRANK. As you said, there is a sharp peak in the distribution of payoffs. There's only so many $10 billion mergers to arrange, and they don't need 100 law schools' worth of students to hire do that-so the battle really is for certification to get access to those really good jobs. 
ROSEN: Here is an economic argument I've heard of for why there's a greater value to sorting, and it relates to this increase in demand for skills that Kevin was talking about earlier. The nature of the changes in technology that seem to be driving a lot of these changes today have to do with increasing demand for intellectual-type human capital rather than for other types. Then you want to encourage production of that kind of capital. This is a supply-side argument and what you need for this argument is that there are complementarities between teacher and student quality. You don't want Cass teaching third-rate students. You want the best students to go to the schools with the best teachers or to associate with other students who also are as talented as them. You get some kind of assortive mating, in a marriage-market sense. The analogy is pretty strong. 
Then, if you have an increase in demand for these kinds of skills, demand for sorting is going to go way up. It's going to be difficult to get into Chicago Law School, or the University of Chicago Economics Department, for that matter. On the other hand, I would expect there to be more supply-more spaces to become available-to reflect that greater sorting. 
Now, there's no doubt that there is more sorting of college students than there used to be. I know that when I was in college, I could have gone to Yale or Harvard if I wrote the check. Now it's impossible-it's basically impossible-to go to those places. Even the state schools like the University of Illinois system has many different units that are very stratified by student academic performance and so on. I think that there is an increase in sorting, but I think it's due to the increase in the value of sorting-social value, not an arms race. The trouble with that, I think, is why hasn't the supply of high quality law schools increased more than it has? 
QUESTION: I'd be curious to know how your economic and legal models deal with almost what seems like a psycho-social phenomenon, sort of a cult of personality that seems to occur in a lot of these superstars. In the sense that David Copperfield does a card trick that is not ridiculously different than if someone else does a card trick, except that Copperfield makes $70 million a year. It's not just in the entertainment industry-Jerry Seinfeld or whatever. I'm just very curious about that. It seems to be almost more of a psycho-social phenomenon that almost goes back to ancient ideas of kingship where people are really excited about a personality, and that there's a lot of effort in creating that personality. 
ROSEN: Do you want tips on how to become such a person? aughter] 
SUNSTEIN: It's a very good question. Part of it is that you can talk to others about the fact that you saw Michael Jordan or David Copperfield-they all know who he is. Thus, part of it is it is not just the experience of seeing, that it may be a magic trick that is not much better than others, but it's someone everyone else has heard of and that's part of the reason you pay for it. 
MURPHY: Right, the point is that that doesn't make it of no social value, or make it not real. The point is that it is sort of arbitrary-that we could have picked anyone to be king, but we picked this guy and then people really enjoy listening to this guy talk. This is still a real phenomenon, and to not have that would create a problem. Now the question is, do the gains to having a "king" get dissipated as people compete to be king? 
ever read that book... Impossible to read... [Laughter] 
MURPHY: This also gets back to a point that Bob Frank made a bit ago, which is this question about when somebody else's car goes faster and that 1999] makes me want a faster car, too. It's true that those models can lead to.. .models... and that's a problem that I've studied a lot. In fact, Bill [Landes] and Gary [Becker] and some other people have worked on problems like that and it turns out that relative position isn't the key feature. The question of whether you get too fast a car is not a question of whether me having a faster car makes you want to have a faster car, but the mode with which that operates. Does me having a faster car make you better off, or does me having a faster car make you worse off? It's not the complement between the speed of my car and the speed of your car that leads to inefficiency, even though that's what leads to the ars race element of it. I could have a case in which you having a faster car makes me want a slower car and that would be inefficient. There is no necessary connection between those two things. 
FRANK: You see, that's a problematic response in the sense that if you could imagine a different pattern, then you could get a different result, so there's no result at all. 
FRANK: I'm just not aware that there is any serious argument to the effect that when cars get faster generally, people enjoy having a slow car more. 
MURPHY: No, but do they enjoy their car less? If they don't enjoy it lesseven if it really makes them want to have that faster car-if they don't enjoy it less, then there is no externality. 
FRANK All available evidence suggests that a car that goes to 60 mph in seven seconds seems slower-and, hence, less attractive if you care about speed-in a world where all cars get there in six seconds than in a world where they all get there in eight seconds. That's totally incontrovertible. 
MURPHY: Well, I don't know... 
FRANK: Maybe you don't care about speed. But if you care about speed, then that's just the answer. 
ROSEN: [Gestuwing towards Mur'p~] Remember, he likes "The Simpsons." [Laughted 
MURPHY: The point is, if I care about speed is saying one thing. But saying that you having a faster car makes me unhappy, is a different thing. 
FRANK: It makes your car slower as you experience it. That's known to be true. I mean there are a few things that we do know. 
QUESTION: This is pretty much Kevin's argument, perhaps. When we had kings and dukes and so on, society needed somebody to be in charge, that had a lot of leverage and so on. We did have a lot of counter-effects-namely that the dukes would start to fight with each other in wars, and that cost society a lot. So we don't know which is better, whether we had a good scheme. You could say that we have something like that now, too. It's not really very different. We only have a certain amount of slots-only one Michael Jordan, and I guess that we can't replace him at the moment-but there are other certain fuzzies: how many we need at the top or how many we have. There's something like that that goes on and there's a huge amount of competition to get into that. Is that something like the wars of the medieval times, and so that it can be even counterproductive to society-is that what you're saying? 
MURPHY: Well, it could be if the method on which they competed didn't independently create value. That's the question. In the war case, in fact, it's doubly bad because the method in which they competed created negative value, not only not independent value. In this case, it's not clear at all that in factremember, they don't collect the full amount of that value and that's... 
MURPHY: ... and in this case Michael Jordan is not competing by having us kill each other off. 
QUESTION: There seems to be another way that superstars might work, like Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan brought the whole NBA industry up. There was a sort of an initial phase in which Michael Jordan had to create interest again in basketball, like the home run race in baseball. I think that after that there's sort of another thing happening-that once people are interested again in basketball or baseball, that perhaps the superstars are not as necessary? I mean, we will still be watching basketball or baseball after Michael Jordan or Mark McGwire. 
1999] 
MURPHY: I think that what you are pointing to is a sort of diminishing returns to having superstars and that maybe superstars are very relevant when we're falling to a point where there's a critical level, a point at which we're going to fall from the public eye. There may be an element of that, but I think that also bolsters the view that Michael Jordan didn't collect a big part of the value that he created-neither did Mark McGwire or Sammy Sosa. Even though they're getting a lot in endorsements and the like, it's unlikely that they collect even a significant part of the value that they created in terms of the renewed interest in baseball. 
FRANK- There's actually an estimate on Jordan. Ten billion was the estimate that I saw, value added. 
MURPHY: Yeah, exactly. 
SUNSTEIN: What we want to know is whether over-optimistic people, alert to the example of Michael Jordan and the $30 million, are entering the basketball market trying to become professionals where there are other, better things-and that is the problem the book points to. There's a lot to study empirically here, about whether people who are entering superstar markets a) are over-optimistic and b) whether what they're doing is wasteful. Kevin is suggesting that often it is not. Often it isn't, but we want to know how often isn't it. 
QUESTION: The only evidence that I've really heard from Bob is about these surveys where there are 90 percent of the people who think that they are above the mean or something like that. I'm just wondering how valuable that survey is? If I were to go ask my students in class-you know, at the beginning of the quarter-how many of them think that they are going to get above the mean grade, I'm sure most of them will state that they will. Partly because they don't want to give me a signal that they think that they are not as smart as they might be and that I might hold that against them or something else-but I'm not really sure what you can take from that type of survey. Simply because they honestly believe that everyone is going to be getting A's in the class? Or does it tell us something about what they think about-how other people are going to react if they reveal that they may not be as smart? 
SUNSTEIN: Do you think if it's anonymous that you might get a different result? Note that this is very robust. It is not just about expected performance in a class. With respect to the incidence of cancer, heart disease, divorce--any bad thing that you can mention that people have control over-they think that they are less likely than most people to experience it. In fact, the only class of people with a realistic sense of their own capacities and what's going to happen to them and of what other people think of them-the only people who are realistic-are the clinically depressed. 
QUESTION: But there seems to be concerns about winner's purses and people bidding on things-there seems to be evidence that we aren't making mistakes. 
MURPHY: The other point is that the dear empirical test of this is whether, in fact, if I raise the variance of earnings in a profession, holding the mean constant, more people would enter that profession. Economists would expect fewer people would want to go in. You would say more people would want to go in. As far as I know, there do appear to be risk premiums that you do get--a premium for risk-which seem to counter the argument that in fact people overenter markets in which there is too much risk. People tend to think that their stock portfolios are going to do better than they do as well. Yet, we still, when we look at the premium for risky stock returns, find a consistent premium for risk. I'm not sure that you can take that survey evidence on what they thinkthey think that they're better than the average guy picking stocks, but, on the other hand, we still end up with a risk premium. It doesn't necessarily translate into behavior. 
MURPHY: That's what I'm saying. But what's important for the inefficiency is that it translate into behavior-not that it translate into expectations. 
FRANK No, if you're risk averse, then not only will fewer people choose to compete in a high variance market, but fewer should compete on a welfare... 
MURPHY: Yes, but somehow you're saying that the observed risk premium, then, is too small relative to what it should be. 
FRANK Risk aversion steers you away, and it should if it's risky. Overestimating your odds of winning steers you towards competing, and it shouldn't. 
MURPHY: I guess what I'm saying is that, on net, it steers you away. 
ROSEN: There's another factor here, and that is that risk is good when you can cut it off. There's an option value... 
ROSEN: ...so if I'm going to try to make partner in a big law firm, guys who don't make it do very well in less prestigious firms. They don't do as well as they would have had they made partner. If I'm going to be a boxer, and I start getting some data feedback that I'm not going to make it, then I go and do something else. Risk attracts people for that reason in a lot of occupations. 
1999] 
SUNSTEIN: That's a very helpful clarification because there the two are quite different We may not have a problem of overcrowding, at least with respect to certain classes of lawyers, because those who end up not making partner still add value and do great. But, with respect to boxers, it's possible that they've invested a lot of wasted time in learning how to box instead of getting skills that... 
ROSEN: You know how many boxers can make a full-time living at it? 
ROSEN: It's forty. 
MURPHY: Let's go back to where we started today. We started today talking about opera singers and I wonder, ifwe looked at it, are more people working to be opera singers today? Probably the total payments to opera singers as a group are higher, and yet there are probably more people working to be professional opera singers now than there were back when there were 1,300 of them just in Iowa. Again, I think because people realize that their chances of making that huge record contract are pretty low. That would be an example that we could look at to say, has this situation increased the skewness of the results? I don't think the total pie is any smaller-but has the increased skewness of results led to more entry or less entry? 
FRANK: This is not a claim that there is more or less entry. The question is, would it be better if there was less entry? If there are a lot of good magicians who can do card tricks and all you care about is watching the best known among them, then you don't increase the size of the pie by doubling the number of people in that competition. You get to see the best known of how many there are out there, if that's what you care about And I think to an extent that is what we care about, primarily, in the case of sopranos when we're talking about the kinds of differences among contestants in this market As Sherwin has noted, it's very hard for a trained listener to detect quality differences among the top 100 sopranos. 
ROSEN: I've changed my mind. That was before I listened to any of them. [Laughte] 
MURPHY: There's an issue, then, in the question of why I wouldn't buy for $12 the CD of that person who is slightly less talented when the better person's CD sells for $13. Clearly that seems to be contradicted by the facts. People think that that CD sitting in the bargain rack over there for $4.99 doesn't sell like the one for $13 from the person who is a little bit better. 
FRANK Again, we don't know whether that's because what they cared about was listening to the best known soprano. If that's what they care aboutperse-if they want to see Copperfield rather than another magician who does it just as well, because they know Copperfield-then you get that difference explained not because the extra quality is worth more, but by the fact that it is by the bestknown performer. You're going to get a best known performer anyway, however many people you have competing. That's the distinction there. 
SUNSTEIN: There's some statistic about the percentage of Division I college basketball players who think that they'll be in the NBA, something like... 
FRANK. Sixty-odd percent. 
SUNSTEIN: And what's the actual percent? FRANK. A percent and a half, about. 
SUNSTEIN: Right. Now that doesn't seem strategic in John [Lott]'s sense, that it doesn't have behavioral consequences. Does it mean that they are not adding value that they could? 
ROSEN: What do you do about it? I mean, suppose you're right-then what do you do? Do you regulate it? 
FRANK No. 
SUNSTEIN: Information first. 
ROSEN: What do you mean? 
ROSEN: Everybody knows that. 
SUNSTEIN: They do? Then why do sixty percent say so? 
ROSEN: Everybody knows that hardly anyone makes it into the big-time sports. 
SUNSTEIN: Well, if you think that they're saying it, but they don't actually think it-is that what you think? 
ROSEN: Maybe they think they're in the one percent. 
SUNSTEIN: Well, they do! 1999] 
ROSEN: Right! You can't do anything about it! What's the point of talking about it? 
SUNSTEIN: I'll tell you one ingenious advertising campaign that we want to know what its effects were. Here the government was alert. If you look at their drug advertisements and their drunk-driving advertisements, you will find that they are quite alert to this. Ninety percent of drivers think that they are safer than the average driver and less likely to be involved in an accident. The government's response wasn't to tax anybody or to have new laws. It said, "Drive defensively! Watch out for the other guy!" 
SUNSTEIN: No, that was not the government's response. But it would be interesting to know if this drive-defensively, watch-out-for-the-other-guy notion worked better than others. The behavioral prediction is that it would because people were excessively optimistic. 
SUNSTEIN: Have you studied the data? In fact, there is very powerful evidence... What I've just said is based on nothing, but what he said was based on nothing, too. [Laughter] 
QUESTION: I don't know how much MichaelJordan made at the end of his career. I do think that he was the greatest basketball player that ever lived. But due to the salary cap and free agency, isn't there a way that the salary of the best basketball player drives up the salary of the succeeding basketball player who might be a novice and not have any certain value? 
FRANK. There does seem to be a going rate for basketball players, for CEOs, and as each new frontier is breached the amount paid to others in the wake of... 
FRANK. Sherwin posed a question of why legal earnings haven't gone down despite the flood of supply. Might that just be the old story of one lawyer in town, there's no business, two lawyers in town...? 
SUNSTEIN: That's a good note on which to end. We should thank the panelists, especially Bob. 
Janet and I, and the others, have kept it secret for all these years, and I must tell you that I'm pleased about that. But it's time, I think. 
It was a warm spring morning when Justice Powell called me into his office. "This is a hard case for me," he said, "because I've never met a homosexual." Of course I was stunnedhow could he possibly think that?-but at first I kept my silence, even though several of Justice Powell's own law clerks had been gay. I really wasn't sure what to do. But that afternoon I talked to my co-clerk Janet, and after a lot of soul-searching and a good, long, hard talk, we decided that the Justice (that's what we called him) could not be asked to decide this case without knowing a little more. 
So we took a big risk. We called two of his gay clerks and asked if we could tell the Justice that he had indeed met a homosexual, or two, or more. 
Please don't be shocked that we did this, Helen. Maybe it wasn't exactly ethical, but we didn't tell our predecessors anything about the Hardwick case, or anything about our discussions with Justice Powell about the legal issues involved. We disclosed no inside information. We were just asking whether the closet might be opened a little bit. (You might not know what that means. The "closet" is the term that was used to mean where gay people stayed, when they kept secret the fact that they were gay. This must seem mysterious to you, I know.) We wanted the Justice to know a bit more than he did. We actually thought that it was relevant. 
Anyway we got their permission, and the next morning, at 10 am, we went into the Justice's office and said, in brief, "We think you ought to know that you have met a homosexual, or two, or more. In fact some of your own clerks have been homosexuals." And then we named two of them. Well, the Justice was stunned. For a while he was silent. Then he said, very slowly, "Why didn't I know?" And then, a little angrily: "Why didn't they tell me?" And then, with some grief, and quietly: "Oh my." And then, very firmly: "I need to be alone now." 
I never knew what happened next. But I know that Justice Powell stayed in his office, alone, for nearly three hours. We were all told that he was "not to be disturbed." I believe that he did a lot of thinking. I also suspect-though I'm not sure-that he called the two clerks we mentioned. 
As you know, Justice Powell was a crucial vote in Bowers v. Hardwick, striking down that Georgia sodomy statute. What you don't know is the firmness with which he stood by his vote, in the face of frequent, and sometimes severe, entreaties from his conservative colleagues. But everyone respected Lewis Powell. And I think that those famous passages about discrimination and secrecy in Justice Blackmun's majority opinion had a lot to do with Justice Powell's thinking about the case. And my private hunch is that Justice O'Connor would have voted with Justice White if not for Justice Powell's private eloquence, and intense feelings, about the rights involved. 
SYMPOSIUM: SUNSTEIN 
Well, what happened next is on the public record; but it must seem like ancient history to you! Many people celebrated the outcome as a great day for civil rights, and Michael Hardwick was on the cover of all the leading magazines, and he soon became a hero and a celebrity. President Reagan denounced the Court's decision and denounced the Court as a whole, and he strongly supported the Defense of Marriage Amendment, which became a focal point of public debate for the next decade. President Hatch-what a firebrand! -had two pretty successful terms, defeating a mealy-mouthed Southern Democrat (what was his name?), who simply would not take a clear stand for, or against, the Hardwick decision. 
You know, Helen, I actually thought the Defense of Marriage Amendment would finally pass under President Quayle (boy was he a canny politician). But the key states-New York, California, New Jersey, Illinois, and Michigan-somehow stood firm. Bless those framers; it's awfully hard to change the Constitution. 
You're too young to know this, at least not in any detail, but 1990-2010 was a grim time for this wonderful country. There was a lot of anti-gay violence, and some governors seemed to think that that was just fine. Though the public would not repudiate Hardwick, the whole cause of civil rights was on thin ice. When President Quayle abolished affirmative action in 2003, the country seemed to me in big trouble. And the deficit went completely out of control; that was the most serious problem, I think. People were awfully worried about the economy, and the recession of the mid-1990s-some called it a depression-was bound to make it a bad period for civil rights. 
It certainly took a while, but as this country always does, we got back on track. Old Man Bradley finally made it to the White House-the first Democrat since Jimmy Carter; imagine that! and he certainly did a wonderful job. And now the Civil Rights Act bars discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. Justice Powell certainly could not have imagined that-or that Bowers v. Hardwick, his pride and joy, would be invoked in the President's signing statement! And to think that now everyone thinks that Hardwick was right, that it stands with Brown itself as a symbol of constitutional justice-Helen, I have to tell you, that's the hardest thing for your old grampa to believe. 
I don't know if you study this in law school, but Lewis Powell did us proud. Before he died, he said in an interview that his vote in Bowers v. Hardwickwas "the best vote I ever cast, and if I had it to do over again, I would do exactly the same thing." I don't know if he was a great man, Helen. But I do know that he was a good man. 
Sometimes I wonder a bit about what would happened if I hadn't talked to Janet and if we hadn't made those phone calls. Would Justice Powell have voted the way he did? Maybe the Court would have come out the other way; is that possible? And if it had, would things have been different? You never know. 
Well, that's my story, my little graduation present for you. It's your story now, not mine. Do with it as you wish. 
Helen, you're a woman now, and I don't have anything to teach you, not any more. But maybe you'll forgive one small plea from an old man. In the law, you'll have a lot of chances to do something that might make a difference, small or large. Even if you're not sure, maybe you'll make that phone call. Much love, 
CASS R. SUNSTEIN t 
From 1997 to 1998, the President's Advisory Committee on the Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters debated various possible reform proposals. Aware of the "winner-take-all" characteristics of the media market, several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of reviving some kind of broadcasting "code," akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters ("NAB") between 1928 and 1979. The idea of a code received considerable attention, mid-deliberation, in the trade press. In its annual meeting, however, the National Association of Broadcasters signalled its skepticism about the idea and came very close to saying, "no" and "never." 
Very oddly, a large part of the broadcasters' objection was that any "code" would violate the antitrust laws. This is very odd, because in private discussions, members of the NAB treated the possibility of an antitrust violation as extremely good news. It is not often that high-level corporate officials are smiling when they discuss the possibility that certain action would be found unlawful. 
It seems dear that a code is unlikely to be accepted by the NAB, and that if it has any prospects at all, it would be to fend off more aggressive and direct regulation. Part of the purpose of this Essay is to understand the dynamic just described-the enthusiasm of many distinguished broadcasters for such a Code and the simultaneous resistance of the NAB. Part of the purpose is also to understand a second and related puzzle: pervasive broadcaster skepticism about a t. Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay is a revised version of a presentation given at The Wages ofStardom:Law and the Winner-Take-All Sodety, a panel discussion sponsored by the University of Chicago Roundtable in February 1999. As a revised version of oral remarks, it is more than usually sparing on footnotes. The essay draws on a more formal paper, Cass R. Sunstein, PrivateBroadcastersand the PubicInterest:Notes Towarda 'Third Way" (forthcoming California Law Review, 1999). [6:39 seemingly flexible and highly attractive "pay or play" system, in which broadcasters can be relieved of public interest obligations (to "pay") if they agree instead to pay someone else-another broadcaster-to do so. As we will see, the solution to the two puzzles helps illuminate the nature of television markets, and also the potential virtues and vices in both market and non-market solutions. 
Television markets have important "winner-take-all" characteristics.' Intense competition among stations can lead to extraordinary success for some programs and total disaster for others. For many people, the relative quality of the program (Is this the best local news show? The best program on at 7:30?) matters as much as its absolute quality. And for many people, what matters is what other people are watching; hence a decision to watch, or not to watch, the evening news on CBS, or Ally McBeal, or Star Trek, or Seinfeld can have external consequences. 
Participants in media markets are entirely well-aware of this fact. A bad decision for one week may produce a crisis the next week; a good decision for one week may make a year and conceivably a decade. The result can be a kind of homogeneity in programming and also a more than occasional "race to the bottom" in terms of sheer quality, as the effort to grab viewer attention has corrosive effects on programming. Many broadcasters and journalists are quite vocal about this phenomenon, lamenting the adverse effects of competition, which lead them to produce shows different from and inferior to what they would, in a sense, like to offer. 
Apart from the concerns of participants, are winner-take-all television markets a basis for legitimate public concern? I believe that they are, above all because of the adverse cultural and democratic consequences of sensationalistic, violent, or prurient programming. 2 It is reasonable to think that competitive forces have an array of harmful effects, ranging from inadequate programming for children, to substance-free and scandal-pervaded treatment of political issues, to news as "infotainment," and most generally to bad consequences for social norms, preferences, and culture as a whole. 3 
Government has often responded to this problem through direct regulation. The most celebrated example is the "fairness doctrine," now largely defunct, which required a certain amount of public interest programming and emphasized the importance of presenting divergent views. Regulation of this kind is often defended as a way of overcoming competitive pressures. The problem with such regulation is that it may be futile or counterproductive. It may also raise serious constitutional problems. 
In this essay I discuss another way of promoting public interest goals. The basic idea is a system of voluntary self-regulation, through a "code" of conduct to be issued and enforced by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), and if not by the NAB, by some kind of external "watchdog" group. For many dec 
Winner-Take-LersCodes & PtivateBmadsartea 41 ades, in fact; the NAB did indeed issue and enforce such a code, partly to promote its own economic interests (by raising the price of advertising), partly to fend off regulation (by showing that the industry was engaged in self-regulation), and partly to carry out the moral commitments of broadcasters themselves. A new code, building on the old, could contain various public interest obligations designed to protect children and to encourage substantive attention to public issues, and such a code could also attempt to protect against (for example) sexually and gratuitously violent material, subliminal advertising, sensationalistic treatment of politics, and a wide range of other problems with television. Such a code might promote some of the desirable effects of government regulation without creating the familiar accompanying problems of rigidity and coercion. 
The question is whether it is possible, in the current era, for broadcasters to overcome some of the unfortunate effects of the winner-take-all, or winner-takemost, marketplace with voluntary measures designed to ensure something on the order of winner-take-less. An underlying question, likely to be faced in many areas of regulatory policy both domestically and internationally, is whether a code would work as a kind of undesirable cartelization or instead as protection against an undesirable "race to the bottom"--and whether such a code might be immunized from attack under the antitrust laws. 
I suggest that a code might do a great deal of good. A general lesson is that at least with respect to television, competition is producing an array of social harms, and the antitrust laws ought not to be invoked too readily to prevent producers from undertaking cooperative action in circumstances in which competition is producing serious harms. Government regulation is often the response to market failure, but a code might be better, especially because of its comparative flexibility and because of the informational advantages of private enforcers. Thus it is hazardous to invoke the antitrust laws; direct regulation may lead the industry to provide benefits more crudely and expensively than if a code were in place.4 
Competitive pressures often do a great deal in providing programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable, satellite, digital television, and an astonishingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be instrumental in producing "niche" programming for people who have a particular interest in certain programming, even serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; there may even be a possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations5 But as I have noted, those competitive pressures also have a downside. They can lead to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or the kind of programming that is 
in note t). [6:39 indispensable to a well-functioning democracy.6 This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can lead to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, "[i]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly ill-informed and illtempered electorate."7 
It would be possible to respond to the sometimes harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Direct legal requirements and prohibitions are of course a possibility. But the most obvious and simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of "code" of good programming. Such an approach would be specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In other nations, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.8 Such cooperative action often makes people concerned about antitrust violations. But the antitrust law can go quite wrong when it prevents certain cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures.9 Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation designed to overcome those adverse effects 0 ; the question is whether that experience has domestic analogues. 
Television Programming (Princeton 1998). 
Effect of '"PrivateCensorship" on PressFreedom andHow to ConfrontIt-An IsraeliPerspective, Discussion Paper D-35, 14 (Harvard University 1998). Note also that many international bodies attempt to certify quality, in a kind of cooperative action designed to reduce adverse effects of market pressures. 
26, 1997) (stating "Some of the world's biggest companies are putting their weight behind a new, verifiable code of conduct intended to answer mounting consumer criticism of the exploitative conditions under which the goods they sell are produced in poor countries. ... The code, called SA8000 (Social Accountability 8000), is the brainchild of the Council on Economic Priorities, an American public interest group, which tries to improve corporate responsibility. It has been drawn up by companies, non-governmental organisations, trade unions, and other interested groups, and is due to start operating next year. 
The code covers the basic issues of child labour, forced labour, health and safety, trade union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay.... As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modeled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organisation in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality. But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard."). 
My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better; competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well 
The idea of a broadcasting code has a long and illuminating history." A central goal was to increase revenues by jacking up the price of advertising. Another goal was to fend off federal regulation. Yet another goal was to embody the public-regarding aspirations of many members of the industry (and to prevent competitive responses by those who had only profits on their mind). Intriguingly, the invalidation of part of the code, on antitrust grounds, was received with enthusiasm by the NAB, a phenomenon that casts light on the puzzle with which I began. 
The NAB was founded in 1923, and it first attempted to produce a degree of self-regulation in 1926, as a response to the "chaos" widely perceived to have been produced by interference and piracy. Some progress was made, but ultimately the agreement broke down; hence legislation was necessary, in the form of the Radio Act of 1927. 
The initial NAB code, produced in 1928, included some content guidance, but it was quite vague and also lacked an enforcement mechanism. Just one year later the NAB adopted a new code, involving ethics and standards of commercial practice. For example, the code banned "fraudulent, deceptive or obscene" material, "false, deceptive, or grossly exaggerated advertising claims, and "offensive" material. But the continuing imprecision of this code, together with the continuing lack of an effective enforcement mechanism, made it something of limited usefulness. 
The next major step resulted from President Roosevelt's National Recovery Administrative Codes in 1933. The NAB submitted a code of fair practices to the NRA, and on November 27, 1933, President Roosevelt signed it and gave it the force of law. The result included a seven-person Broadcaster Code Authority, designed to supervise compliance. But the National Recovery Act was struck down in 1935 by the Supreme Court,' 2 and the Code Authority was eliminated along with the 'law" that President Roosevelt had signed. [6:39 
B. AFTER THE NEW DEAL: INCREASED CONTENT CONTROL. 
Soon thereafter the NAB produced a new voluntary code, which was largely ignored. But in 1938 the NAB came up with another, far more specific code and also an explicit enforcement authority, the NAB Code Committee. Part of the reason for the new development was the increasing willingness of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to regulate both structure and contentand a specific warning, by the Chairman of the FCC (after the broadcast of War of the Worlds) that without industry self-policing, government involvement was likely. 
The 1938 Code included a number of important provisions. Among other things, it (a) required broadcasters to allot time fairly for discussion of controversial views; (b) banned the sale of time for the airing of controversial views; (c) asked broadcasters to cooperate with educational groups for the airing of educational programming; (d) required fair and accurate news programs; and (e) regulated commercials by limiting the time and length of advertisements. There were also prohibitions on hard liquor advertising. A Code committee would enforce the Code by determining whether a station was in compliance. Notably, the head of the FCC publicly approved the Code, and the American Civil Liberties Union described it as "a great step forward in formulating a policy in the public interest."13 
All of these steps involved radio, but the 1938 Code was the unmistakable precursor of the eventual television Code. In its first period, television witnessed a pattern that generally characterized the past debates over radio and late twentieth century debates over television: legislative concern, proposed legislation, steps toward self-regulation, and little or no legislation or regulation. 
In 1951, members of Congress proposed a National Citizens Advisory Board for Radio and Television, to oversee programming content. At about the same time the NAB began to draft its first television code in 1952, apparently in direct response to a congressional threat of legislation.14 The new code had a broad reach, emphasizing in particular educational and cultural programming. It also contained content restrictions on display of violent action and sexual material. 
Compliance with the Code was voluntary. (Note also that station operators who were not members of the NAB were eligible to subscribe.) Its enforcement provisions were quite modest. The basic mechanism came in the form of a clearinghouse for complaints. In addition, subscribers could display a code seal (the NAB "Seal of Good Practice"), and permission to display the seal would be withdrawn for "continuing, willful, or gross" violations. Thus the only formal sanction was that the non-complying station owner could not display the seal. 
But there were informal pressures, too. Stations who sought license renewal were likely to have prompt FCC processing if they adhered to the Code. Moreover, some people believe that subscription to the Code was appealing to those who bought advertising time, because the Code contained limits on the length and frequency of commercials, which would enhance the prominence of the announcement. Some stations in the United States did not adhere to the Code, but the vast majority chose to do so. 
by the justice Department in 1979, based on an allegation that certain provisions of the Code violated the Sherman Act.15 But the Justice Department's complaint was quite narrow. It involved not the code in general, but three specific kinds of cartel-like advertising restrictions: ( of commercial material that could be broadcast in an hour; ( interruption standards, which imposed a limit on the maximum number of commercial announcements per program as well as on the number of consecutive announcements per interruption; and ( prohibited the advertising of two or more products or services within a single commercial if the commercial was less than 60 seconds in length. 
The court did not invalidate the code in general, nor did it accept the Justice Department's argument in its entirety. It held that the multiple product standards were per se unlawful, but that the time standards and program interruption could not be tested without an inquiry into the facts. 16 The NAB took this ruling as an opportunity to eliminate the Code altogether. From all reports, the NAB was pleased to take a narrow judgment as the basis for a complete rejection of the held that the time and product interruption standards were notinvalid per se. In the court's view, the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting industry argued against a per se rule of invalidity. Because broadcast frequencies are scarce, because the whole area is subject to regulation, and because of the fact that there are only sixty minutes in an hour (), no simple solution would be sensible. On these two issues, the court also denied summary judgment for the government under the rule of reason, concluding that there were material issues of fact. By contrast, the court held that the multiproduct standard wasper se unlawful. In its view, this rule was akin to a standardization agreement by which food manufacturers set a standard for the ingredients that would be used in their products. This form of standardization was per se illegitimate. Thus the court actually invalidated only one provision of the code, on the theory that it was analytically akin to a system for price-fixing. At the same time, the court denied summary judgment for the NAB. An important question was whether the time standards would have the effect of raising or stabilizing the price of commercial time (this was the antitrust problem); it was possible, the court said, that any such effect would be trivial in light of the importance of other factors. If this was true, the code would not violate the Sherman Act. Id. This is because there is no antitrust violation without a significant adverse effect on competition. See, for example, UnitedStates vArnold, Schwinn, & Co, 388 US 365, 375 (1967), overruled on other grounds by ContinentalT t, 
(9th Cir 1979). [6:39 Code approach, perhaps because of the emerging threat from cable television (see below). 
In the 1980s, continuing congressional concern about televised violence led to a new law exempting from the antitrust law networks, broadcasters, cable operators and programmers, and trade associations, in order to permit them to generate standards to reduce the amount of violence on television.'7 But there was considerable doubt about whether an explicit exemption was necessary; a 1993 opinion from the Department ofJustice said that the industry could cooperate to reduce television violence without offense to the law of antitrust.18 
In 1962, the FCC proposed to make parts of the code into a legal mandate. The industry successfully resisted this step. But there was a continuing pattern of interaction among regulatory proposals, legislative reaction, public concern, and self-regulation. Of these the most important involved 1970s concerns about violence on television. The industry responded through the "family viewing policy," saying that inappropriate entertainment programming would not be shown between 7 pm and 9 pm eastern standard time. This was a distinctive form of self-regulation. But the Writers Guild of America challenged the policy on first amendment grounds, arguing that the policy was not voluntary self-regulation but was in fact a product of government coercion. 
In a controversial decision, the trial court accepted the challenge, and barred the NAB from enforcing the policy.19 The court of appeals overturned the decision on the ground that the district court was not the right forum to resolve these issues in the first instance.20 The court of appeals said that the issue should first be resolved by the FCC. Although the decision of the court of appeals was jurisdictional, that court suggested considerable doubt about the district court's judgment: "It simply is not true that the First Amendment bars All limitations of the power of the individual licensee to determine what he will transmit to the listening and viewing public."21 
The FCC ruled in 1983 that there had been no government coercion and that the NAB had adopted the family viewing policy voluntarily. In its key passage the FCC wrote, "[v]oluntary industry action is often preferable to governmental solutions, and an industry frequently addresses a problem in order to forestall regulation by the Government; conversely, it is not unusual for a regulatory body 
to forego enacting rules when the regulated industry voluntarily adopts standards which deal with a perceived problem.' m 
In June 1990 the NAB responded to public pressure by issuing new, exceptionally tepid "voluntary programming principles" to cover violence, indecency and obscenity, drugs and substance abuse, and violence. The new standards were reaffirmed in June 1991, and in 1992, ABC, NBC, and CBS issued and agreed to adhere to a set of new standards, although without an enforcement mechanism. Thus in the 1990s self-regulation can be found in various places: the advance parental advisory system, joint advisory guidelines issued by the four networks, NAB principles, and an annual public assessment, by the four networks, of television violence. 
From what I have said thus far, the case for a new code is quite straightforward. Such a code might well counteract some of the harmful effects of "race to the bottom" competition, and they might ensure that winner-take-all markets look more like winner-take-most markets, in such a way as to promote (for example) more and better programming for children and greater attention to public issues. The question then becomes whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. Such a code might update the old NAB code, and reduce current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing "standards." Obviously a new code could create certain problems, especially in an era in which broadcasters must compete with other television sources. But for the moment, let us put that point to one side. 
What provisions might a new code include? Consider the following possible code provisions 3 simply for the sake of illustration: candidates during the two month period preceding the election. It is preferable to ensure that candidates provide substantive arguments and that they avoid sloganeering and short "soundbites." children each day. They shall also attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to or inappropriate for children. Broadcasters should [6:39 avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. emphasize the sensational and the prurient. It should concern itself with claims and disagreements on matters of substance. Stations should endeavor not to give excessive or undue attention to sensational accusations or to issues of "who is ahead," at the expense of other issues. report, especially in connection with stories of crime or sex, should be avoided. News should be broadcast in such a manner as to avoid panic and unnecessary alarm. News programming should attempt to avoid prurience, sensationalism, and gossip. Stations should make an effort to devote enough time to public issues to permit genuine understanding of problems and disagreements. responsibly, and not exploitatively. Presentation of violence should avoid the excessive, the gratuitous, the humiliating, and the instructional. The use of violence for its own sake and the detailed dwelling upon brutality or physical agony, by sight or sound, should be avoided. Programs involving violence should venture to present the consequences to its victims and perpetrators. Particular care should be exercised where children may see, or are involved in, the depiction of violent behavior. Programs should not present rape, sexual assault, or sexual violence in an attractive or exploitative light. the needs of citizens with disabilities. To this end, broadcasters should ensure that programming is accessible, through the provision of closed captioning and other means, to the extent that doing so does not impose an undue burden on the broadcaster. Particular efforts should be made to provide full access to news and public affairs programming. Citizens who are deaf and hard of hearing are sometimes at risk of a form of disenfranchisement, or even physical danger, because steps are not taken to ensure that television broadcasting is available to them. Stations should take special steps to ensure that information about disasters and emergencies are fully accessible to those who are deaf and hard of hearing, including in "real time." 
Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all. 
There are two obvious possibilities. The simplest would be for the NAB to undertake enforcement on its own, just as it did under the old code. Enforcement might be both symbolic and material. The NAB might, for example, give a seal of approval to those who are shown to comply with its provisions, and deny a seal of approval to those who have been shown not to have complied. It might also give special public recognition to those stations that have compiled an excellent public service record in the past year. Such recognition may be awarded for, among other things, meeting the needs of children in a sustained and creative way, offering substantive and extended coverage of elections, including interviews, free air time, and debates, offering substantive and extended coverage of public issues, and providing opportunities for discussion of problems facing the local community. At the time of license renewal, a notation might be given to the FCC that there has been compliance or continuing or egregious noncompliance with the code. 
If the NAB is unwilling to enforce a code of this kind, perhaps a private "watchdog" group could take the initiative, both promulgating the code and publicizing and in that (modest) sense sanctioning violations. In the environmental context, information disclosure has itself accomplished considerable good, by activating relevant groups and social norms34 Perhaps the same would be true here. 
There is another question: the scope of any such code. Undoubtedly such a code was less painful, and easier to operate, when three broadcasters exhausted the universe of television. Of course broadcasters now find themselves in competition with many other entertainment sources, including cable and the Internet In these circumstances, broadcasters are not likely to constrain themselves if their competitors are not similarly constrained. The competition for an audience for news is much affected by the existence of "tabloid television," and a broadcaster who ties himself to the mast may find himself with a significantly reduced audience. The point suggests that in the development of a code, broadcasters should perhaps be joined by the National Association of Cable Television. 
By itself, however, a code limited to broadcasters would probably do considerable good, even if some broadcasters are reluctant to subscribe to it. When the market reaches the stage in which broadcasters are merely some of a large number of providers, with no distinctive status, it might make sense to think of a more general code (with suitable adjustments for particular kinds of programmers25). 
of recycling through the application of social norms) (cited in note 6). 
provide free air time for political candidates. [6:39 
Provisions like those described should not, and in all likelihood would not, be taken to violate the antitrust laws. The Department ofJustice has so concluded,2 and in two important cases, aspects of previous codes were upheld against private antitrust attack. A district court refused to issue an injunction against code standards forbidding cigarette advertising, despite a claim that these standards were inconsistent with the antitrust laws. 27 A lower court also upheld the provisions involving standards for advertising directed to children2 In these cases, the court basically concluded that the restrictions were reasonable and in the public interest. 
As I have noted, the most recent code met its demise as a result of an antitrust action brought by the Justice Department in 1979, based on an allegation that certain provisions of the Code violated the Sherman Act. After the court's ruling, the NAB suspended enforcement of all code provisions. 29 Doubtless the NAB did this partly for reasons of economic self-interest, and not only because it was fearful of a legal challenge. Nonetheless, the district court's narrow decisionuntested in any court of appeals-has loomed over the debate about codes. But in its most recent analysis of the problem, the Department of Justice suggested that networks could agree to guidelines and principles to reduce unnecessary violence on television.30 Indeed, this is not an ordinary form of collusion. It is 
1969). The court concluded that the plaintiff was not likely to prevail on the merits. The court referred in particular to the dangers posed by cigarette smoking and claimed that the standards and guidelines in the code serve the "public interest." Id at 1169. 
Broadcasters,407 F Supp 900 (S D N Y 1976). The rule at issue there said that children's program hosts or primary cartoon characters "shall not be utilized to deliver commercial messages within or adjacent to the programs which feature such hosts or cartoon characters." The provision applied as well "to lead-ins to commercials when such lead-ins contain sell copy or imply endorsement of the product by program host or primary cartoon character." Id at 902. The plaintiff attacked the restrictions, claiming that it restricted the ability of hosts and actors to obtain free employment for delivery of commercials. The court said, "There is not the slightest indication of any anti-competitive purpose in the creation of the rule," especially since there was no evidence of a motive "to benefit one class of performers competitively over another class of performers." Id. The court found it relevant that the rule "resulted from a bona fide concern on the part of various groups, and the FCC, regarding fair and ethical methods to be used in television advertising directed to children." Id. This was "a reasonable rule of conduct regarding good practice by its members in the public interest and is not a violation of the antitrust laws." Id at 
which the NAB agreed, for ten years, to cease monitoring and enforcement of the three disputed code provisions. 
that "the conduct that was at issue in the NAB case differs significantly from that covered by" an agreement on televised violence. Id at 3. In the NAB case, the problem was raising "the price of time," to "the detriment of both advertisers and the ultimate consumers of the products promoted on the air." Id. By contrast, an agreement covering violence should "be liked to tradi 
Winner-Take-L-essCodes & PivateBmadcasters 51 not as if broadcasters are saying that advertisers must pay a minimum of $X per advertisement. It is possible that the restrictions under discussion would have little or no adverse effect on competition; they may even have good effects on competition.31 Even with a code, programmers would compete over a great many things, including the kinds of programming regulated by a code. The code might in a sense be pro-competitive, because it would ensure television coverage of materials in which there is a substantial public interest and which might otherwise not be provided. This is so especially in light of the fact that stations would compete for viewers with respect to the kinds of programming covered by the code.32 
In light of the distinctive nature of the television market, a code of the sort under discussion would likely survive a "rule of reason" inquiry. Any restrictions, such as they are, could be defended as a means of promoting competition and also various public interest goals, such as education of children, access for the handicapped, and democratic and civic functions. 3 
We are now in a position to understand the two puzzles with which I began. The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though frequently "winners," they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of market competition in television. They were also vulnerable to "winner-take-all" effects from their competitors insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain practices that might attract viewers. In this way, a code would not hurt and might even help them. 
Compare the position of the NAB. The broadcasting industry as a whole could not be helped and might well be hurt by such a code, especially because cable television would not be bound by it. Why should broadcasters, in an intensely competitive market, give a significant edge to cable television? Why should they do this if the result would be that cable could take, if not all, a lot tional industry standard-setting efforts that do not necessarily restrict competition and may have significant pro-competitive benefits." Id. In the view of the Department of Justice, "efforts to develop and disseminate voluntary guidelines to reduce the negative impact of television violence should fare well under the appropriate rule-of-reason antitrust analysis." Id at 4. 
that we are discussing would allow a wide range of choices and options for consumers and producers. Perhaps some producer of some marginal programming could claim that he was unable to sell his product because of (for example) free air time for candidates; but this would be an extremely speculative injury. Perhaps viewers could argue that they were deprived of certain programming that they would like; but in view of the wide range of options available to viewers, this too is speculative. Perhaps some stations or programmers could contend that a code limited their freedom; but it is not dear that this would count as an antitrust injury, espedally in light of the fact that the code is voluntary. 
similar entities. See, for example, NCAA v Board of Regents, 468 US 85 (1984); Allied Tube Conduit Corp vIndianHead,486 US 492 (1988). more of the existing audience than it now does? In short, a code limited to the broadcasting industry would not be good for the broadcasting industry, simply because in a market with winner-take-all features, the existence of the code might mean that cable would take all, or most, or at least more. Of course the likely result is that cable would take more rather than most. And this is why a code limited to broadcasting would probably be, on balance, good for the public, and good for good broadcasters, even though bad for broadcasters as a whole. 
And this point helps explain a related but perhaps deeper puzzle: the Committee broadcasters' skepticism about "pay or play" alternatives. A set of rigid public interest requirements does not hurt public-interested broadcasters and may even help them, insofar as it places their competitors under legal duties that they would themselves meet voluntarily (because of their aspirations or because of the particular demands of their audience and their advertisers). The substitution of a new system of "pay or play" would mean that these broadcasters would be undercut by competitors who, unwilling to play, would pay--and capture a large audience share, in a version of "winner-take-most." No wonder certain broadcasters would much prefer "play" to "play or pay," even if the latter would, for the industry as a whole, create far more flexibility. 
The best defense of a code of the sort I have discussed is that it would counteract the adverse consequences of competitive pressures, producing winnertake-less outcomes, in a way that would provide significant benefits for the public by strengthening broadcaster behavior and norms in favor of obligations to children and to democratic values. And if this is so, the area of television regulation provides a quite general lesson about how voluntary private action might sometimes handle problems usually dealt with by direct government controlsand a lesson about the reflexive use of the antitrust laws to prevent publicspirited producer cooperation. We might even conclude with the suggestion that such cooperation might, in winner-take-all contexts, provide a kind of "third way" between unlimited competition on the one hand and rigid governmental mandates on the other. 
