T he early 1990s were among the most extraordinary periods for constitutionmaking in the history of the world. Several people at the University of Chicago Law School played a role in this period, mostly as observers, to some small degree as participants. The editors of this Journal have asked me for some brief reflections on this remarkable time; I am grateful to have been asked and happy to oblige. 
This is an impressionistic essay, but I do have a principal theme. It involves the conflict between what might be called pragmatic and expressive conceptions of constitution-making and constitutionalism. Americans generally tend to think of constitutions as pragmatic instruments, important for what they do in the real world. In Eastern Europe and (to a lesser extent) South Africa, by contrast, expressive considerations loomed very large; what constitutions say-what ideals they expresswas extremely important, not merely what constitutions would do. Of course what constitutions do is often a function of what they say; I am emphasizing the role of constitutions as carriers of symbols and statements, largely for their own sake. I also offer some brief notations on the contrast between Eastern Europe and South Africa, and on what Americans might learn from constitution-making efforts elsewhere. 
I. 
FOUR TRANSITIONS AND RECURRING ISSUES 
After the downfall of the Soviet Union, a large number of nations were embarking on a remarkable enterprise in self-definition and constitutional reform. At the time it was clear that several quite different transitions were involved. Four are easy to identify. The first involved a shift from a command economy to some form of capitalism, or at least a system in which private property was acceptable. The second was a shift from party rule to some form of democracy. The third, of particular interest to law professors and lawyers, involved a shift from rampant official lawlessness, and meaningless constitutions, to some version of constitutionalism and the rule of law. "Constitutions did not play an important role under communism."' One of the principal goals of the transition from communism was to produce a system of meaningful constitutions; ten years later this goal has been largely achieved, to one degree or another. The fourth transition involved a shift to domestic rule from more than occasional control by the Soviet Union. This shift-from Soviet domination to •Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political 
Science, University ofChicago. (Cambridge 1998). national self-government-turned out to be extremely important to the early 1990s, and often it seemed foremost in the minds of the reformers. 
Soon after the fall of communism, it was clear to several of us at the University of Chicago that it would be very valuable to attempt to track and analyze the new efforts at constitution-making. Jon Elster, Stephen Holmes, and I created a Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, designed above all to house records and to engage in fact-gathering and analysis.' Our mission was emphatically not to provide "advice" to nations involved in constitution-making. As an organization, we believed that the academic tasks might be compromised by advice-giving roles. 
Nonetheless, some of us did participate, to a greater or lesser extent, as spectators and advice-givers with respect to constitution-making, not only in Eastern Europe but also in South Africa (with which the Center was not concerned). Many issues were discussed, in quite similar terms, in a range of countries-for example, whether to give the Constitutional Court the power to issue advisory opinions; whether the Court should be available to ordinary citizens, to government officials, or both; whether and how to handle problems of ethnic pluralism; whether and how to promote sex equality (an issue that was greatly neglected in Eastern Europe, but quite prominent in South Africa); the circumstances in which rights could be abridged (what form of words would be appropriate for identifying those circumstances?); whether to include social and economic guarantees; and whether to distinguish between constitutional rights against the state and constitutional rights against private actors. 
My informal impression was that the South African constitution-makers had an extraordinary degree of sophistication about constitution-making and constitutions, including encyclopedic knowledge of other nations' constitutions. Indeed, this encyclopedic knowledge put their American counterparts to considerable shame; Americans tend to know little or nothing about constitutionalism elsewhere. For example, I well remember a debate in South Africa about whether (and how) the new constitution should include guarantees of minimal economic well-being. The participants had full knowledge of actual and possible approaches to the topic. In addition, all of the concerns voiced by American observers were well-understood by the South Africans, and the South African debate went far beyond the American one in its appreciation of possible rejoinders (partly having to do with desirable effects on the legislature, whose responsibility would be made clear in the founding document). 
This degree of sophistication sharply distinguished the constitution-making experience in South Africa from the experience in much of Eastern Europe, where knowledge about constitutionalism was new and partial, and where many of the most European Constitutional Review. The center and the Review were eventually moved to New York University. 
C'o 1 N.I basic ideas seemed unfamiliar. Sometimes there was little thought about the nature of judicial review or about the pragmatic consequences of one or another approach. Law itself seemed in disrepute, a point that might have contributed to the enthusiasm for expressive understandings of constitutions. I remember, for example, an exchange with Ukrainian constitution-makers (during a meeting held in Prague) - true heroes, by the way, who had helped to break apart the Soviet Union, with a range of activities on behalf of freedom and democracy. In that exchange, the Ukrainians asked whether the Constitution ought not to have a provision requiring the press and the media to be "objective." It was responded that a free country recognized that what was "objective" was itself disputed, and that a newspaper should be permitted to say what it liked however "subjective." To this response, the Ukrainian constitution-makers replied with uneasy stares. 
The same was true of frequent discussions of whether parts of the Constitution might be made applicable only to the government, and not to the private sphere; this seemed to be a quite unfamiliar idea. I also remember that some of the Ukrainian constitution-makers, like some of those involved in constitution-making in other nations, emphasized that domestic political constraints called for particular constitutional provisions, above all provisions that would give some kind of security to citizens generally or to particular constituents concerned about what they might lose. In this way the Constitution's real-world functions were less important than ensuring agreement from potentially troublesome groups. And because it seemed unclear whether the Constitution would actually function as law-because the notion of a constitution as binding law seemed unfamiliar-the real-world issue often appeared to be obtaining consensus, rather than obtaining a Constitution that would have good effects once ratified. Compare the South African experience, where difficult questions about judicial enforcement led to the ratification of a number of provisions making it clear that the legislature would have enforcement authority, with a supplemental (or no) judicial rule.4 
It is noteworthy in this connection that in both Eastern Europe and South Africa, constitution-making was often made possible only by virtue of agreement on abstractions amidst uncertainty or disagreement about what those abstractions might specifically entail. General principles of free speech, religious liberty, and equality under the law could be accepted amidst sharp social contests about the concise substance of those principles. There is a large lesson about law, I think, in the possibility of obtaining, amidst considerable social heterogeneity, incompletely theorized agreements about abstractions!5 unfair discrimination."); Art 3(3) ("National legislation must provide for the acquisition, loss and restoration of citizenship."). For similar provision requiring legislative action, see also Art 6(4) (national languages); Art 26(2) (housing); Art 27(2) (health care, food, water and social security); Art 32(2) (access to information); Art 33 (3) (justadministrative action). s. This point is emphasized in Cass EL Sunstein, Legal Reasoningand PoliticalConflict at 35-61 (Oxford 1996); I learned the lesson from experience in Eastern Europe. 
III. CONSTITUTIONS: PRAGMATIC OR EXPRESSIVE, 
One impression, however, lingers above all others, and this has to do with a large difference between the process of constitution-making that we witnessed and the more distinctly American understanding of constitutionalism. In brief, Americans, or at least American lawyers, tend to think that constitutions are largely pragmatic instruments, to be evaluated for what they do, not merely what they say. For us, a successful constitution accomplishes a great deal in the real world; it is far more than a set of statements of basic commitments. (This is not to say that the American Constitution is fuly implemented in the world; for example, there are violations of the fourth amendment every day.) In Eastern Europe, by contrast, one of the central points of constitution-making was emphatically expressive-to make a statement about what was being accomplished and to articulate national commitments or goals.6 It is easy to overlook what was entirely visible at the time: the struggle, on the part of many nations, to reassert national identity, or more simply nationhood, in the aftermath of what had been seen by many as a form of Soviet occupation. Discussions with constitution-makers at the time made quite clear that casting off Soviet rule was a widely shared goal, and a key part of what the new constitutions were to claim. Whether the consequence was to produce liberal democracy, and if so of what kind, was a much harder question. 
But the expressive nature of constitutional provisions extended far beyond nationhood, and captured a great deal of additional territory. When the new constitutions speak, as many of them do, of a right to work7 or to a healthy or favorable environment,8 what was generally envisioned was a statement of general policy and intention, rather than judicially enforceable rights.9 In these ways, constitution-making in Eastern Europe had some of the features of design of a party platform in the United States, though of course the stakes, in the former case, were, and were broadly perceived as, much higher. 
South Africa was an interesting contrast in this regard. There it was understood that the Constitution would have a preeminent legal function, and crucial provisions were devised with attention squarely directed to real-world consequences. At the same time, it was thought important to devise some rights that would not be selfimplementing, partly for expressive reasons, but partly also to give both a political and rof 12No.1 a rhetorical advantage to those arguing on behalf of certain claims in the political process. As I have noted, the South African Constitution makes a sharp distinction between judicially enforceable rights and rights whose enforcement is left to the political process. The South African Constitution also has an expressive dimension, especially in the firm commitment to national unity amidst a recognition of great pluralism."0 Thus, the South African Constitution has a great deal of sophistication about various classes of provisions: those that require judicial enforcement; those that will be implemented legislatively; and those that are designed simply to state something about national self-conception." 
The conflict between the expressive notion of a constitution, and the notion of a constitution as a genuine guarantee of individual rights, has created some obvious puzzles in Eastern Europe. The Constitutional Court has played a large role in welfare reform in Hungary, a role that, to say the least, has not been regarded as productive or desirable by all observers. But in retrospect, it seems clear that American advice-givers were insufficiently sensitive to questions about culture and context; some of us acted as if there was one general model for democratic constitutions, and downplayed domestic fears and concerns, some of which called for an emphatically expressive constitution, and others of which called for unusual provisions and approaches. 
IV. 
WHAT AMERICANS LEARNED 
Americans learned a great deal from these exercises in constitution-making, and they could learn much more from reflecting on what has happened in the last decade and more. I offer two brief thoughts here. 
The first clear lesson has to do with the dependence of rights-protectionon resources, and the absence of a sharp distinction, along this dimension, between so-called negative rights and so-called positive rights. In Eastern Europe, and South Africa as well, it was dear to all lo. 'We, the people of South Africa ...[b]elieve that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity." S Afr Const Preamble. years. The first was held in Washington DC, before the fall of apartheid, and it was run by white judges, in charge of a constitutional commission. The judges did not believe in apartheid-they clearly thought that it failed, and was unjust, and deserved and needed to go-but they were extremely interested in providing means to protect "groups as such" via constitutional provisions. It took a while for me to understand that the search for these means was basically an effort to protect "whites as such"-an understanding that cast some new light on the idea of"group rights" in general. (The head ofthe working group, a distinguished South Africanjudge, seemed obsessed with my last name, which he used, puzzlingly and somewhat inappropriately, on a number of occasions, culminating in dinner one evening, when he used it three times in a row, as if itwere a song lyric, and immediately added, "We have a Jew on our Court. My wife calls him the Gentle Jew.") Expressive concerns played a large role in this draft, but they were dominated by instrumental goals. It should be needless to say that the drafts that emerged turned out to matter not at all to the ultimate process ofconstitution-making in South Africa. 
Spring2000 that compliance with constitutional commands would require money. A right to ajury trial, for example, would commandeer a great deal of local court budgets in Russia; protection of basic property rights would call for a well-organized system to extract and deploy taxpayer funds. Even the most negative of negative rights could not exist without public support, and hence negative rights, as they are misleadingly called, require the expenditure of public resources. This point was entirely clear in Eastern Europe and South Africa, and it draws much of conventional American wisdom into grave doubt.3 
A second lesson is the limited importance of the constitutional text and the overriding importance of culturalsupportfor constitutional institutions. In retrospect, the precise text of constitutional provisions could increase probabilities of various sorts, and reduce risks; but, it could do little more. This is true in America as well as Eastern Europe. Our constitution does not foreordain existing practices with respect to either institutions or rights; a close reader of the text might well be shocked to learn about our recent institutions and our recent rights. The administrative state is not discussed in the Constitution, for example, and from a reading of the first amendment (which applies only to Congress), it would be very hard to generate the current structure of first amendment doctrine. This does not mean that we lack a Constitution; it means only that the written words constrain us less than we tend to think. 
Of course, the institutional provisions of a Constitution-setting up a court with the power of judicial review, separating the executive and legislative branches-can make a great deal of difference. But we should not overstate the importance of a constitutional text, nor should we underestimate the need for a culture that is committed, first, to the rule of law and constitutional limitations, and second, to some kind of orderly process for ensuring that any implementation of unclear constitutional provisions, or any adjustment of such provisions, takes place in a way that is not inconsistent with respect for constitutional ideals. Note in this regard that communist constitutions contain ample rights provisions, which meant nothing in practice; and that the right to equality on the basis of sex does not exist in Eastern Europe, notwithstanding the fact that most of the Eastern European constitutions protect such a right, expressly or by implication. 
One final point: It is now ten years after the fall of communism, and a good time to take stock in a way that is empirically informed. Which constitutions have worked well, and which have worked badly? To the extent that nations are doing well or badly, is the Constitution responsible? Most important: have we learned anything about what sorts of provisions belong in a constitution at all? Answering such questions would provide a great deal of knowledge, and it would be quite productive to get started on this endeavor. For the moment, however, I conclude with two documents that might give a sense of some aspects of constitutional debate immediately after the fall of communism. -b 1999). 
APPENDIX ONE 
Re: 
I am most grateful to have the opportunity to comment on the new Draft Constitution of Ukraine. At the outset, three disclaimers. (1) The views expressed here are tentative and provisional. I am sure that with further discussions, and with additional readings of the Draft Constitution, some of my views will change. (2) There are of course severe limitations in the perspective, on a country's constitutional reform efforts, offered by someone who does not know that country well. Some of what follows will undoubtedly reflect my limited perspective. (3) I have been asked to concentrate on human rights and the constitutional court, and I restrict myself to those issues here. 
Having read and commented on a large number of Eastern European draft Constitutions, I might note that this seems to me an excellent draft-in terms of both clarity and substance. The provisions about ethnic and religious rights are especially good; indeed, they could stand as a model for both the East and the West. 
I do, however, have one basic concern about this draft. The statement of liberties looks, in part, like a general list of aspirations, rather than a catalogue of legally protected rights. It creates too many promises of what the state will do-rather than clear limits on what the state can do. 
The draft should, I believe, be changed to delete the many promises of state intervention into the economy, and the many guarantees of positive rights. It should instead restrict itself, for the most part, to negative rights held by individuals against the government. In its current form, it sounds too much like the Soviet Constitution, which was not worth the paper on which it was written. If the various unenforceable promises are not to be deleted, they should be placed in a separate section, intended to set forth "social aspirations" that are not for judicial enforcement. 
Most of my remarks are intended to spell out this basic concern. 
I. 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
Let me begin with some brief general observations. For Ukraine, the drafting of the Constitution appears to be pose two especially distinctive challenges. The first challenge is to begin the process of creating a legal culture witb firmjudicialprotection of individual rights. By individual rights, I mean, first and foremost, traditional negative rights against government: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, private property and freedom of contract, security against the criminal justice system (including cruel or unusual punishment, official action not authorized by statute, unjustified searches and seizures, inadequate hearings). 
The second challenge is to facilitate the creation of a market economy and of a civil society-that is, a realm of private action containing institutions (churches, markets, corporations, and so forth) that are independent of the state and constrained minimally by it. Through meeting these challenges, a constitution could simultaneously promote democratic goals and help ensure economic prosperity. 
To carry out this task, constitution-makers in Ukraine should probably try to avoid several strategies that contain serious risks. One risky strategy is to use a constitution as a place for stating very general social aspirations, or for imposing positive duties on government (such as the provision of a social welfare state including leisure time, social security, and occupational safety and health law). To put it bluntly: The strategy of stating aspirationsand imposingpositive duties-prominentof course in the old Soviet Constitution-runs the risk of turning a constitution into something worthless. It is important to remember here that a constitution should not list all things to which a country aspires; it should limit itself, for the most part, to rights that it is genuinely able to enforce. 
Another strategy posing similar risks is to use the constitution as a place for creating "duties" as well as rights. (This too is, I believe, a holdover from Soviet constitutionalism.) These duties are not likely to be enforceable through courts. Their statement in a constitution tends to weaken the understanding that the document creates protected rights, with real meaning, against the state. 
Yet another dangerous strategy is to make constitutional provisions binding against private people and private organizations as well as against the state. In almost all Western systems, the Constitution generally applies to the government, not to the people in general. This is extremely important, because it recognizes and helps create a private spbere-a civil society that operates independently of the state. It also frees up private organizations-employers, religious organizations, and so forth-to act as they choose. 
If the people of Ukraine want to apply particular constitutional provisions to particular private organizations, of course they can do so, through ordinary legislation. But it is probably a mistake to apply such provisions through the constitution itself. Above all, this strategy works to erase the distinction between the private and public spheres, in a way that may tend to defeat Ukraine's current aspirations. 
PROTECTING NEGATIVE RIGHTS 
In this section I make suggestions for changes in the human rights provisions. These suggestions are in line with my general remarks. The goal is to ensure reliable protection of individual rights, through legal organs, and to help facilitate the creation HeinOnline -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L. 180 2000 
Vo li o.i of a private sphere and a market economy. (a) Most important: I would either (1) delete the provisions that create positive rights (e.g., to rest and leisure, a maximum work week, adequate payment) or (2) put those provisions in separate chapters, making it clear that such provisions are not for judicial enforcement. 
There are many problems with these positive rights. They appear to apply to the private sphere as well as government-a genuine disaster. They also appear to threaten the new market economy, by requiring governmental involvement in areas that Ukraine now hopes to give to private people and to decentralized economic decisions. 
For example, the statement "all who work conscientiously have the right to fair and satisfactory remuneration," or that "Every person, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for the same amount of work" (Article 49), is, in my view, a large mistake. It is inconsistent with a market economy, in which the government does not supervise wages to make sure that they are "fair." Wages are set by the market, not by government. 
In any case: What could these provisions possibly mean, in court, or anywhere else? They sound like a general aspiration signifying nothing. So too, there should not be a right to safe working conditions and protection against unemployment-at least not in the Constitution (see above). These are matters for ordinary legislation. Not everything desirable belongs in the Constitution. Much of Articles 49 through 57 should therefore be deleted. 
(b) Along the same lines, I would delete the right to rest; the right to an adequate living standard; the right to medical assistance; and the right to a safe environment. Environmental questions, for example, involve extremely difficult trade-offs among competing social goods: environmental quality, economic growth, employment, poverty, and inflation. Constitutional protection of a "safe environment" might be (a) too vague to mean anything, (b) impossible for courts to enforce, or (c) an invitation for judicial involvement in an area in which they cannot be helpful. Here as well as elsewhere, recognition of a constitutional right is reminiscent of the old Soviet model. Also a good candidate for deletion: Article 75, second to last sentence: "Ownership is socially oriented and must serve the interests of society." 
(c) Much of Chapters 8 and 11 unnecessarily puts aspects of the "welfare state" into the Constitution. Article 84, specifying what enterprises are obliged to do, should be deleted. (It's a duty, not a right; this Constitution should restrict itself to rights.) Article 85 should also be deleted; it belongs in ordinary legislation. Article 87 states broad generalities that could not conceivably have meaning in court. It should be deleted. I would delete Chapter 11 entirely. 
As an alternative, there could be a different section, entitled "social aspirations," containing some version of these chapters. If this were done, everyone would know that aspirations belong in a separate category from rights. My fear is that the current version of the Constitution-by including so much which is not plausibly enforceable-could damage all rights, including those that are otherwise enforceable. 
(d) If there is to be a section on ecological safety, it should consist, I believe, of a few summary paragraphs. Article 89 should be deleted; article 93, by contrast, seems to be a good idea. 
(e) Article 97 contains sex discrimination! It assumes that women will always and forever be the primary care-takers of children. This is inconsistent with Article 96. I would encourage you to change the word "motherhood" to the word "parenthood," and change the word "mother" to the word "parent." 
Sex discrimination is, I fear, a serious threat in the new Eastern European democracies. The Constitution should not allow it, must less contain it. I hope that we will be able to discuss this matter in some detail. 
(0 All provisions that impose "duties" on citizens should, I think, be deleted (see Articles 71 through 74). What good do these provisions do? These duties, as stated, are legally unenforceable. Any genuine legal duties should be imposed through ordinary law. The Constitution is the place to guarantee and protect rights, not to impose duties. 
(g) Much of the draft Constitution is written as if many of its provisions apply to all private and public entities. Some such provisions do not refer to the state or the government at all, thus implying that they apply to private as well as official institutions. See, for example, the right to rest, or the right to adequate payment. I would recommend that the Constitution be redrafted to make it clear that the basic rights are guaranteed against government, not against private institutions. As it stands, the Constitution, perversely, would require constant government interference with the market. At the present juncture, the Ukrainian Constitution should not do this. 
(h) The section on "enterprise"-an excellent general idea!-should probably be rewritten to carry out, more clearly than it now does, the central goal of protecting rights of private property and freedom of contract. As it stands, this section is a bit thin on this point. There is no constitutional provision at all for freedom of contract. Such a section might say: 'No law shall impair the obligations of contracts." It might include some of the existing provisions that are designed to create "market freedoms." This is a separate idea from (for example) political liberties of speech; it might be placed in this separate section. Such a section might include a clear right to free choice of occupation and to a general freedom to travel. (Article 38 might be insufficiently protective.) (i) Some of the religion provisions raise hard questions. "No one may be HeinOnline -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L. 182 2000 roof.iNo.i exempted from discharging one's duties toward the state or refuse to obey laws on religious grounds." (Article 40). This sounds good, but in some cases an exemption might be required in the interest of religious liberty (e.g., from a Sunday closing law). Also, it is not clear that "the rousing of hostility and hatred on religious grounds" should be "punishable under the law" (Article 40). This provision might stop free expression, e.g., criticism of certain religious theories and practices. I hope that we will be able to discuss this in some detail. 
The provisions relating to the constitutional court seem quite good. A few notes: possibility is that political actors will manipulate the number of judges to ensure outcomes in accordance with prevailing political will. Some of this is specified in chapter 20; but I am not entirely clear on the matter. (a) Does the Constitutional Court have advisory duties, or do its powers extend only to cases and controversies? (I hope the latter.) (b) When a constitutional issue arises, is it automatically referred to the 
Constitutional Court? (c) Does the Court have discretion to refuse to hear cases raising trivial issues? Perhaps some of this can be specified in the Constitution. 
CONCLUSION 
Most generally, I suggest that the draft Constitution should be rewritten so as to conform more closely to Ukraines desire to create firm individual rights. The Constitution should not contain everything to which a society aspires. It should contain real rights that real courts can really enforce. Most of my comments are intended to move the draft away from the old Soviet model, which did so little for the people of Ukraine. Some of the draft draws too much from that old model. 
In any case, I am extremely grateful to have an opportunity to comment on the draft Constitution at such an extraordinary time in Ukraines history. I very much look forward to our meeting. 
Constitutional Working Group, Government of Ukraine Date: March 9, 1992 Re: 
Ukraine's Draft Constitution 
Here are some additional comments on the constitutional draft. I might say at the outset that our meetings were an extraordinary opportunity for me. It was also an enormous pleasure and honor to have a chance to discuss these issues with you. 
I will organize this memorandum by beginning with relatively modest suggestions and ending with relatively large ones. I restrict myself to the constitutional court and basic liberties and rights, since these have been the areas on which I was asked to focus. 
L 
suggest that Article 7, sentence two, should be inserted in Article 24, after current sentence 1. The second sentence in Article 24 should be deleted; it invites discrimination. Article 55, sentences 2 and 3, contains sex discrimination. These provisions should be deleted. Article 97 also includes sex discrimination. It would be best to say "parenthood" rather than "motherhood." (This issue may seem trivial now. It is not trivial. It will not seem trivial in a generation, or even in a decade.) be rewritten. Some provisions allow open-ended restriction, so long as the restriction occurs through 'law." Some provisions do not contain a standard for restrictions. I know that your intention is to include only narrow restrictions. I include some possible examples for improvement in this regard. 
I would change Article 26 so as to comply with the European Convention. A possible new Article 26 would read: "Any restrictions of constitutional rights and freedoms shall be as narrow as possible, shall be proportionate, and shall always be consistent with the aims of a democratic order." Some other wording might be preferable. This is only a suggestion, needless to say. 
Articles 34, 36, 37, and 39 should allow invasion only on a showing of "probable cause" for any restriction. This would be easy to do; simply specify that the government must show "probable cause" to restrict these rights. 
Article 34 should require that the warrant be approved by the court, not just the procurator. 
Article 41, second sentence, should read, "Any abridgement of this freedom must be established by law, and must be necessary to avoid a clear and present danger to the democratic order or to the constitutional rights of other people." 
Article 64, 5th sentence, should read, "A suspect is under no obligation to prove his or her innocence and may be convicted only after the government has proved guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." Court shall issue its decisions. This should be spelled out. In any case the Court should not be allowed to comment on laws before they are enacted. right to strike) and economic ENTITLEMENTS (unemployment insurance, medical benefits, safe working conditions). At the very least, there should be one section on economic or market freedoms, and one separate section on economic benefits from government. of notice to the government before a meeting or rally. This is potentially tyrannical. should be unamendable, even through constitutional means. There are models for doing this. The specific unamendable rights might include freedom of speech and religion, freedom from torture and cruel punishment, freedom from discrimination, and several others. 
MODERATE SUGGESTIONS suggest a separate section, entitled "economic liberties." This would include what you now have: general economic freedom (Art. 48), a prohibition on forced labor (Art. 52), a right to strike (Art. 53), a prohibition on forced appropriation of property without compensation (Art. 81), and freedom of enterprise (Art. 82). These fundamental liberties-so crucial to economic development-should be reorganized and put in the same section. 
(a) Freedom of contract is guaranteed. The state shall not limit liberty to enter into contractual arrangements. (b) The government may not assume a legal monopoly over any enterprise. It must permit private competition. (c) People have a right of free entry into businesses, trades, and occupations. 
The state shall not interfere with this right. (d) The government may not discriminate against private enterprise. It must permit private enterprise to operate on the same basis as public enterprise. crucial guarantee of liberty. The citizen should not depend on some government official to give him access to the Court. Thus I suggest that an Article 231 be added, saying: "Any citizen claiming that his or her constitutional rights have been violated shall have access to the Constitution Court, directly or by appeal, in any case or controversy." Instead of a right to a 40 hour work week, there should be a right to rest and leisure. Articles 49 and 51 are too detailed and specific; they could be reduced to one or two sentences. Article 56, second sentence, should be deleted. Articles 84 and 85 are too detailed for a Constitution. Article 87 is inconsistent with a market economy, and should be deleted. Article 93 is excellent, but chapter 9 should consist of one or two brief, general sections. It's far too detailed. Articles 100 and 101 could consist just of the first sentence of Article 100, or perhaps of that sentence plus the first clause of Article 101. treated as judicially unenforceable obligations of the legislature. If it remains as is, it could endanger the Constitution in general, by making it less enforceable. specify the rights that are at risk and the rights that are not at risk under conditions of emergency. 
This would entail eliminating Part III, chapter 6. aspirations. Positive rights and social aspirations are the defining characteristic of Soviet-style constitutionalism. They tend to turn a constitution into something not HeinOnline -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L. 18 worth the paper on which it is written. I realize that this is a controversial matter and have therefore suggested more moderate possibilities above. dangerous to give the Court the power to issue advisory opinions at the behest of government or legislative officials-dangerous because this tends to compromise judicial independence. (Ifthe judges are communicating closely with the executive and the legislature, they may well become its allies.) But if the Court is to issue advisory opinions, the circumstances should be specifically set out. not to acts of private people. Most Western Constitutions are applicable to government. Private people, including private companies, can do as they wish, subject only to ordinary law. This is an important aspect of democratic liberty, and it helps promote economic prosperity as well, by freeing civil society from legal regulation. 
I strongly encourage you to go through this draft and to make most provisions into barriers to government action, rather than to private action as well. This would be easy to do. It would simply entail a review of the human rights provisions, and a minor linguistic change to say that "public officials" may not invade certain rights. 
I very much hope that these comments are helpful. And I would be delighted to continue to consult with you during this extraordinary period in Ukraine's history. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 102 
(2D SERIES) Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id= XXXXXX Preliminary draft 7/27/00 All rights reserved 
Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position 
Robert H. Frank* and Cass R. Sunstein** 
The movement for cost-benefit analysis of regulatory problems has proved stunningly successful. By Executive Order, Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Clinton have all required cost-benefit analysis of major regulations.1 Partly as a result, agencies routinely attempt to calculate the costs and benefits of their activities.2 Congress has also shown considerable interest in cost-benefit analysis, requiring both OMB and EPA to produce monetized accounts of the consequences of regulation.3 Courts themselves have been highly receptive to efforts to mandate cost-benefit analysis,4 asking agencies to monetize costs, benefits, or both.5 In a recent decision, the court of appeals for the D.C. Circuit –- the most important court in federal regulatory law -- has made clear that Congress will have to speak unambiguously if it intends to forbid consideration of cost.6 In sum, both the executive and the judiciary have converged on a kind of default rule in favor of cost-benefit analysis, to be used unless Congress expressly precludes it. 
We believe that the movement toward cost-benefit analysis of regulatory initiatives is generally desirable and that most of the conventional criticisms of it are unconvincing.7 But those who approve of cost-benefit analysis need practical ways to measure both costs and benefits, and it is here that many questions remain, for theory and practice alike. Our focus is on the standard economic approach, which attempts to estimate people’s willingness to pay for the various goods at issue.8 We intend to criticize this approach on the ground that it ignores a central point about valuation, thus producing numbers that systematically undervalue the benefits of regulation. * Goldwin Smith Professor of Economics, Ethics, and Public Policy, Cornell University. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. We are grateful to Christine Jolls, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for very helpful comments on a previous draft. An earlier version of this paper was Working Paper 00-05 (June 2000) from the AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, and we are very grateful to Robert Hahn and others at the Joint Center for encouragement and assistance. 1 See Executive Order 12291, 46 Fed. Reg. 13193 (1980); Executive Order 12866, 3 CFR 638, 649 (1993) 2 See, e.g., Economic Analyses at EPA: Assessing Regulatory Impact (Richard Morgenstern ed. 1997); Thomas McGarrity, Reinventing Rationality (1994). 3 5 USC 1532 4 See, e.g., Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (9th Cir. 1991); Grand Canyon Air Tour Coalition . FAA, 154 F.3d 455, 475 (DC Cir 1998); NRDC v. EPA, 937 F.2d 641, 643-46 (DC Cir 1991); Michigan v. EPA, 2000 US App LEXIS 3209 (DC Cir., March 3, 2000). 5 See cases cited in note 4 supra. 6 Michigan v. EPA, 2000 US App LEXIS 3209 (DC Cir, March 3, 2000). 7 See Robert H. Frank, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000); Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000); Cass R. Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice ch. 10 (1997). 8 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992). 
Policy analysts rely for the most part on two methods for estimating willingness to pay. One is the hedonic pricing method, which attempts to infer valuations from observable market behavior. For example, analysts might estimate the value of safety by examining how wages vary with workplace injury levels.9 In the contingent valuation approach, generally used when market evidence is unavailable, analysts ask how much people would be willing to pay to reduce or avoid a wide range of dangers -- specific health problems associated with ozone or particulate matter; various kinds of workplacerelated mortality risks; risks associated with air travel; risks of injury or death in automobile accidents; and so on.10 Relying primarily on hedonic pricing studies, but also on contingent valuation studies, federal agencies have used estimates of the value of a statistical life saved that range from $1.5 million (used by the FAA) to $5.8 million (used at least once, but not consistently, by the EPA). 11 
Monetization, as measured by estimates of willingness to pay, is not limited to mortality risks. For example, the EPA recently provided a wide range of numbers for health problems short of mortality.12 It considers a risk of congestive heart failure to be worth $20,600 for people under 65, but $16,600 for people over 65. It considers an episode of acute bronchitis to be worth $45; an emergency visit to the hospital for asthma, $9000; chronic bronchitis, $260,000; and a single episode of shortness of breath, $5.30. In all cases, these numbers are generated on the basis of estimates of what affected individuals would be willing to pay to avoid negative outcomes. 
For present purposes we shall simply assume that these numbers are basically sound, in the sense that they represent good estimates of private willingness to pay. We shall also assume that private willingness to pay is, in general, the appropriate basis for monetizing the benefits of regulation.13 We nonetheless suggest that the actual numbers on which federal agencies rely understate the social benefits of many regulations by a substantial amount. It follows that important policies are being defended, and made, on the basis of assessments that greatly undervalue the net benefits of regulatory interventions. Where the government currently says that the value of a statistical life is about $4 million, it ought to be saying that the value is somewhere between $4.7 million and $7 million. At the very least, our analysis suggests that when government agencies are unsure how to value regulatory benefits along a reasonable range, they should make choices toward or at the upper end. 
The essential reason for our claim is that people care a great deal about their relative economic position, and not solely, and often not mostly, about their absolute economic position. Current estimates tell us what an individual, acting in isolation, would be willing to pay for, say, an increase in safety on the job. But when an individual buys additional safety in isolation, he experiences not only an absolute decline in the 9 See, for example, Richard Thaler and Sherwin Rosen, The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor Market, in Household Production and Consumption 266 (ed. N. Terleckjz 1976). 10 For general discussion, see Symposium, J. Econ. Persp. (Fall 1994). 11 See Mathew Adler and Eric Posner, Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, J Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). 12 See U.S. EPA Innovative Strategies & Economics Group, Office of Air Quality Planning & Standards, Regulatory Impact Analyses for the Particulate Matter and Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards and Proposed Regional Haze Rule 12-43 (1997). 13 This is an assumption and no more. It is criticized in Sunstein, supra note, and defended in Frank, supra note. amounts of other goods and services he can buy, but also a decline in his relative living standards. In contrast, when a regulation requires all workers to purchase additional safety, each worker gives up the same amount of other goods, so no worker experiences a decline in relative living standards. If relative living standards matter, then an individual will value an across-the-board increase in safety more highly than an increase in safety that he alone purchases. 
The “willingness to pay” numbers used in the standard estimates take no account of this difference; they are based on an implicit assumption that individuals care only about absolute living standards, not at all about relative living standards. This assumption is wrong. If people could maintain their relative economic position, they would be willing to pay more, and possibly a great deal more, to purchase many of the goods that regulation attempts to deliver. A central assumption here, which we defend in some detail, is that income is in large part a positional good, valued in terms of relative position, whereas many regulatory benefits, such as health care, safety, parental leave, and leisure time, are largely or primarily nonpositional goods, valued for their own sake and more independently of what others have. Our minimal claim, then, is that existing numbers are too low insofar as they fail to take account of concerns about relative economic position, and that a serious conceptual defect is thus inherent in current approaches, one that merits much further investigation. Our more ambitious claim is that in order to be accurate, the existing numbers should be increased substantially, and we attempt to show how the more accurate numbers might be generated. We hope that those who object to that particular attempt will be motivated not to defend the implausible view that absolute position is all that matters, but to develop more accurate ways to incorporate positional concerns into cost-benefit analysis. 
The arguments we make here go well beyond the particular area of cost-benefit analysis. In many contexts, consumers find themselves on a positional treadmill, in which their choices do not really make them happier or better off, but instead serve largely to keep them in the same spot in the hierarchy.14 Many actual and imaginable laws can stop or slow down the positional treadmill, thus maintaining people’s relative position while also giving them something of value. People care about maintaining relative position not only because of envy, status-seeking, or reputational concerns; a particularly important point is that the frame of reference for evaluating many goods and services is set socially rather than individually, and inevitably so.15 For many goods and services, the holdings and actions of other provide the frame of reference against which each person evaluates his holdings and actions. When the frame of reference changes, evaluations will change as well. Improvements in the frame of reference often mean that people experience previously satisfactory goods and services as undesirable, a kind of prisoner’s dilemma that may be best solved through law. We will discuss a number of examples here. While our focus is on cost-benefit analysis, an especially salient current topic, our discussion bears on many other problems as well. 
This essay comes in several parts. Part I traces the rise of cost-benefit analysis within the national government, gives a sense of the numbers that government institutions are now using, and briefly explains how those numbers have been chosen. Part II 14 See Robert H. Frank, The Demand for Unobservable and Other Nonpositional Goods, 75 American Economic Review 101 (1985). 15 See Robert H. Frank, The Frame of Reference As A Public Good, 107 Economic Journal 1832 (1996). discusses the central importance of relative economic position to people’s perceptions of their own well-being. Part III explores how some of the key benefit calculations would be altered by an understanding of the importance of relative position. Part IV discusses several theoretical issues, focusing on the objection that positional concerns should play no role in public policy. Part V explores some limits and extensions of our argument. We consider the implications of the fact that many regulatory programs benefit not all people but subclasses, and we discuss how positional concerns help justify nonwaivable contractual terms in employment law. Part VI is a brief conclusion. 
In this section, we outline the rise of cost-benefit analysis, as produced by the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of the national government. The general lesson is that we are fast approaching the end of a “first generation” debate, between advocates and critics of cost-benefit analysis, with general victory for the advocates.16 At the same time, we have only started to enter into the equally important “second generation” debate, over the appropriate method for valuing costs and benefits. Hence neither Congress nor courts have given even minimal guidance for valuing regulatory benefits, and there is a great deal of unexplained disparity even within the practices of those agencies firmly committed to cost-benefit principles. 
During the last twenty years, cost-benefit analysis has become a prominent practice within the executive branch of the national government. Though economic advisers have attempted to ensure cost-benefit review since the Nixon Administration,17 the cost-benefit principle did not receive prominent recognition until Executive Order 12291,18 issued by President Reagan in 1981. The purpose of this executive order was to ensure that all major rules would be subject to cost-benefit analysis and that such analysis would be the “basis” of decision, at least to the extent permitted by law.19 At the same time, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) was entrusted with the power to oversee agency cost-benefit analyses to ensure their basic rationality and sense.20 The movement in the direction of cost-benefit analysis was much accelerated in 1985 with the issuance of Executive Order 12498,21 requiring that cost-benefit analysis provide the basis for an “annual regulatory plan” to be issued by all executive agencies. It was 16 By this we mean both a political victory and an intellectual victory. One of us has criticized some defenses of cost-benefit analysis on the ground that they wrongly assume the “commensurability” of all social goods, see Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 Mich L Rev 779, 842 (1994). But this criticism is not meant as an objection to the comparison of costs and benefits as a policy tool, designed to discipline inquiry. See id. at 842. We are concerned here with cost-benefit analysis as a policy tool, and for that purpose it is not necessary to engage other, more abstract debates on the nature of human valuation.. 17 See Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1, 13-14 (1995). 183 CFR 128 (1981). 19 Id 20 Id 213 CFR 323 (1985). pursuant to this executive order that annual volumes, often containing OMB instructions for the valuation of risks, became a prominent basis for understanding federal regulatory activity.22 
Many people doubted whether President Clinton would endorse the idea that regulatory judgments should be made with close reference to cost-benefit balancing. Despite the misgivings of some environmental organizations, President Clinton's Executive Order 12866,23 issued in 1993, firmly embraced cost-benefit analysis as a central ingredient in regulatory decisions. The Order does shift, in certain ways, from the Reagan-Bush initiatives, principally via references to "equity" and "distributive impacts" as relevant factors in agency analysis.24 But these are modest changes in a presidential requirement that continues to require cost-benefit analysis of major rules. Thus the executive branch has endorsed cost-benefit balancing for over twenty years, and it seems reasonable to suggest that insofar as the White House is overseeing the federal regulatory process, cost-benefit analysis will continue to play a central organizing role, no matter the party affiliation of the president. 
Notwithstanding this point, a key limitation in the current process within the executive branch is the absence of an agreed-upon system for assessing the relevant values.25 As we shall soon see, agency practices are widely divergent. OMB has attempted to discipline agency inquiry, but only through unenforced and somewhat vague guidance and occasional intervention,26 and without much of an underlying theory aside from general reliance on private “willingness to pay.” 
The executive branch has not acted alone. In one of the most noteworthy developments in the last twenty years of administrative law, courts have also enforced a form of cost-benefit balancing, at least where Congress has not barred them from doing so.27 Indeed, the most dramatic innovation, noted above, is a new doctrine permitting and possibly even requiring cost-benefit analysis unless Congress has expressly directed otherwise.28 Federal law now reflects a kind of default principle: Agencies will consider costs, and thus undertake cost-benefit analysis, if Congress has not unambiguously said that they cannot. 
Thus judges have invalidated regulatory action that imposes high costs without significant benefits.29 They have also policed agency action to ensure at least a rough kind 22 See, e.g., Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Program of the United States Government, 1985-1986; for OMB’s most recent statement, see OMB, Guidance to Regulatory Agencies (on file with the authors). Like all other governmental bodies, OMB ignores positional considerations in its effort to state “best practices” for cost-benefit analysis. 233 CFR 638 (1993). 24 Id. 25 For a complaint in this vein, see Robert W Hahn, Assessing the Quality of Regulatory Impact Analyses (unpublished manuscript 2000). See OMB, supra note, for effort to codify “best practices”; but OMB’s guidance is merely that, and hence has no binding quality. 26 See Thomas O. McGarrity, Reinventing Rationality: The role of regulatory analysis in the federal bureaucracy (Cambridge 1991). 27See note supra; Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (9th Cir. 1991). 28 Michigan v. EPA, 2000 US App LEXIS 3209 (DC Cir, March 3, 2000). 29 Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (9th Cir. 1991); AFL-CIO v. OSHA, 965 F.2d 962 (11th Cir. 1992). American Petroleum Institute, 448 US; is in the same general spirit. There the plurality held of proportionality between costs and benefits.30 Sometimes courts have been quite aggressive in requiring proportionality as part of their function in reviewing agency action to test whether it is "arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion."31 Courts have insisted that some amounts of money are too much to spend for small benefits.32 On the other hand, they have failed to give much guidance for deciding, in general, when a great deal is too much. Here, as within the executive branch, the appropriate valuation of regulatory benefits has received exceedingly little attention. 
Executive and judicial developments do not mean that the regulatory state is now routinely subject to scrutiny for conformity with cost-benefit criteria.33 Presidents and courts have circumscribed authority; they must act consistently with federal statutes, which often forbid cost-benefit balancing. Consider, for example, the Clear Air Act34, the Clean Water Act35, the Occupational Safety and Health Act36, the Delaney Clause37, and the Safe Water Drinking Act38, many of whose provisions ban agencies from balancing costs against benefits. It is partly for this reason that the American regulatory state contains many regulations imposing high costs not justified by corresponding benefits.39 
Hence much of the contemporary interest in regulatory reform has been directed toward Congress. Consider the fact that in the mid-1990s, repeated efforts were made to impose a “supermandate” that would require all agencies to undertake cost-benefit analysis and to make decisions on the basis of that analysis.40 Notably, these proposals included no guidance for the valuation of life and other benefits from regulation. Partly because of irreconcilable legislative differences over the question of valuation, the proposed supermandate was defeated. But the national legislature has not uniformly rejected cost-benefit balancing. In the area of health and environmental protection, two important statutes, involving toxic substances and pesticides, contemplate a form of costbenefit analysis.41 More recently and more globally, the Unfunded Mandates Act contains two relevant provisions, imposed on all regulatory activity.42 First, significant regulatory actions must be accompanied by a statement that includes "a qualititative and quantitative assessment of the anticipated costs and benefits of the Federal mandate."43 Second, all agencies must "identify and consider a reasonable number of regulatory alternatives and from those alternatives select the least costly, most cost-effective, or least burdensome alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule."44 These provisions enshrine a form of cost-benefit analysis for major rules; but in keeping with the pattern that we have seen thus far, they are silent on how agencies are supposed to value the goods at stake. 
What have agencies actually done when they have done cost-benefit analysis? It is clear that the general practice is to build on some version of the contingent valuation and hedonic pricing methods discussed above. Thus agencies attempt to measure people’s willingness to pay, using actual choices if possible, and contingent valuation if necessary. It is on the basis of this sort of analysis that the EPA recently compiled the following table45: 
Health Endpoint Mortality 
Life saved 
Life year extended Hospital Admissions: 
All Respiratory Illnesses, all ages Pneumonia, age < 65 COPD, age > 65 Ischemic Heart Disease, age < 65 Congestive Heart Failure, age > 65 
Emergency Visits for Asthma Chronic Bronchitis Upper Respiratory Symptoms Lower Respiratory Symptoms Acute Bronchitis Acute Respiratory Symptoms (any of 19) Asthma Shortness of Breath Sinusitis and Hay Fever Work Loss Days Restricted Activity Days (RAD) 
Minor RAD 
Respiratory RAD Worker Productivity Visibility: residential 
Recreational Household Soiling Damage Mean WTP Value per Incident 
(1990 $) $4.8 million $120,000 
But there is also a great deal of variation both within and across agencies. With respect to statistical lives, consider the following table46: 
We do not intend to give a full answer to the question of which of these numbers is appropriate. But we do mean to identify a substantial problem with current practice, a problem with which agencies have yet to come to terms or even to acknowledge. 
We now attempt to show that relative economic position is important for people’s subjective and objective well-being, and that absolute economic position is less significant than is ordinarily thought. For purposes of establishing our minimal proposition here, it is necessary only to establish that willingness-to-pay numbers undervalue safety and other benefits if they ignore concerns about relative position. (Notice that we are assuming a point that we will defend below: For many regulatory benefits, positional considerations are less important than they are for income.) We draw on a wide array of evidence in order to establish this point. Of course each piece of evidence is vulnerable to counterarguments, at least if taken on its own; and we will not be reluctant to mention some counterarguments here. But taken as a whole, the evidence strongly suggests that traditional methods of estimating willingness to pay seriously understate the social value of many regulatory benefits. 

The income figures represent real purchasing power. Thus your higher income in World A would enable you to purchase a house that is 10 percent larger than the house you would be able to afford in World B, 10 percent more restaurant meals, and so on. Faced with a once-for-all choice between these two worlds, which would you choose? 
The economic theory that underlies cost-benefit analysis suggests that World A is the uniquely correct choice. The question unambiguously specifies that the income figures represent real purchasing power, and hence prices would not be higher in World A than World B. Neoclassical economics rests on the assumption that people derive satisfaction primarily from the absolute quantity of goods and services they consume. On that measure, World A is better because it offers higher absolute consumption for every citizen. (For choosers who do not want higher levels of consumption, no matter; they might put the money in the bank for their children, or give it to their favorite charity.) That fact notwithstanding, however, a substantial proportion of people confronted with this choice say they would opt for World B.47 47See, for example, Sara J. Solnick and David Hemenway, Is More Always Better? A Survey on Positional Concerns, 37 Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 373 (1998). When these authors offered subjects a choice similar to the one we posed above, 56 percent chose the world with higher relative income and lower absolute income. Similar numbers – with about half opting for higher relative income -- have emerged from several experiments, with about 200 subjects, involving law students at the University of Chicago Law School. 
In a recent discussion of these experiments, Judge Posner complains, "[R]elative income is important as a signal of ‘how one is doing.’ If your boss is paying you a lot less than someone who does 
We do not claim that theirs is necessarily the better choice. But we do argue that it is a rational and coherent one, in part because of the importance of what the late economist Fred Hirsch called positional goods.48 A positional good is one whose value depends in significant part on how it compares with goods in the same class consumed by others. The ability to purchase such goods depends strongly on one’s position in the relevant distribution of income. For example, one’s ability to buy a fine painting or a house with a good view typically depends more on relative income than on absolute income. But such goods are not the only reason that relative income is important. Some people want to be toward the top of any relevant hierarchy; many more do not want to be at the bottom; and below we will discuss evidence that once a threshold level of affluence is reached, physical and psychological well-being are much better predicted by relative consumption levels than by absolute consumption levels.49 
relative position comes in the form of happiness surveys conducted over time in a variety of countries. These surveys ask people to report whether they are "very happy," "fairly happy," or "not happy." They find that happiness levels within a country at a given moment are strongly positively correlated with relative position in the country's income distribution. But the same studies find only weak long-term trends in average reported happiness levels, even for countries whose incomes have been growing steadily over time. The counterintutive conclusion is that substantial increases in economic growth do not produce substantial increases in subjective well-being. 
In the early studies, Richard Easterlin found little relationship between increases in material living standards and subjective well-being.50 More particularly, Easterlin found three important patterns in the data. First, average satisfaction levels within a given country are stable over time, even in nations experiencing significant economic growth. Second, satisfaction levels across individuals within a given country do vary with income. Richer people are, on average, more satisfied than poorer people within the same nation. Third, average reported satisfaction levels are not well-correlated with average levels of national income. Nations with high levels of average income do not show higher average satisfactions than nations with lower levels of average income. In Easterlin’s view, these patterns tend to suggest that relative income is far more important than absolute income in determining people’s subjective well-being. 
More recently, it has been found that at very low levels of poverty, increases in absolute income do tend to increase self-reported happiness.51 When people lack adequate similar work, something is wrong, unless you have decided to substitute nonpecuniary for pecuniary income. Evening out all incomes would thus deprive people of a great deal of information about their status and prospects.” Richard Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). The point is correct but not responsive. We agree that relative pay is an important signal, and to make this point is not to argue for evening out all incomes. 48 Fred Hirsch, Social Limits to Growth (Harvard Univ. Press, 1976). 49For an extensive summary of this evidence, see R. H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond, chapter 2 (Oxford University Press. 1985). 50 See Richard Easterlin, Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? in Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz, Paul David and Melvin Reder, eds., (Academic Press, 1974). 51 See Ed Diener and Carol Diener, The Wealth of Nations Revisited: Income and the Quality of Life, 36 Social Indicators Research 275 (1995). food or shelter, they are likely to report themselves as happier as economic growth reduces those needs. It has also been found that average satisfaction levels are significantly higher in rich countries than in very poor ones.52 But the basic pattern identified by Easterlin continues to hold: average satisfaction levels are not significantly correlated over time with income. 
income is more important than absolute income as a determinant of self-reported happiness levels. But several questions might be raised about their implications for our claims here. 
First, what is the relationship between self-reported happiness and subjective happiness? Is anything real being measured? Self-reported happiness might seem to invite social comparisons; people might rate their happiness by asking how they compare to others, and hence substantial differences in happiness levels, between wealthy and less wealthy nations, might not be picked up by the responses even if substantial differences exist. It is thus possible that subjective happiness measures are simply void of normative significance. 
Plausible in the abstract, this objection turns out to be wrong, or at best greatly overstated, for there is considerable evidence that self-reported happiness does measure something of significance. Numerous studies have found strong positive relationships between reported happiness levels and observable physiological and behavioral measures of well being.53 People who report that they are not happy, for example, are more likely to experience headaches, rapid heartbeat, digestive disorders, and related psychosomatic ailments.54 Those who rate themselves as very happy are more likely than others to be rated as happy by their friends, more likely to initiate social contacts, less likely to seek psychological counseling, and less likely to attempt suicide.55 
A second question involves the relationship between subjective happiness and objective well-being.56 People with a greater capacity to purchase goods and services may not be subjectively happier, but they may be far better off. Among other things, they are likely to be healthier and to live longer lives.57 It is therefore reasonable to say that people who earn $70,000, in a society where that is the median income, are likely to have better lives, other things being equal, than people who earn $30,000, where that is the median income – even if people in these different societies report the same subjective happiness. The fact that people in relatively poor nations show relatively high levels of subjective happiness may simply reflect adaptation to relative deprivation.58 
We agree that subjective happiness is not all that matters; it does not capture everything that a society should be aiming to promote.59 Economic growth would certainly be desirable insofar as it increases longevity and diminishes various risks to life 52 See id. 53For a more detailed survey of this evidence, see Frank, chapter 2 (1985). 54Id 55Id 56 See Amartya Sen, Development As Freedom (1999), for relevant discussion. 57 See the striking evidence of declining risks of death over time, described in W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs 285 (1992). 58 See the discussion of adaptive preferences in Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (1983). 59 See Sen, supra note; Martha Nussbaum, Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach 111-48 (2000). and health, even if it had no effect whatever on subjective well-being. But subjective happiness is an important component of overall well-being, and a society whose members mostly report themselves as “unhappy” surely has a serious problem, just as a society whose members report themselves as “happy” is entitled to congratulate itself on this fact. If any income loss from a regulatory intervention does not itself decrease subjective happiness, and if the intervention confers substantial benefits, subjective and otherwise, it would seem likely that people are gaining rather than losing; and this is sufficient for our claims here. 
A third question has to do with loss aversion.60 It is now well-established that people dislike losses more than they like corresponding gains.61 It follows that surprisingly little subjective gain may be created by increases in income, even if equivalent decreases in income would indeed create subjective losses.62 Perhaps people do not report themselves as significantly happier when income increases; but this does not show that they would not report themselves as significantly less happy when income decreases. The point matters for our claim here, since we will be suggesting that the economic losses associated with regulation do not matter a great deal to subjective wellbeing if relative position is held constant. But loss aversion does not undermine our basic claims. Even if people dislike losses from the status quo, they have considerable power to adjust to those losses, and indeed their fear that losses will produce significant subjective loss is not borne out by reality.63 If relative position is held constant, it is extremely unlikely that income losses, of the relatively small sort that we are discussing here, would produce more than transitory subjective losses, especially because the relevant measures will be producing regulatory benefits at the same time. 
Survey measures of subjective well-being are not the only evidence that people care strongly about relative income. Unlike psychologists, who often rely on survey evidence, economists prefer behavioral evidence when attempting to make inferences about what people care about. The relevant literature is not extensive, but there are several studies that shed light on the strength of concerns about relative income. 
Andrew Postlewaite investigate how individual labor supply decisions depend on the incomes of important reference group members.64 They argue that if someone cares strongly about how her income compares with the incomes of others, an increase in others’ incomes will cause her to become more likely to seek employment, or more likely to work longer hours if she is already employed. The difficulty in testing such predictions has always been that it is hard to know whose incomes really matter to the decision maker. Most people presumably care most about the incomes of people with 60 See, e.g., Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1991). 61 See id; Jennifer Arlen et al., Endowment Effects, Other-Regarding Preferences, and Corporate Law for a recent overview. 62 See Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession (2000). 63 See, e.g., George Loewenstein and David Schkade, Wouldn’t It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings, in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 85 (Daniel Kahneman et al eds 1999). 64 David Neumark and Andrew Postlewaite , Relative Income Concerns and the Rise in Married Women's Employment, J. Public Economics (70)1 (1998) pp. 157-183 whom they associate most closely. Unfortunately, researchers seldom have reliable data about who knows whom, much less about which specific individuals people care most about. 
Neumark and Postlewaite cleverly finesse this problem by examining the behavior of sisters. The specific question they pose is this: Does a woman’s decision about whether to work outside the home depend on her sister’s economic circumstances? According to economic orthodoxy, which holds that only her own absolute income matters to her, it would not. But Neumark and Postlewaite find differently for a large sample of women whose sisters are not employed. Specifically, they find that such a woman is 16 to 25 percent more likely to work outside the home if her sister’s husband earns more than her own husband.65 This is strong evidence that relative position matters to both perceived well-being and actual behavior. 
suggest that salaries depend a great deal on what employees think other people are receiving, and that perceptions of relative position have large effects on morale.66 “Few workers have a precise notion of market wages or wages that are fair in some absolute sense. Rather, they make comparisons with their own past pay and with the pay of coworkers.”67 As we will discuss in more detail below, the internal wage structure of firms is highly responsive to this point, partly because employers do not want to encourage bickering and shirking by making some workers think that they are being underpaid relative to coworkers. In the words of an official responsible for international job placement, “Inequity causes disharmony. Employees want more money if a new person is paid more than they are.”68 In the words of the director of a small company, “I have had difficulty with people receiving different pay who had similar skills and worked in different parts of the building. . . . They felt underpaid and undervalued.”69 Many companies respond to people’s concerns about relative economic position with relatively rigid “grade and step systems.” Some companies respond by creating a norm against public discussion of salaries, on the theory that people are likely to be happy enough with their own, but would be less happy if they found themselves making comparisons to others.70 Strategies of this sort would be unintelligible if absolute position was all or almost all that matters. 
otherwise puzzling behavior in interpersonal bargaining contexts. Consider, for example, 65 Ibid, Table 3. 66 A recent, detailed treatment is Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall DuringA Recession (2000). 67 Id. at 310. The point may be most familiar in professional sports, where athletes seek higher salaries on the basis of the salary set by relevant others. Often such athletes contend that their demands are not really “about money” but are really “about respect.” These claims are frequently ridiculed on the ground that “respect” is a disguise for what really matters, which is “the money.” If we are right, there is no disguise here; money is a proxy for “respect.” Labor market behavior shows that this is a pervasive phenomenon, not limited to professional sports. (Imagine if you discovered that the median salary in your workplace, for people like you, was 5% higher than your salary.) 68 Id. at 81. 69 Id. at 80. 70 As it happens this is the practice at the University of Chicago Law School; there is an exceptionally strong norm against public discussion of salaries, even among good friends. The evident basis of the norm is to prevent dissatisfaction about relative position in the face of satisfaction with absolute position. an elegant experiment known as the "ultimatum game."71 The game is played by two players, "Proposer" and "Responder." It begins with Proposer being given a sum of money (say, $100) that he must then propose how to divide between himself and Responder. Responder then has two options: 1) he can accept, in which case each party gets the amount proposed; or 2) he can refuse, in which each party gets zero and the $100 goes back to the experimenter. 
If Proposer believes that Responder cares only about absolute wealth, his own wealth-maximizing strategy is clear: he should propose $99 for himself and $1 for Responder (only integer dollar amounts are allowed). If Proposer's assumption about Responder is correct, Responder will accept this one-sided offer because he will reason that getting $1 is better than getting nothing. This is the standard economic prediction. 
But suppose that Responder cares not only about absolute but also relative wealth levels – about the relative division of money as between the two. Responder might then refuse the one-sided offer, even though he stands to gain from it in absolute terms, because he finds the relative terms so distasteful. In fact, refusals of one-sided offers are widely observed. Responders routinely reject offers that do not involve splits of 50-50 or 60-40 -- even when the stakes are large, as in games played for several months’ salary in poor nations.72 Likely anticipating responders’ behavior, proposers routinely offer splits of 50%-50% and 60%-40%. Proposers rarely offer less than 20%, and responders rarely accept less than that amount. The existence of such results in games with large stakes demonstrates that the outcomes cannot be discounted on the ground that the money involved is a small fraction of total wealth. 
To be sure, relative position is not all that matters in the Ultimatum Game. Much of the behavior is driven by Responders’ beliefs about the motivations of Proposers. When the experiment is altered to make it seem as if Proposers have earned the right to be Proposers, more unequal divisions are acceptable; the same is true when Proposers’ options are narrowed, making an unequal division (say, 80-20) seem more fair in light of the alternatives (say, 10-10 or 10-90).73 Thus a preference for good relative position does not explain all of what occurs in the game; ensuring a fair outcome, which may or may not call for good relative position, is often the driving factor. But relative position also counts for many participants, so much so that “difference aversion” appears to motivate a significant percentage of participants. That is enough for our basic claim here.74 
An obvious irony is that the effect of Proposer's believing that Responder cares about relative wealth is to boost substantially the amount that Proposer offers Responder. By virtue of his concern about relative wealth, Responder becomes a much more effective bargainer. Thus the outcomes of the ultimatum game strongly support the proposition that 71See Werner Guth, Rolf Sdhmittberger, and Bernd Schwarze, An Experimental Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining, 3 J. of Economic Behavior and Organization 367-68 (1982). 72 For example, see Colin Camerer and Richard Thaler, Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners, 9 J Ec Persp. 209 (1995); Alvin Roth et al. Bargaining and Market Behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo, 81 Am. Ec. Rev. 1068 (1991); for a recent overview, see Jennifer Arlen et al., Endowment Effects, Other-Regarding Preferences, and Corporate Law (forthcoming 2000). 73 See Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin, Social Preferences: Some Simple Tests and A New Model (unpublished manuscript 2000, available from Social Science Research Network). 74 See id. relative income, not only absolute income, matters a great deal,75 and indeed that this concern for relative position can strengthen bargaining positions. 
simple laboratory manipulations of relative position can have profound implications for the terms of market exchange.76 In one experiment, for example, they awarded half of their subjects “stars” on the basis of their performance on a transparently meaningless quiz. Following these awards, subjects were given objects of known value and allowed to exchange these objects with one another for cash. The subjects who received stars consistently received better terms—that is, they bought at lower prices and sold at higher prices—when they exchanged goods with subjects who did not receive stars. It seems clear that people with higher relative position in a salient context do better in apparently unrelated contexts, simply because of that higher position. 
There is evidence that relative position affects health and even fundamental biochemical processes in the nervous system. For reasons that remain poorly understood, and not easily traced to a simple causal mechanism, high relative position is correlated with good health, and low relative position with worse health – holding absolute income constant.77 
In a study involving 19 groups of adult vervet monkeys, McGuire et al. found a relevant mechanism: the dominant member in each group had roughly 50 percent higher concentrations of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which affects mood and behavior in a variety of ways.78 They also showed that this difference was both a cause and an effect of high status.79 Fortunately the evidence is not limited to monkeys; McGuire and his 75 As noted in the text, we do not contend that the outcomes of the ultimatum game can be explained solely on this basis. The responder’s perception of the proposer’s intentions, and character, is therefore an important factor in these experiments. See Rabin, supra note; Sally Blount, When Social Outcomes Aren’t Fair: The Effect of Causal Attributions on Preferences,” 63(2) Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 131, (1995), for instructive treatments. 76 Sheryl Ball and Catherine Eckel. Status and Discrimination in Ultimatum Games: Stars Upon Thars, Virginia Polytechnic Institute Department of Economics mimeo, 1994; Sheryl Ball, Catherine Eckel, Philip Grossman, and William Zame, Status in Markets, Department of Economics Working Paper, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, January 1996. 77 See Robert Frank, Luxury Fever 142-43 (1999). 78See Michael McGuire, M. Raleigh, and G. Brammer, Sociopharmacology, 22 Annual Review of Pharmacological Toxicology, 643, 643-61 (1982). 79To do this, they removed the initially dominant animal from each group and placed him in an isolation cage. Shortly thereafter, a new individual established dominance within each group, and after roughly 72 hours passed, serotonin concentrations in the newly dominant animal rose to the levels seen in the formerly dominant animal. At the same time, the serotonin concentrations in the formerly dominant animal fell to the level associated with subordinate status. When the initially dominant animal was returned to the group, he reasserted dominance and serotonin concentrations in both the originally dominant and interim dominant animals responded accordingly. See Michael J. Raleigh, and Michael T. McGuire, Serotonin, Aggression, and Violence in Vervet Monkeys, 146-58 in The Neurotransmitter Revolution: Serotonin, Social Behaivor, and the Law, Roger Masters and Michael McGuire, eds., Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press (1994). Michael Raleigh and his co-authors also found that animals were more likely to ascend in the social hierarchy after having been given drugs that boost concentrations of serotonin. See Michael Raleigh, Gary Brammer, Edward Ritvo, and Edward Geller, Effects of Chronic Fenfluramine on Blood Serotonin, Cerebrospinal Metabolites, and Behavior in Monkeys, 90 Psychopharmacology 503 (1986). colleagues have also found elevated serotonin levels in the leaders of college fraternities and athletic teams.80 In another study, Douglas Madsen finds that the status-serotonin relationship is positive for some groups of male college students.81 
Like dopamine, norepinephrine, and other neurotransmitters, serotonin affects mood and behavior in a variety of ways. Within limits, having elevated serotonin concentrations is associated with enhanced feelings of well-being. Serotonin deficiencies are associated with a variety of affective disorders, including irritability, sleep disorders, mania, and depression.82 Recent work suggests that serotonin deficiencies are also strongly linked with impulsive aggression and suicide attempts.83 
In males, concentrations of the sex hormone testosterone appear to have a relationship with status similar to the one seen for serotonin. Reductions in status thus tend to be followed by reductions in plasma testosterone levels, whereas these levels tend to rise following increases in status.84 A player who wins a tennis match decisively, for example, experiences a post-match elevation in plasma testosterone, and his vanquished opponent experiences a post-match reduction.85 And as with serotonin, there is some evidence from primate studies that elevated concentrations of testosterone facilitate behaviors that help achieve or maintain high status.86 
To be sure, it is not simple to extrapolate from such data to judgments about the importance of relative position with respect to income (and other goods) within all human contexts and societies; socialization matters a great deal and can undoubtedly increase or decrease people’s concern with their standing in the group. But there is at least plausible reason to think that a high relative position is associated with desirable physiological effects, and that low relative position is associated with undesirable ones. 
There is a more speculative grounds to think that something like this is true. If we adopt the biologist's view that human motivation is shaped in part by the forces of natural selection, it is no surprise that people would care so strongly about relative resource holdings. Even in a famine, for example, there is always some food available, and the question of who gets it is settled largely by relative entitlements.87 Concern about relative 80 McGuire, personal communication to Robert Frank (1998). 81 Douglas Madsen, Serotonin and Social Rank Among Human Males, in The Neurotransmitter Revolution: Serotonin, Social Behaivor, and the Law, Roger Masters and Michael McGuire, eds., Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 146-158 (1994). 82 Alec Coppen, Role of Serotonin in Affective Disorders, in J. Barchas and E. Usdin, eds., Serotonin and Behavior, (Academic Press, 1973); see also the summary discussion in J. Barchas. and E. Usdin, eds., Serotonin and Behavior, (Academic Press, 1973). 83 Emil F. Coccaro, The Biology of Aggression, 38 Scientific American, 38 (1995). The drug Prozac, widely prescribed for depression and other mood disorders, is a serotonin uptake inhibitor, which means that it increases the effective concentrations of serotonin in the brain. 84 See, for example, Allan Mazur, Physiology, Dominance, and Aggression in Humans, in A. Goldstein, ed., Prevention and Control of Aggression, (Pergamon, 1983); Allan Mazur and T. Lamb. Testosterone, Status, and Mood in Human Males, 14 Hormones and Behavior 236 (1980); and M. Elias, .Serum Cortisol, Testosterone and Testosterone Binding Globulin Responses to Competitive Fighting in Human Males, 7 Aggressive Behavior 215 (1984). 85 Mazur and Lamb, supra. 86 See Rose, Bernstein, and Gordon, (1975). 87 See Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines (1981). position is also adaptive insofar at it prods people to monitor how they are doing relative to their competitors and to boost their effort levels if they start falling behind.88 
In sum, evidence from several disciplines strongly suggests that interpersonal comparisons are an important determinant of both physical and psychological well-being. Such comparisons take place along many dimensions other than income. In what follows, however, our focus will be on comparisons in the income domain. We emphasize income comparisons because relative economic position is of obvious importance and because positional concerns typically loom larger with income than with the goods that regulation attempts to provide (safety, leisure time, leave to take care of children and ailing relatives). Our basic objection is that the conventional estimates used in cost-benefit analysis of health and safety regulation are derived from models that assume, quite implausibly, that people do not care at all about relative economic position. This produces a serious distortion, as we shall now see. 
III. How Concerns about Relative Position Affect Willingness To Pay 
There is an initial question about the use of willingness to pay as a measure for many regulatory benefits: Who is actually going to pay for them? Suppose, for example, that government proposes to impose workplace safety requirements or to require all employers to provide a certain period of leave time for new parents. Will the cost of these requirements be borne by (a) workers, in the form of reduced salary (or other benefits), or (b) consumers, in the form of increased prices, or (c) firms, in the form of reduced profits (and perhaps reduced compensation for high-level executives), or (d) the unemployed, in the form of lost job opportunities? 
Though theoretical considerations can provide useful guidance,89 this is of course an empirical question; and as a general rule, decisive empirical evidence is lacking. There is, however, evidence that at least in some cases, requirements of this sort do result in lower wages. The workers’ compensation programs of the early twentieth century, for example, appear to have resulted in something like a dollar-for-dollar reduction in the earnings of nonunionized workers; the parental leave program of the early 1990s appears to have had a similar effect.90 For the sake of discussion, we make a simple assumption here, without insisting that the assumption is correct: The people who benefit from regulatory programs will also have to pay for those benefits. We suggest that even if they do have to pay for those benefits, existing methods for eliciting their willingness to pay substantially understate the appropriate amount, from the beneficiary’s own point of view. 88The alternative of operating at maximum effort levels at all times is less efficient in that people tend to do better by conserving their energy when environmental conditions are not stressful for use when the threats to survival are more immediate. 89 For an overview of the theoretical considerations, see Lawrence H. Summers, Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits, 79 Amer. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proceedings) 177 (1989). 90 See Jonathan Gruber, The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits, 84 Am. Econ. Rev. 622 (1994), and Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, Did Workers Pay for the Passage of Workers’ Compensation Laws, 110 Q J Econ. 713 (1995) (finding substantial wage offsets): “Analysis of the effect of the introduction of workers’ compensation on wages shows that in the coal and lumber industries, workers experienced substantial wage offsets. In the coal industry the offsets were large enough to cover not only the expected monetary value the benefits, but also the employers’ costs of purchasing the insurance to provide those benefits.” Id. at 736. 
A. The Distortion willingness to pay for an amenity such as workplace safety, we begin by working through a simple, stylized example of an employment decision confronting two workers, Smith and Jones. Also for simplicity’s sake, we assume that each gets satisfaction from, or cares about, three things—his income, his safety on the job, and his position on the economic ladder. We make no assumptions about why he cares about that position, though we will say a few words on the point below. The choice the two confront is between a safe job that pays $300/wk and a risky job that pays $350/wk. The value of safety to each is $100/wk, and each evaluates relative income as follows: Having more income than his neighbor provides the equivalent of $100/wk worth of additional satisfaction; having less income than his neighbor means the equivalent of a $100/wk reduction in satisfaction; and having the same income as his neighbor means no change in the underlying level of satisfaction. (For purposes of understanding the general point, the specific numbers do not matter; the same point could be illustrated in any number of ways.) The question is: Which jobs will Smith and Jones choose? 
If we viewed each person’s decision in isolation, the normatively correct choice would be the safe job. Although it pays $50/wk less than the risky job, the extra safety it provides is worth $100/wk, by assumption. So if we abstract from the issue of concern about relative income, the value of the safe job is $400/wk (its $300 salary plus $100 worth of safety), which is $50/wk more than the $350 value of the risky job. 
Once we incorporate concerns about relative income, however, the logic of the decision changes in a fundamental way. Now the attractiveness of each choice depends on the job chosen by the other. The four possible combinations of choices and the corresponding levels of satisfaction are shown in Table 3. 
Smith unsaf e job @ $35 0 /wk 
$40 0 /wk each 
Jones $45 0 /wk for Jones $30 0 /wk for Smith $30 0 /wk for Jones $45 0 /wk for Smith $35 0 /wk each 
Suppose, for example, that Jones chooses the safe job. If Smith then chooses the unsafe job, he ends up with total satisfaction worth $450—$350 in salary plus $100 from having more income than Jones. Jones, for his part, ends up with only $300 worth of total satisfaction—$300 in salary plus $100 from safety minus $100 from having lower vis-à-vis coworkers (although it does still mean having lower income relative to members of other groups). If one’s personal reference group consisted entirely of one’s coworkers, the distortion caused by concerns about relative position would not arise, and conventional hedonic estimates would not be biased. Typically, however, an individual’s personal reference group contains not just coworkers, but also friends, neighbors, family members, and other acquaintances who are not in a position to participate in collective decisions about safety expenditures. 
For the sake of illustration, we consider the intermediate case of a worker whose personal reference group consists equally of coworkers and non-coworkers. For such a worker earning $50,000 per year, a $1,000 per year expenditure on safety reduces relative income by an average of 1 percent (a zero percent reduction vis-à-vis his coworkers and a 2 percent reduction vis-à-vis others). Our adjustment based on the vKv estimate would then be only half as large as before. That is, the worker would be willing to pay roughly $167 more for the same increment in safety if he could be assured that his income relative to relevant non-coworkers would be unaffected by the expenditure—as would be the case, again, if everyone else made similar expenditures on safety. For this illustrative case, an adjustment based on the vKv survey data would call for an upward revision by 17 percent in the willingness to pay values inferred from hedonic pricing models. For example, if those models produced a value of life of $5 million, the adjusted estimate would be almost $6 million. 
C. An Alternative Approach on the basis of responses to survey questions regarding subjective well-being. In this section we examine an alternative procedure that rests not on surveys but on objective market data – on what behavior within markets reveals about people’s value of higher rank, or elasticity of position. If people care about relative position not just in a global sense, but also within the context of specific groups to which they belong, it is possible to infer the value of relative income by examining the relationship between wages, local rank, and productivity among groups of co-workers.97 
The full story is somewhat technical. For those uninterested in the details, the simple version begins with the suggestion that in the labor market, compensating wage differentials must be and are paid, not only for higher risks98 and less vacation time, but also for lower relative positions within firms.99 Just as in the context of risk-taking, where the use of compensating wage differentials is well-established,100 so too here. Actual labor market behavior can be used to ascertain the amount that people are willing to pay to avoid occupying positions of low rank vis-à-vis their coworkers. Compensating wage differentials, once ascertained, can be used to adjust private willingness to pay by incorporating concerns about relative position. We attempt an exercise to show how such differentials might be calculated, with the qualification that a full analysis would require 97 R. H. Frank, Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products?, 74 American Economic Review 549 (1984). 98 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992). 99 Of course different people will have different tastes on this count, as we discuss; some people do not much care about a high relative position, and some people even dislike having much more income than their coworkers. We use survey and labor market evidence to capture aggregates. 100 See id. access to a fuller and more up-to-date labor market data than those used here. What is important is the principle and the basic inquiry, not the details. 
theories, which assume that workers do not care about relative position, assert that wage rates will track productivity differences on a one-to-one basis. Thus if one worker contributes $10/hr more than another to the employer’s bottom line, the first worker should earn precisely $10/hr more than the second. Yet many firms follow strict salary formulas based on experience, education, and length of tenure within the firm, even when there are large visible differences in the productivity of workers paid the same under these formulas. 
Such patterns can be accounted for, however, by a simple amendment to the standard models. The amendment rests on two assumptions: 1) other things being equal, most people prefer high-ranked to low-ranked positions among their coworkers; and 2) no one can be forced to remain in a firm against his or her wishes.101 
Our account begins with the observation that, by the laws of simple arithmetic, not everyone's preference for high rank in the wage distribution of his firm can be satisfied. After all, only 50 percent of the members of any group can be in the top half. But if people are free to associate with whomever they please, why are the lesser-ranked members of groups content to remain? Why don't they all leave and attempt to form new groups of their own in which they would no longer be near the bottom? Many workers undoubtedly do precisely that. And yet we also observe many stable, heterogeneous groups. Not all accountants at General Motors are equally talented; and in every law firm, some partners attract much more new business than others. If everyone prefers to be near the top of his or her group of coworkers, what holds these heterogeneous groups together? 
An important part of the answer is that their low-ranked members receive extra compensation – partly from a prestigious association, partly from an advantageous wage structure. If they were to leave, they would gain by no longer having to endure low rank. By the same token, however, the top-ranked members would lose, because they would no longer enjoy high rank. If their gains from having high rank are larger than the costs borne by members with low rank, it does not make sense for the group to disband. Everyone can do better if the top-ranked workers induce their lesser-ranked colleagues to remain by sharing some of their pay with them. 
Of course, not everyone assigns the same value to having high rank. Some people care little or not at all about high relative rank. Some people actually dislike having more money, or a lot more money, than their coworkers. Others consider high relative rank extremely important. Some people do not much care about high rank, but abhor low rank. Just as people diverge on other aspects of a compensation package, such as parental leave and vacation time, so too they diverge on the value of a high relative rank. Those who care little or less about high rank will do best to join firms in which the wage is high even if, or because, they are less productive than most workers on the scene. As lesser-ranked members in these firms, they will receive extra compensation. People who care most strongly about rank, by contrast, will want to join firms in which most other workers are 101 For a formalization of the argument that follows, see R. H. Frank, Interdependent Preferences and the Competitive Wage Structure, 15 The Rand Journal of Economics, 510, 510-520 (1984). 
Wage 
Firm 1 45 less productive than themselves. For the privilege of occupying top-ranked positions in those firms, they will have to work for less than the value of what they produce. 
Workers can thus sort themselves among a hierarchy of firms in accordance with their demands for within-firm status. Figure 1 depicts the menu of choices confronting workers whose productivity takes a given value, M0. The heavy lines represent the wage schedules offered by three different firms. They tell how much a worker with a given productivity would be paid in each firm. The average productivity level is highest in firm 3, next highest in firm 2, and lowest in firm 1. The problem facing persons with productivity level M0 is to choose which of these three firms to work for. Firm 2 
Firm 3 
Product ivit y 
Workers who care most about local rank will want to "purchase" high-ranked positions such as the one labeled "A" in Firm 1. In such positions, they work for less than the value of what they produce. By contrast, those who care least about local rank will elect to receive wage premiums (of one or another magnitude) by working in lowranked positions such as the one labeled "C" in Firm 3. Workers with moderate concerns about local rank will be attracted to intermediate positions such as the one labeled "B" in Firm 2, for which they neither pay nor receive any compensation for local rank. 
Note also in Figure 1 that even though not every worker in each firm is paid the value of what he or she produces, workers taken as a group nonetheless do receive the value of what they produce. The extra compensation received by each firm's low-ranked workers is exactly offset by the shortfall in pay of its high-ranked workers. There is thus an implicit market for high-ranked positions in the firm. Buyers in this market are those who purchase the right to occupy such positions by agreeing to work for less than the value of what they produce. Sellers in this market are those who agree to occupy lowranked position (without which high-ranked positions cannot exist) in return for being paid more than the value of what they produce. By observing the deviations between pay and productivity within groups of workers in the firm, the analyst can infer the monetary value that people assign to high local rank. 
compensating wage differentials for lower rank within the firm? If we knew the answer to that question, we could use it in an attempt to estimate the monetary cost of a reduction in relative position—the essential piece of information we need to adjust conventional estimates of the monetary value of safety and other workplace amenities. Of course the amount that workers are willing to pay for high local rank will be different for different occupations. In occupations in which coworkers do not associate closely with one another, people will not be willing to pay much for a high-ranked position. After all, the comparisons that matter most are those between people who interact most intensively. The price paid for high rank (and received for low rank) will be highest in occupations in which coworkers work closely together for extended periods. 
The amended model predicts that the wage will rise by less than a dollar for each extra dollar of value produced, and that the difference between productivity and pay will increase with the extensiveness of interaction between coworkers.102 The predictions of the standard model are contrasted with those of the amended model in Figure 2. 
Wage 
Wage = Product ivit y (st andard model) 
Local rank model wit h less int ensive int erac tion 
Local rank model wit h more int ensive int erac tion 45 
Product ivit y 
Table 4 presents estimates of the rates at which earnings rise with productivity for three occupations.103 The occupations are listed in increasing order of closeness of interaction. Real estate salespersons, who have the least intensive contact, pay the lowest amounts for high-ranked positions. At the other end of the spectrum, research chemists, who work together in close-knit groups for extended periods, pay very large sums indeed. 102 Of course, factors other than an implicit market for local rank might also contribute to wage compression within firms. Frans Spinnewyn, Long Term Contracts and Income Redistribution, CORE Discussion Paper 8357 (1985), for example, notes that if workers are risk averse and initially uncertain about how productive they are, they can benefit by agreeing ex ante to have greater cross-sectional wage equality within each work group than would be called for by the variations in productivity that are revealed ex post.102 Perhaps, but that seems an unlikely explanation for the wage compression observed in the entries of the Table 4, because for these occupations existing labor contracts cannot prevent the most productive workers from being bid away by rival employers once productivity differences are revealed. 
Measurement difficulties might also lead to wage compression, since a firm’s wages cannot be expected to track productivity differences that cannot be observed. But this too seems an unlikely explanation for the wage compression observed in Table 4. Individual differences in productivity among sales persons are relatively easy to observe, and the estimate reported for research chemists is based on one component of productivity—long-term contributions to overhead cost recovery from research grants—that can be measured with precision. 103 R. H. Frank, Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products?, 74 American Economic Review 549 (1984). In the sample studied, the most productive chemists accounted for over $200,000 more in revenues each year than their least productive colleagues, yet received only slightly higher salaries. Auto salespersons do not associate nearly as intensively as chemists, but unlike real estate salespersons, they do spend their working hours together in the same location. And as predicted, the price of high-ranked positions for auto salespersons lies between those of the other two occupations. generating an estimate of the lower bound of the extent to which concerns about local rank contribute to wage compression. (That number will then serve as the basis for our estimate of the extent to which concerns about relative position reduce willingness to pay for safety and other amenities.) We start with the assumption that real estate agents assign no value at all to their income rank vis-à-vis coworkers. This is an exaggeration, to be sure, but perhaps not a serious one in light of the fact that agents spend relatively little time in one another’s company. Since real estate agents’ earnings grow by 70 cents for every dollar they generate for their employers, our assumption implies that factors other than concern about local rank reduce the slope of the wage-productivity gradient by 0.30—from 1.0 to 0.70.104 In the absence of any adjustment, the entry for research chemists in Table 4 says that the salary of a member of this group will rise by less than 9 cents with every additional dollar of productivity. To simplify, we round up to 10 cents. Applying the 0.30 adjustment, we then estimate that a chemist’s salary would rise by 40 cents with every additional dollar of productivity if all factors unrelated to local rank could be controlled for. On this estimate, a university research chemist would be roughly indifferent between the following two events: a) he and his colleagues each receive a $10,000 increase in salary; and b) he receives a $4,000 increase in salary while his colleagues’ salaries remain the same. 
The amount a worker is willing to pay for an improvement in local rank within the firm is an understatement of the value of improved relative position more generally, because coworkers are just one of many personal reference groups that matter. Thus, as noted earlier, the income and consumption levels of neighbors, friends, family members, and others are also important components of the overall social frame of reference. Anyone who takes a cut in pay to gain a high ranked position vis-à-vis his coworkers will simultaneously suffer reduced income and consumption rank in those other groups. Accordingly, the amount that workers are willing to sacrifice to hold high-ranked 104 See Spinnewyn, supra, for a discussion of these factors. positions among their coworkers should be smaller than the value they place on having high relative position more generally. 
The extent to which willingness to pay for local rank understates the value of overall relative position will vary inversely with the intensity of coworker interaction. In the extreme case of a firm whose workers were hermetically sealed off from the rest of the world, the observed willingness to pay for high local rank would coincide exactly with the value that workers assign to relative position more generally. In practice, of course, no such firm exists. Among the three cases examined in Table 4, not even the relatively insular world of research chemists would exempt these workers from unfavorable comparisons outside the workplace. To the extent that external comparisons are of at least marginal importance even for members of this group, their observed willingness to pay for local rank will understate their willingness to pay for overall relative position. A research chemist’s willingness to pay for local rank (adjusted in the manner described above) is thus a good candidate for use in the construction of a lowerbound estimate of the value of overall relative position. Our estimate, again, is that such a worker would be indifferent between a $10,000 across-the-board salary increase and a $4,000 increase that applied to him alone. 
Our next step is to use this estimate to construct an adjustment in the valuation of safety suggested by conventional methods. Consider again a worker who earns $50,000 per year and is shown by hedonic pricing studies to have a reservation price of $1,000 per year for a one-in-a-thousand reduction in his annual probability of dying in a workplace accident. Assuming that he and his coworkers spend equal amounts on workplace safety, this payment does not reduce his consumption relative to that of his coworkers, but it produces a $1,000 reduction relative to other members of his personal reference group. 
For the sake of illustration, we again consider the intermediate case of a worker whose personal reference group consists equally of coworkers and non-coworkers. For this worker, a $1,000 expenditure on safety reduces relative income by an average of 1 percent (a zero percent reduction vis-à-vis his coworkers and a 2 percent reduction vis-àvis others). The cost of the additional safety for this worker may thus be expressed as the sum of two components: the $1,000 direct expenditure on safety plus the implicit cost of a 1 percent ($500/yr) reduction in relative income.105 What is the latter cost? Our earlier estimate tells us that this worker would be indifferent between a $1,000 across-the-board reduction in income and a $400 reduction that applied to him alone, implying that he would be also be indifferent between a $1,250 across-the-board reduction and a $500 reduction that applied to him alone. A $500 reduction that applied to him alone, in turn, would impose two costs—a reduction in absolute living standards by that amount and the corresponding reduction in relative living standards. Using CA(500) to represent the first cost, and CR(500) to represent the second, we have 
Since the value of CA(500) is simply $500, we solve for CR(500) = $750. Under our maintained assumptions, then, the implicit value of a $500 reduction in relative income is $750. It follows that if this worker were willing to pay $1,000 for a one-in-a-thousand 105 To simplify, we assume that the cost of a variable decline in relative income vis-à-vis different groups is equal to the cost of an equiproportional decline of the same average amount. reduction in the probability of death despite the implied 1 percent reduction in his relative standard of living, he would be willing to pay $750 more for that same benefit if it could be provided without a reduction in relative living standards. Thus, for cases in which conventional estimates would peg the value of a life at $5,000,000 on the basis of observed individual willingness to pay, our estimate would imply a social valuation that is 75 percent larger, or $8,750,000 per life. 
Needless to say, the back-of-the-envelope nature of this estimate, based on a much less than full inquiry into the contemporary labor market, lays it open to criticism. Considerable work remains to be done before the value of relative position can be estimated with any precision.106 Our basic claim is not that we have isolated the precise number, but that even a back-of-the-envelope calculation is likely to be a closer estimate than we would get by simply ignoring concerns about relative position. Even crude estimates like the ones described suggest that ignoring concerns about relative position has led to significant underestimates of the social benefit of reductions in risks to health and safety. 
IV. Should Public Policy Address Problems that Stem from Concerns about Relative Position? 
Our argument has been based on a claim about the harmful external effects introduced by the increased income of other people. In our account, increases in the wages of some people impose costs on others. In form, this is a simple externality story, of the sort that has become quite conventional in many areas of law and policy. Economists and noneconomists alike accept the proposition that market allocations may be suboptimal when production is accompanied by the discharge of environmental pollutants, and most concede that air and water quality are proper concerns of public policy. Our suggestion here is that because subjective well-being depends on relative wealth, increases in the income of some people give rise to positional externalities.107 Analytically, positional externalities are no different from ordinary environmental pollutants. But although most people accept the existence of positional externalities as a purely descriptive matter,108 it might seem tempting to question whether such externalities 106 One complication is that workers might engage in offsetting behavior, designed to ensure a better relative position along the dimension of income even with the regulation. Some might, for example, seek overtime work or a second job. On the general issue of offsetting behavior, see Mathew Adler and Eric Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000) 107 R. H. Frank, Positional Externalities, in Richard Zeckhauser, ed., Strategy and Choice: Essays in Honor of Thomas C. Schelling, 25-47 (MIT Press, 1992) . 108 There is indeed an extensive literature in which economists have discussed the dependence of satisfaction on relative living standards. In addition to the authors previously cited, see Arie Kapteyn and F. G. van Herwaarden, Interdependent Welfare Functions and Optimal Income Distribution, 14 Journal of Public Economics 375 (1980); Bernard van Praag, The Relativity of the Welfare Concept, in The Quality of Life, 363, Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen, eds., (Clarendon, 1993); Easterlin, 1974; Richard Easterlin, Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All, 27 Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 35 (1995); Amartya Sen, Poor, Relatively Speaking, 35 Oxford Economics Papers 153 (1983); Amartya Sen, The Standard of Living (Cambridge University Press, 1987); Fred Hirsch,. Social Limits to Growth, (Harvard University Press, 1976); Arthur J. Robson, Status, the Distribution of Wealth, Private and Social Attitudes to Risk, 60 Econometrica, 837 (1992); and Tibor Scitovsky, The Joyless Economy (Oxford University Press, 1976). are a proper basis for policy and law. The principal objections involve, first, freedom and rights and, second, the status of envy. 
increased consumption simply does not constitute a legitimate ground for public action. Smith may be unhappy that Jones consumes more than he does, but the solution is for Smith to mind his own business. On this view, to restrict Jones's consumption because it makes Smith unhappy is essentially no different from telling Jones that he cannot engage in other forms of private conduct to which Smith has some objection, such as reading left-wing magazines, or dating people from another religion, or refusing to floss his teeth. Jones is entitled to engage in such conduct, and that right trumps Smith’s concerns. 
This objection has obvious rhetorical force; we may agree that the mere fact that conduct is objectionable, or imposes offense, is no ground for legal intervention. Yet the objection elides many difficulties.109 People who dislike conduct that they deem objectionable are entitled to bargain with others to prevent them from engaging in that conduct, and when cash payments are not made, implicit accommodations are made all the time, so as to ensure that people do not give one another mutual offense. When bargaining is possible, coercion should certainly be disfavored. But what the argument from “rights” ignores is more fundamental than this -- the possibility that with respect to relative position, people may well find themselves in a position in which they are competing to their collective detriment, and some form of mutual restraint may make all, or almost all, better off. Our claim is about a collective action problem, not about the legitimacy of taxing people whenever they bother, offend, or irritate others. 
Consider, for example, the job seeker who gains an advantage over his rivals by showing up for his interview in an expensive, custom-tailored suit. Acting as individuals, the best response for his rivals may be to show up in expensive, custom-tailored suits as well. Even though all job seekers might strongly prefer the alternative in which all spent less on their professional wardrobes, they are stuck with the extra expense. If it were somehow practical for all job seekers to meet and discuss the issue, they might vote unanimously for a proposal to prohibit interviewees from showing up in a suit costing more than, say, $300. On what grounds might we then conclude that this proposal is illegitimate? Because it violates the individual job seeker's freedom? That would be a strange objection indeed if each job seeker had just voted in favor of the restriction. If each had wanted to restrict his own freedom in precisely this way, disallowing their 109 Among other things, the example shows a problem with the traditional interpretation of John Stuart Mill's idea that government cannot regulate private conduct unless there is “harm to others.” See John Stuart Mill, On Liberty. Speaking purely descriptively, a gain to one may impose a “harm” on others, not only because of envy but for other reasons as well. See below. A judgment that this harm cannot count for law and policy may be right, but it must be defended by some kind of claim about the illegitimacy of taking certain harms into account, and not on the basis of the “harm to others” idea alone. It is the question of legitimacy that we discuss in text. 
An unhappy implication is that what is standardly seen as a Pareto improvement may not be a Pareto improvement. Consider a two-person society, in which A has 2 and B has 2 (both measuring material payoffs). If a change is instituted by which A has 20 and B has 400 (in material payoffs), A might be worse off, because of changes in the social frame of reference, or envy, or harm to self-conception. The problem can be avoided if we see the numbers as reflecting well-being rather than strictly material payoffs. In that case, the material shift just described will, under plausible assumptions, make A worse off, and thus not count as a Pareto improvement at all. agreement would simply make them worse off – and in an important sense, and even in the most important sense, diminish their freedom as well. 
Some might object that such an agreement could never command unanimous support in the first place. Thus there would always be some people whose purpose in wearing custom-tailored suits had nothing to do with wanting to gain advantage over their fellow job seekers. And because the restriction would make such persons worse off, they could hardly be expected to support it. As a practical matter, then, a proposal to limit wardrobe expenses might receive a majority vote, but never a unanimous one. 
Yet we do not require unanimity as a precondition for unquestionably legitimate collective action in other spheres. There is no general power of veto on the part of isolated losers. Because most of us value cleaner air, for example, we require motorists to maintain emission-control equipment on their cars, even though some motorists do not care at all about air quality and would be delighted not to have to incur this extra cost. In these and other cases in which important common goals are at stake, we are prepared to restrict what might seem to be individual freedom in the name of the greater good, one of whose components is the perceived freedom of those who seek to emerge from a prisoner’s dilemma.110 
that society has an interest in discouraging negative emotions, above all envy, and that in any case it ought not to reward those who are envious. Perhaps the reason that some are harmed by the income of others is that they are envious; and though envy is a genuine hedonic loss, it might seem wrong to suggest that government has a legitimate interest in taxing those who induce envy in others. To be sure, our argument for reassessing willingness to pay would impose no tax on activities merely because they arouse envy. But the logic of the argument might seem to support that conclusion.111 
We do not attempt to answer here the complex question whether reducing envy is a legitimate basis for social and legal policy.112 On purely utilitarian grounds, it might seem to be, except for the fact that rewarding envy may have unfortunate social effects—by, for example, discouraging production and encouraging further envy, used strategically or otherwise.. At the same time, envy might have desirable social effects insofar as it encourages productive activities.113 For many people, the question of whether envy should count as a social cost will undoubtedly depend partly on whether it is unfairness that has produced the envy. 
What is far more important for current purposes is that we have not been urging attention to relative position on grounds of envy, for even the purely psychological 110 Alternatively, one might object that an agreement limiting what job seekers spend on suits is bound to be unenforceable. After all, if wearing a better suit than others really does help you win the job, there will be powerful incentives to evade the spending limit. One could buy a suit off the rack, for example, and then make under-the-table payments to a tailor who completely re-cut it. This objection might indeed prove decisive. But it concerns the practicality of the proposal, not its political legitimacy. 111 For a discussion of whether tax policy should respond to positional concerns, see Robert Frank, Luxury Fever, supra. 112 The point is treated in some detail in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 530-41 (1971); Rawls urges (to summarize a complex discussion) that rational people do not feel envy when inequalities are not unjust. 113 The question here is whether people would work too little in the absence of envy; it is possible that envy will induce excessive labor. For a relevant discussion, see Richard McAdams, Relative Preferences, 102 Yale LJ 1 (1992). consequences of inferior relative position often have nothing to do with envy. Envy entirely to one side, the wealth and consumption of other people sets the frame of reference for our evaluation of our own wealth and consumption, and this effect is impossible to avoid.114 The frame of reference is inevitably set socially, not individually, and our experience of social goods – and to some extent our reputation and our selfconception -- will be a function of that frame. In a remote mountain village in India, people can function well without owning an automobile, yet a middle-class citizen in Los Angeles cannot meet even the most minimal demands of social existence without one. This point generalizes to a broad spectrum of goods. When almost everyone has a computer produced in, say, 2005, your computer from 1995 will not only seem hopelessly slow and outdated, its performance will place you at a real competitive disadvantage; but if everyone had computers built in 1995, little or nothing would be amiss. Envy is not involved here; the problem is the frame of reference, which is not within any individual’s control. The point holds for people at every level of the economic ladder, except the extremely poor (for whom, it will be recalled, an absolute economic gain is always important, subjectively as well as objectively). Indeed, some of the effects described here appear driven largely by the same neurophysiological mechanisms that explain why a Helsinki resident's evaluation of a 60-degree day in February is more favorable that a Havana resident's evaluation of a 60-degree day in November. 
Contextual forces of this general sort influence almost every conceivable dimension of product quality evaluation. Writing more than two centuries ago, for example, Adam Smith introduced the important idea that local consumption standards influence the goods and services that people consider essential (or “necessaries,” as Smith called them). In the following passage, for example, he described the factors that influence the amount an individual must spend on clothing in order to be able appear in public “without shame.” 
By necessaries I understand not only the commodities which are indispensably necessary for the support of life, but whatever the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, even of the lowest order, to be without. A linen shirt, for example, is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. The Greeks and Romans lived, I suppose, very comfortably though they had no linen. But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a creditable day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to denote that disgraceful degree of poverty which, it is presumed, nobody can well fall into without extreme bad conduct. Custom, in the same manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life in England. The poorest creditable person of either sex would be ashamed to appear in public without them.115 114 It might be said here that those who have a lower frame of reference lack information about possible alternatives. This way of understanding the point is not entirely wrong, but it is imprecise and insufficiently informative; what we mean to emphasize is that the frame of reference is provided socially, not individually, and that any frame of reference will have effects, some of them adverse, on people who must live with it. If most people have cars that are 10% worse than they might otherwise be, the problem is not that people lack information, but that the relatively less good car produces more satisfaction that it otherwise would. 115 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Random House, 1937). 
The absolute standard of living in the United States today is vastly higher than it was in Adam Smith’s 18th-century Scotland. Yet Smith’s observations apply with equal force to contemporary industrial societies. Consider, for instance, the journalist Dirk Johnson’s recent account of the experiences of Wendy Williams, a middle-school student from a low-income family in Dixon, Illinois.116 
Watching classmates strut past in designer clothes, Wendy Williams sat silently on the yellow school bus, wearing a cheap belt and rummage-sale slacks. One boy stopped and yanked his thumb, demanding her seat. 
"Move it, trailer girl," he sneered. 
It has never been easy to live on the wrong side of the tracks. But in the economically robust 1990's, with sprawling new houses and three-car garages sprouting like cornstalks on the Midwestern prairie, the sting that comes with scarcity gets rubbed with an extra bit of salt. …. 
"I told this girl: 'That's a really awesome shirt. Where did you get it?'" said Wendy, explaining that she knew it was out of her price range, but that she wanted to join the small talk. “And she looked at me and laughed and said, ‘Why would you want to know?’" 
A lanky, soft-spoken girl with large brown eyes, Wendy pursed her lips to hide a slight overbite that got her the nickname Rabbit, a humiliation she once begged her mother and father to avoid by sending her to an orthodontist. 
For struggling parents, keenly aware that adolescents agonize over the social pecking order, the styles of the moment and the face in the mirror, there is no small sense of failure in telling a child that she cannot have what her classmates take for granted. 
"Do you know what it's like?" asked Wendy's mother, Veronica Williams, "to have your daughter come home and say, 'Mom, the kids say my clothes are tacky,’ and then walk off with her head hanging low.” 
An adolescent in 18th-century Scotland would not have been much embarrassed by having a slight overbite, because not even the wealthiest members of society wore braces on their teeth then. Rising living standards have altered the frame of reference that defines an acceptable standard of cosmetic dentistry. The toll that low relative position takes on individuals is no less legitimate because it occurs in psychological rather than explicitly monetary terms. 
To acknowledge that important economic, psychological, and even physical rewards are significantly affected by the spending of others is simply to note an obvious fact of the human condition. Because each individual's consumption affects the frame of reference within which others must make important choices, this frame of reference is no less legitimate an object of public concern than the quality of our air and water. 
As a purely descriptive matter, concerns about relative position cause current methods to underestimate public willingness to pay for risk reduction and a variety of other benefits by substantial margins. To the extent that we accept citizens’ preferences as the basis for policy, we have every reason to believe that correcting for this bias will lead to policy changes that meet public favor. 
In this section we venture some brief remarks on two questions that will eventually deserve extended treatment. The first involves the fact that many regulations involve subclasses of people, rather than (for example) all workers. The second involves the implications of our argument for the much-discussed question of nonwaivable contractual terms. 
Thus far we have written as if the effects of the program at issue will be felt by all persons in the relevant class – as if an environmental regulation would reduce all income by the same amount, or as if an occupational safety and health law would reduce workers’ earnings at the same time and in the same way. When this is the case, the regulation may produce something close to a Pareto improvement – holding relative position constant with respect to income (and thus imposing little or no loss on that dimension), but offering workers a benefit with respect to a nonpositional good (such as safety or leisure time). Of course things are more complicated than this. Some occupational and safety regulations, for example, will have distinct subclasses of workers – as, for example, when a regulation of coal dust applies largely in the mining industry, but without affecting most other workers at all,117 or when a regulation of HIV transmission affects workers in the dental and health care industries, but without applying elsewhere.118 
When regulation affects subclasses of workers, its positional effects will differ from the ones we described above, where all lose in absolute position, but where relative position is held constant. When subclasses are affected, some will gain in relative position and some will lose. Consider, for example, a safety regulation that applies only to dental workers. In contrast to a regulation that imposed an equally costly safety requirement on all workers -- which, as noted above, does not affect relative living standards -- this more limited regulation will reduce the relative living standards of dental workers. Thus, to the extent that the personal reference groups of dental workers consist largely of non-dental workers, the regulation will make it more difficult for dental workers to match the consumption standards that constitute their social frame of reference. 
In such cases, conventional estimates of how much individual dental workers are willing to pay for the regulatory benefit may not significantly understate the social value of the additional safety to dental workers. By hypothesis, the relative income of dental workers is declining. Even in this case, however, the private willingness of dental workers will understate the social value of the regulation. The reason is that the decline in relative living standards experienced by dental workers is counterbalanced by an increase in relative living standards experienced by others in their social comparison group. Relative position cannot be reduced in the aggregate. When some lose position, others necessarily gain. One upshot is that if dental workers are armed with perfect information, and if they know that their relative and absolute income will decline, a regulation that affects dental workers alone is less likely to be popular among dental workers than one that affects all workers in the relevant social comparison group. Another upshot is that while the more general regulation may produce something close to a Pareto improvement, with few real losers, the more targeted regulation cannot be justified on that ground. If government is nonetheless to use numbers of the sort we are urging, it will be on Kaldor-Hicks grounds – the gainers (including the gainers in terms of relative position) are gaining more than the losers (including the losers in terms of relative position) are losing. In other words, there is a distributional shift, in terms of relative position, with the more targeted regulation, whereas there is no such shift with the general one. 
In other cases, a regulation may not alter relative the relative position of those affected by it, even though it applies only to a narrow occupational group. For example, if the relevant social comparison group for coal miners consists largely of other coal miners, a safety regulation that applies only to coal miners would not alter relative position within that group. 
In practice, of course, most regulations are likely to fall somewhere along the continuum between these extremes. How, in such cases, is our analysis affected by the fact that regulations target subclasses of people, and not everyone at once? Although the extent to which an individual’s private willingness to pay understates the social benefits of a regulation generally will not vary with its breadth of coverage, the popularity of the regulation among those directly affected will tend to be lower the more narrowly the regulation is targeted. Political resistance to safety regulation is thus likely to be greater when regulation is done on a piecemeal basis than when it is proposed as part of a more comprehensive package. In addition, distributional concerns might be raised by piecemeal regulation insofar as it alters existing relative positions.119 
The argument we have made has obvious implications for the question whether law should impose nonwaivable terms – as, for example, through legislation involving maximum hours, job security, parental leave, health care, and leave time. Let us continue to assume that the cost of workers’ rights, when they are not waived, will be borne in whole or in part by workers, in the sense that the legal grant of a right, to workers, will result in a lower paycheck. The standard view is that if labor markets are generally competitive, nonwaivable terms cannot be justified as promoting the interests of the supposedly benefited class. 119 We do not believe, however, that this is the most serious of imaginable distributional concerns. In the abstract, there is no reason to think that the losers, in terms of relative position, had any entitlement to their antecedent relative position; and we are not, after all, speaking of redistribution from poor to rich. On distributional concerns and cost-benefit analysis, see various papers in Symposium, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). 
We submit that the standard view is far too simple. If workers care about relative position, nonwaivable rights might, in principle, make workers better off on the dimension along which they are helped (by giving them something important) while also not making them significantly worse off along the dimension along which they are apparently harmed (by decreasing their income while also decreasing that of everyone else). The promising possibility here is that legal initiatives will produce real gains of one or another kind (for example, leisure time, health care, job security, which are, by hypothesis, nonpositional goods), without producing real losses (because the only loss is to absolute position in terms of income). 
To offer slightly more detail: Assume that relative rather than absolute economic position is what most workers care about – that worker well-being would not be decreased by (say) a decrease in annual wages of $25, $50, or $100, so long as all workers face the same decrease. In that event, some nonwaivable terms, such as a right to job security, might be justified on the ground that the consequence of the new term is to decrease absolute income but to hold relative income constant, thus imposing little or no welfare loss on workers, while at the same time workers receive a substantial benefit, e.g., job security. As far as the worker is concerned, the substantial benefit is given essentially for free, because relative position is held constant – an apparently powerful argument for a wide range of nonwaivable workers’ rights. 
Of course this argument cannot be shown to be convincing in the abstract. It raises several questions. Perhaps relative position is also what workers carry about with respect to the new, legally granted benefit; perhaps this too is a positional good. Undoubtedly most goods have a mixture of positional and nonpositional features. As we have suggested, it does seem reasonable to say that many of the goods protected by nonwaivable terms –- health care, vacation time, leisure, job security -- have strong nonpositional features; it is important to have these things regardless of what other people have. At least these goods tend to be less observable than income, and also tend to be valued in large part for their absolute qualities. Of course it is important to ask to what extent income is actually a positional good for the relevant class of workers, since, for very poor workers, absolute income may be what matters most. 
Cost-benefit analysis is an increasingly pervasive practice within the national government, and it promises to grow as a tool of decision in the next decades. The first generation debates involved whether to do cost-benefit analysis at all. The second generation debates, now at their inception, involve debates about appropriate valuation. 
Our minimal submission here has been that the current numbers for regulatory benefits are too low, because they neglect the fact that people care about relative income position, not only absolute income position. In terms of the very framework used to defend cost-benefit analysis, the current numbers should be increased. More speculatively, we have suggested that the current numbers should be boosted by as much as 75 percent. More conservatively, analysts might use the arguments offered here as a rationale for choosing estimates near the upper end of the range of values produced by contingent valuation and hedonic pricing methods. 
We have also suggested that it is entirely legitimate for government to take account of positional externalities, which create a prisoner’s dilemma for those subject to them. People care about relative position not only and not even mostly because of envy, nor even because of status anxiety, but because the position of others sets a general frame of reference within which economic and social activity takes place.120 
The point bears not only on cost-benefit analysis, but also on a wide range of regulatory possibilities, including nonwaivable terms in the labor market. If relative position is what matters to most workers, nonwaivable terms, if generally imposed, may turn out to be justified even if the result of such terms is to lower workers’ salaries. This suggestion is a natural corollary of our basic suggestion here: Any approach to valuation that concentrates solely on absolute economic position, and neglects relative economic income position, will produce outcomes that are wrong in terms of the conventional arguments that justify cost-benefit analysis in the first place. 120 For recent evidence, see Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession (2000). 
Readers with comments should address them to: Robert H. Frank Goldwin Smith Professor of Economics, Ethics, and Public Policy Cornell University Johnson Graduate School of Management 327 Sage Hall Ithaca, NY 14850 Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
(September 1991). 
Contract (February 1992). 
Common Pools (February 1992). 
of AIDS (April 1992). 
1992). 
Economic Analysis (July 1992). 
Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
(November 1992). 
(January 1993). 
Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
(April 1993). 
(The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). 
(October 1993). 
(March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). 
(June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
(August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). 
Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
and Biotechnology (November 1995). 
1996). 
in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other 
Collectibles (July 1996). 
Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
1997). 
Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 
Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative 
Races (May 1997). 
Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). 
Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and 
Valuation in Law) (December 1997). 
Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal 
Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). 
Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting 
Bigger (February 1998). 
to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). 
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). 
Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Decisions (June 1998). 
Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
1998). 
Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
the Tax Law (November 1998) 
International Law (November 1998) 
Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) 
Evidence (February 1999) 
Information Goods (February 1999) 
Enterprise (February 1999) and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Cost-Benefit Default Principles" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 104, 2000). 
COST-BENEFIT DEFAULT PRINCIPLES 
Cass R. Sunstein This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=247884 Preliminary draft 3/6/01 All rights reserved 
In an important but thus far unnoticed development, federal courts have created a new series of “default principles” for statutory interpretation, authorizing regulatory agencies, when statutes are unclear, (a) to exempt trivial risks from regulation and thus to develop a kind of common law of “acceptable risks,” (b) to take account of substitute risks created by regulation, and thus to engage in “health-health” tradeoffs, (c) to consider whether compliance with regulation is feasible, (d) to take costs into account, and (e) to engage in cost-benefit balancing, and thus to develop a kind of common law of cost-benefit analysis. These cost-benefit default principles are both legitimate and salutary, because they give rationality and sense the benefit of the doubt. At the same time, they leave many open questions. They do not say whether agencies are required, and not merely permitted, to go in the direction they indicate; they do not indicate when agencies might reasonably reject the principles; and they do not say what, specifically, will be counted as an “acceptable” risk or a sensible form of cost-benefit analysis. Addressing the open questions, this Article urges that the principles should ordinarily be taken as mandatory, not merely permissive; that agencies may reject them in certain identifiable circumstances; and that steps should be taken toward quantitative analysis of the effects of regulation, designed to discipline the relevant inquiries. An understanding of these points should promote understanding of emerging “second generation” debates, involving not whether to adopt a presumption in favor of cost-benefit balancing, but when the presumption is rebutted, and what, in particular, cost-benefit analysis should be taken to entail. 
“Courts should be reluctant to apply the literal terms of a statute to mandate pointless expenditures of effort. . . . Unless Congress has been extraordinarily rigid, there is likely a basis for an implication of de minimis authority to provide exemption when the burdens of regulation yield a gain of trivial or no value.”1 
“It seems bizarre that a statute intended to improve human health would . . . lock the agency into looking at only one half of a substance’s health effects in determining the maximum level of that substance.”2 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Elizabeth Garrett, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for helpful comments on a previous draft. 1 Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 360-61 (DC Cir 1979). 2 American Trucking Association v. EPA, 173 F.3d 1027, 1052 (DC Cir 1999). “It is only where there is ‘clear congressional intent to preclude consideration of cost’ that we find agencies barred from considering costs.”3 
"In order better to achieve regulatory goals - for example, to allocate resources so that they save more lives or produce a cleaner environment - regulators must often take account of all of a proposed regulation's adverse effects, at least where those effects clearly threaten serious and disproportionate public harm. Hence, I believe that, other things being equal, we should read silences or ambiguities in the language of regulatory statutes as permitting, not forbidding, this type of rational regulation."4 
“The rule-implicit valuation of a life is high – about $4 million – but not so astronomical, certainly by regulatory standards, as to call the rationality of the rule seriously into question, especially when we consider that neither Hepatis B nor AIDS is a disease of old people. These diseases are no respecters of youth; they cut off people in their working years, and thus in their prime, and it is natural to set a high value on the lost years.”5 
Risks never exist in isolation. They are part of systems. For that reason, any effort to reduce a single risk will have a range of consequences, some of them likely unintended. 
airports, so as to make flying safer, it will also make flying less convenient and more expensive, and thus lead some people to drive instead.6 Flying is much safer than driving, and hence the FAA’s measures might increase the number of lives lost on balance. If noise levels are reduced at the Grand Canyon, so that people can enjoy the area in peace and quiet, air tourism there will have to be dramatically reduced, so that fewer people can enjoy the area at all.7 If the Occupational Safety and Health Administration increases regulation of benzene, a carcinogenic substance, it might lead companies to use an unsafe and perhaps a less safe substitute; it might also decrease wages of affected workers, and decrease the number of jobs in the relevant industry. People who have less money, and who are unemployed, tend to live shorter lives -- and hence occupational regulation might, under certain circumstances, sacrifice more lives 3 Michigan v. EPA, 213 F.3d 663, 678 (DC Cir 2000). 4 Whitman v. American Trucking Associations (Feb. 27. 2001) (Breyer, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judgment). 5 American Dental Association v. Martin, 984 F.2d 823, 827 (7th Cir. 1993). 6 See Robert W. Hahn, The Economics of Airline Safety, 20 Harv. . L. & Pub. Policy 791 (1997). 7 Grand Canyon Air Tour Coalition v. FAA, 154 F.3d 4 than it saves.8 Of course the unintended consequences of risk regulation might be desirable rather than undesirable – as, for example, where regulation spurs new pollution control technologies. 
Now consider the following cases: (EPA) to issue standards controlling any substance that “contributes significantly” to pollution problems in certain areas. EPA issues regulations governing relevant pollutants, but without considering the costs of compliance. Industries challenge the regulations on the ground that cost is a statutorily relevant factor.9 asked to promote fuel economy in automobiles “to the extent feasible.” NHTSA issues fuel economy standards that are admittedly feasible, in the sense that no one doubts that they are technologically and economically possible. But the Coalition for Automobile Safety, a public interest organization, contends that the effect of the standards will be to lead manufacturers to produce smaller and more dangerous cars. The Coalition contends that NHTSA acted unlawfully in failing to take this effect into account.10 
Administration to regulate toxic substances “to the extent feasible.”11 OSHA interprets this language to require it to consider whether the regulation is technologically feasible and whether it is “practicable,” economically speaking, for the industry to comply. OSHA imposes a regulation that is admittedly “feasible” under this test; but the statute cannot pass a cost-benefit test, because the benefits are low and the costs are high. Insisting that costs should be compared with benefits, industries subject to the regulation complain that it is unlawful.12 8 See Symposium, Risk-Risk Analysis, 8 J Risk and Uncertainty 5 (1994). 9 Cf. Michigan v. EPA, 213 F.3d 663, 678 (DC Cir 2000) (finding cost a permissible factor for the agency to consider under a similar statute; Lead Industries v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 (DC Cir 1980) (finding cost an irrelevant factor under provisions governing national ambient air quality standards). 10 See Competitive Enterprise Institute v. NHTSA, 956 F.2d 321 (DC Cir. 1992). 11 29 USC 655(b)(5). 12 ATMI v. Donovan, 452 U.S. 490 (1981). 
In which of these cases has the agency acted unlawfully? The question is of immense importance, both for regulatory policy and for the relationship between courts and agencies. One of my main purposes here is to demonstrate that federal law has now built a novel set of rules for statutory construction: the cost-benefit default principles. In brief, these principles (1) allow de minimis exceptions to regulatory requirements; (2) authorize agencies to permit “acceptable” risks, departing from a requirement of “absolute” safety; (3) permit agencies to take account of both costs and feasibility; and (4) allow agencies to balance costs against benefits. Taken as a whole, the cost-benefit default principles are making a substantial difference to regulatory policy, both because of their effects in litigated cases and because of their systemic consequences for regulation.13 
Even when thus specified, however, the default principles raise many questions. For the most part, the cost-benefit default principles say what agencies are permitted to do. It is not clear whether the default principles also mean that where statutes are ambiguous, agencies will be required to do any of these things. Nor do the principles give much indication of how agencies permitting ”acceptable” risks, or engaging in cost-benefit analysis, might be expected to proceed. What does it mean to say that agencies are permitted to “consider” costs? Would it be unlawful for an agency to say that even very high costs are worth incurring? In what way should the monetary valuation of human life be constrained? What counts as an acceptable or de minimis risk? How should agencies deal with the interests of future generations? 
However these questions are resolved, there can be no doubt that the cost-benefit default principles have emerged as a central part of what amounts to the federal common law of regulatory policy. Of course most of that common law, including the incipient federal common law of cost-benefit analysis, will emerge, and is emerging, from regulatory agencies, which have to decide how much to regulate, and why.14 Here agencies are the principal architects of what is 13 See Robert Percival et al., Environmental Regulation 425 (4th ed 2000). I discuss the relevance of the important decision in Whitman v. American Trucking Associations, S. Ct. (Feb. 28, 2001), below. 14 Hence, for example, different agencies have come up with different dollar figures by which to value statistical lives; this is a central part of agency-made common law of cost-benefit analysis. See the table in Matthew Adler and Eric Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J. Legal Stud. 1105, 1146 (2000). There are also striking variations in agency selection of discount rate, that is, the treatment of costs and benefits (such as lives saved) unmistakably a form of common law. But courts will undoubtedly play an important role,15 and it is in the interaction between agencies and judges that binding law will emerge. Among my largest purposes here is to understand the nature of the cost-benefit default principles, their legitimacy, and their future content.16 
There is a still more general point in the background. The steady emergence of the cost-benefit default principles signals the impending conclusion, in all branches of government,17 of a “first generation” debate over whether cost-benefit analysis is desirable.18 That debate appears to be terminating with a general victory for its proponents, in the form of a presumption in favor of their view (signaled above all, perhaps, by President Clinton’s substantial endorsement of cost-benefit balancing via Executive Order19). The “second generation” debates raise difficult questions about how (not whether) to engage in cost-benefit analysis – how to value life and health, how to deal with the interests of future generations, how to generate rules of thumb to simplify complex inquiries, how to ensure that agencies do what they are supposed to do, how and when to diverge from the conclusion recommended by cost-benefit analysis, how to determine the roles of agencies and courts in contested cases. My identification and assessment of the costbenefit default principles is intended as a contribution to these “second generation” debates. An especially important “second generation” question is in the future. See Comment, Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-Benefit Analysis, 65 U Chi L Rev 1333, 1364-69 (1998) (documenting variations ranging from 2% to 10%). These issues are treated below. 15 See, e.g., Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991) (striking down agency regulation of asbestos under statute calling for cost-benefit balancing). 16 It is important to see that many federal agencies do not comply with the apparent requirements of cost-benefit balancing in existing executive orders. Robert Hahn has shown that compliance is episodic and that a great deal needs to be done to systematize the process. See Robert W. Hahn et al., Empirical Analysis: Assessing Regulatory Impact Analysis: The Failure of Agencies To Comply With Executive Order 12866, 23 Harv J. L & PP 859 (2000). Here as elsewhere, there is a large difference between law on the books and law in the world. I do not attempt here to address the important issue of how to ensure compliance with principles that call for attention to costs and benefits. But judicial review of agency action can serve as a partial corrective at least, ensuring that in the egregious cases, agency action will be held invalid for failure to comply with the principles. This point is discussed at several places below. 17 Within Congress, see eg, 5 USC 1532, 1535; within the executive, see note supra. 18 For discussion, see Symposium, 29 J. Legal Stud. 837 (2000); Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions, 106 Yale LJ 1981 (1998). 19 See Executive Order 12866, 58 Fed Reg 51735 (1993). when, if ever, the presumption in favor of cost-benefit balancing is rebutted. I attempt to make a start in answering that complex question. 
The Article is organized as follows. Part II traces the rise of cost-benefit default rules in federal law; it begins with the emergence of cost-benefit principles, outlines statutory formulations, and then elaborates the default rules. Part III explores the underlying considerations in some detail – what supports the use of default principles generally and these default principles in particular. In Part III, I address the general question when the presumption in favor of the principles might be rebutted. Part IV turns to the question whether agencies should be required to do what the cost-benefit default principles permit them to do. Part V deals briefly with a set of issues that an agency must address if it is going to engage in cost-benefit balancing. Part VI is a brief conclusion. 
A. From 1970s Environmentalism to the Cost-Benefit State? A Prefatory Note 
I will not attempt to resolve the broad question whether cost-benefit analysis is a good idea, or whether the many recent initiatives in that direction should be approved or modified.20 But as background to an understanding of the costbenefit default principles, a brief discussion is in order. 
The rise of interest in cost-benefit balancing signals a dramatic shift from the initial stages of national risk regulation. Those stages were undergirded by might be called “1970s environmentalism,” which placed a high premium on immediate responses to long-neglected problems, which emphasized the existence of problems rather than their magnitude, and which was often rooted in moral indignation directed at the behavior of those who created pollution and other risks to safety and health.21 Defining aspects of 1970s environmentalism can be found in the apparently cost-blind national ambient air quality provisions of the Clean Air Act22 and in statutory provisions requiring “the best available technology” without an assessment of either costs or benefits.23 20 For a range of perspectives, see Symposium, 29 J. Legal Stud. 837 (2000). 21 See Bruce Ackerman and Richard B. Stewart, Reforming Environmental Law, 13 Colum. J. Env. L. 171 (1988). 22 42 USC 7409(b). 23 See, eg, 33 USC 1311(b)(1)AA), 42 USC 7411(a)(1), 7412(d)(2), 7475(a)(4), 7502(c)(1). 
No one should deny that 1970s environmentalism has done an enormous amount of good, helping to produce dramatic improvements in many domains, above all in the context of air pollution, where ambient air quality has improved for all major pollutants.24 Indeed, 1970s environmentalism appears, by most accounts, to survive cost-benefit balancing, producing aggregate benefits in the trillions of dollars, well in excess of the aggregate costs.25 EPA’s own estimates suggest that as a result of the Clean Air Act, there were no less than 184,000 fewer premature deaths among people thirty years of age or older in 1990 – and also that there were 39,000 fewer cases of congestive heart failure, 89,000 fewer cases of hospital admissions for respiratory problems, 674,000 fewer cases of chronic bronchitis, and 850,000 fewer asthma attacks.26 EPA finds annual costs of air pollution control at $32 billion, hardly a trivial number, but less than 4% of the annual benefits of $1.1 trillion.27 Even if the EPA’s own numbers show an implausibly high ratio, significant adjustments still reveal benefits far higher than costs.28 
accounting of the costs and benefits of regulation.29 In general, the report shows benefits in excess of cost. While the government’s own numbers should be discounted – agency accounts may well be self-serving – at least they provide a good place to start.30 In its 2000 report, OMB finds total regulatory benefits ranging from $254 billion to $1.8 trillion, with total costs ranging from $146 billion to $229 billion, for net benefits ranging from $25 billion to $1.65 trillion.31 A more disaggregated picture is also encouraging. In the transportation sector, the benefits range from $84 billion to $110 billion, with the costs from $15 billion to $18 billion, for net benefits of $66 billion to $95 billion.32 In the net benefits range from $9 billion to $12 billion. Much of the uncertainty stems from uncertainty about environmental benefits and costs, producing a range from $-73 24 See Economic Analyses at EPA 455-56 Pollution Policy, in Public Policies for Environmental Protection 77, 101-105 (Paul Portnoy and Robert Stavins eds 2000). 25 Id. 26 Portnoy, supra, at 102-03. 27 Id. at 109. 28 Id. at 113 (showing a benefit-cost ratio of 3 to 1). 29 Available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/index.html. 30 For a good but sometimes dated overview, see Robert Hahn, What Do The Government’s Own Numbers Tell Us?, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved (Robert Hahn ed 1995). 31 Id.; see 2000 report, charts, table 4. 32 Id. billion in net benefits to over $1.5 trillion in net benefits.33 For most government action, however, the benefits seem to exceed the costs.34 As especially good examples, consider the following regulations, all from recent years: 
But even though the overall picture is no cause for alarm, a closer look at federal regulatory policy shows a wide range of problems. Perhaps foremost is 
260-1900 330-360 50-1,200 110-1200 136-736 0 260-1900 510-580 50-1,200 110-1200 136-736 12,000113,000 260-1900 440-500 50-1,200 110-1200 136-736 -20,00086,000 exceptionally poor priority-setting, with substantial resources sometimes going to small problems, and with little attention to some serious problems.35 There are also unnecessarily high costs, with no less than $400 billion being attributable to compliance costs each year,36 including $130 billion on environmental protection alone.37 OMB’s own report shows some disturbing numbers: For the next fifteen years, OSHA’s methylene chloride regulation will have annual costs of $100 million and annual benefits of $40 million38; a regulation calling for roadway worker protection has benefits of $30 million, but equivalent costs; the costbenefit ratio for airbag depowering regulation seems bad, though there is uncertainty in the data39; EPA’s regulation for financial assurance for municipal solid waste landfills has monetized benefits of $0, but costs of $100 million, and this is expected for the next fifteen years.40 By way of general illustration, consider the following table,41 all drawn from recent regulations: 35 This is the theme of Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (1995). 36 Thomas Hopkins, The Costs of Federal Regulation, 2 J Reg and Soc. Costs 5, 25 tbl. 2 (1992). 37 Paul Portney and Robert Stavins, Regulatory Review of Environmental Policy, 8 J Risk and Uncertainty 111, 119 n. 1 (1995). 38 Id., table 12. 39 Id. 40 Id. 41 Id. Pulp and -150 to 0 paper effluent guidelines Ozone 0 standards Child restraint -40 to 40 system Vessel -220 response plans Nitrogen -57 to 29 oxide emission from new fossil fuel fired steam generating units -150 to 0 -150 to 0 
-240 to 0 -235 to 240 -840 to 1190 
-9,200 to -1000 -40 to 40 -220 -40 to 40 -220 -40 to 40 -220 -57 to 29 -57 to 29 -57 to 29 
These figures, drawn from regulations in a single year, show a less than coherent pattern of regulation, especially when Table 1 is put together with Table each year, 60,000 additional lives at no additional cost – and such allocations could maintain the current level of lives saved with $31 billion in annual savings.42 The point has been dramatized by repeated demonstrations that some regulations create significant substitute risks43 -- and that with cheaper, more effective tools, regulation could achieve its basic goals while saving billions of dollars.44 
In these circumstances, the most attractive parts of the movement for costbenefit analysis have been rooted not in especially controversial judgments about what government ought to be doing, but instead in a more mundane search for pragmatic instruments designed to reduce the three central problems of poor priority-setting, excessively costly tools, and inattention to the unfortunate sideeffects of regulation. By drawing attention to costs and benefits, it should be 42 Tammy Tengs et al., Five Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and Their Cost-Effectiveness, 15 Risk Analysis 369 (1995). 43 See John Graham and Jonathan Wiener, Risk vs. Risk (1995). 44 See, e.g., A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets in Clean Air (2000); Robert Stavins, Market-Based Environmental Policies, in Public Policies for Environmental Protection, supra, at 31, 35-55. possible to spur the most obviously desirable regulations, to deter the most obviously undesirable ones, to encourage a broader view of consequences, and to promote a search for least-cost methods of achieving regulatory goals.45 Notice here that so defended, cost-benefit analysis is not only an obstacle to unjustified regulation; it should be a spur to government as well, showing that it should attend to neglected problems. If cost-benefit balancing is supported on these highly pragmatic grounds, the central question is whether that form of balancing is actually producing what can be taken as policy improvements by people with diverse views about appropriate policy. 
On these counts, the record of cost-benefit analysis, at least within the EPA, is generally encouraging.46 Assessments of costs and benefits has, for example, helped produce more stringent and rapid regulation of lead in gasoline; promoted more stringent regulation of lead in drinking water; led to stronger controls on air pollution at the Grand Canyon and the Navaho Generating Station; and produced a reformulated gasoline rule that promotes stronger controls on air pollutants.47 In these areas, cost-benefit analysis, far from being only a check on regulation, has indeed spurred governmental attention to serious problems. 
goals at lower cost, or that do not devote limited private and public resources to areas where they are unlikely to do much good. With respect to asbestos, for example, an analysis of benefits and costs led the EPA to tie the phase-down schedules to the costs of substitutes, and also to exempt certain products from a flat ban.48 With respect to lead in gasoline and control of CFCs (destructive of the ozone layer), cost-benefit analysis helped promote the use of economic incentives rather than command-and-control regulation49; economic incentives are much cheaper and make more stringent regulation possible in the first place. For regulation of sludge, protection of farmworkers, water pollution regulation for the Great Lakes, and controls on organic chemicals, cost-benefit analysis helped regulators produce modifications that significantly reduced costs.50 For modern government, one of the most serious problems appears to be, not agency use of 45 For many examples, see Economic Analysis at EPA 46 See id. 47 See id. at 458. 48 Id. at 458. 49 Id. at 49-86; 131-169. 50 Id. at 458. cost-benefit analysis, but frequent noncompliance with executive branch requirements that agencies engage in such analysis.51 
Of course cost-benefit analysis is hardly uncontroversial.52 Insofar as both costs and benefits are being measured by the economic criterion of “private willingness to pay,” there are many issues. Poor people often have little ability and hence little willingness to pay; some people will be inadequately informed, and hence show unwillingness to pay for benefits that would make their lives go better53; and perhaps regulatory agencies should seek, not private willingness to pay, but public judgments, as expressed in public arenas.54 Society is not best taken as some maximizing machine, in which aggregate output is all that matters. Sometimes a regulation producing $5 million in benefits but $6 million in costs will be worthwhile, if those who bear the costs (perhaps representing dollar losses alone?) can do so easily, and if those who receive the benefits (perhaps representing lives and illnesses averted?) are especially needy. 
In view of these problems, the strongest arguments for cost-benefit balancing are based, not only on neoclassical economics, but also on an understanding of human cognition, on democratic considerations, and on an assessment of the real-world record of such balancing.55 Begin with cognition: People have a hard time in understanding the systemic consequences of one-shot interventions.56 Unless they are asked to seek a full accounting, they are likely to focus on small parts of problems, producing inadequate or even counterproductive solutions.57 Cost-benefit analysis is a way of producing that full accounting. Ordinary people also have difficulty in calculating probabilities, and they tend to rely on rules of thumb, or heuristics, that can lead them to make systematic errors.58 Cost-benefit analysis is a natural corrective here. Because of intense emotional reactions to 51 See Hahn, supra note. 52 For a general challenge to quantification, see Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions, 106 Yale LJ 1981 (1998). 53 See Adler and Posner, supra note. 54 Many of these points are pressed in Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993). 55 I attempt to develop this point in Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis, 29 J. Legal Stud. 1059 (2000). In the same vein, see Allan Gibbard, Risk and Value, in Values At Risk 94-112 (Douglas MacLean ed 1986). 56 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure (1994). 57 Id. 58 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment under Uncertainty: Heurisics and Biases, in Judgment unde Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3, 11 (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky eds 1982); Roger Noll and James Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive psychology for Risk regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud. 747 (1990). particular incidents, people often make mistakes in thinking about the seriousness of certain risks.59 Cost-benefit balancing should help government resist demands for regulation that are rooted in misperceptions of facts. 
With respect to democracy, the case for cost-benefit analysis is strengthened by the fact that interest-groups are often able to use these cognitive problems strategically, thus fending off regulation that is desirable, or pressing for regulation when the argument on its behalf is fragile.60 Here cost-benefit analysis, taken as an input into decisions, can protect democratic processes by exposing an account of consequences to public view. With respect to pragmatic considerations, a review of the record suggests that cost-benefit balancing leads to improvements, not on any controversial view of how to value the goods at stake, but simply because such balancing leads to more stringent regulation of serious problems, less costly ways of achieving regulatory goals, and a reduction in expenditures for problems that are, by any account, relatively minor.61 
problems that I have identified. Everything depends on questions of implementation, and there are also hard questions about appropriate valuation, questions to which I shall return. Sometimes respect for rights, or concerns about irreversibility, justify a rejection of cost-benefit balancing.62 The central point is that cost-benefit analysis can be seen, not as opposition to some abstraction called “regulation,” and not as an endorsement of the economic approach to valuation, but as a real-world instrument, designed to ensure that the consequences of regulation are placed before relevant officials and the public as a whole, and intended to spur attention to neglected problems while at the same time ensuring that limited resources will be devoted to areas where they will do the most good. So understood, cost-benefit analysis promises to attract support from a wide range of people with diverse perspectives on contested issues – a promise realized in the apparently growing bipartisan consensus on some form of cost-benefit balancing in many domains of regulatory policy.63 An understanding of this consensus is an indispensable background for approaching the cost-benefit default principles. 59 See George Loewenstein et al., Risk As Feelings (forthcoming 2001). 60 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 6 61 See Economic Analysis at EPA 455-76. 62 TVA v. Hill, 437 US 153 (1978). 63 See Executive Order 12866, 58 Fed Reg 51735 (1993). 
My emphasis here will be on the relationship between these points and judgemade default rules for statutory interpretation. But judge-made rules have considerable overlap with approaches taken explicitly by Congress, in statutes governing health, safety, and the environment. In fact there is undoubtedly an interaction effect between statutes and judge-made law, with default principles emerging from statutory formulations and vice-versa. Part of the argument for the cost-benefit default principles is that they do not reflect purely judicial polcymakng; those principles fit well with explicit enactments in other areas of the law. In dealing with the role of benefits and costs, federal statutes tend to fall in the following categories. I order the statutes roughly in accordance with their treatment of cost-benefit balancing, beginning with those that most flatly reject it, and ending with those that unambiguously embrace it. 
environmentalism, appear to forbid any consideration of cost. Perhaps the most famous example is the Delaney Clause, which for a long period prohibited food additives that “induce cancer in man or animal.”64 In the face of that language, the government sought to permit additives that, while carcinogenic, created only the most miniscule risks of cancer – lower risks, in fact than those that would come from eating one peanut with the FDA-permitted level of aflatoxins every 250 days, and much lower risks than come from spending about 17 hours every year in Denver (with its high elevation and radiation levels) rather than the District of Columbia.65 Nonetheless, the Delaney Clause was taken to forbid any form of balancing. 66 But a far more important example comes from the most fundamental provisions of the Clean Air Act, governing national ambient air quality standards.67 For a long time, the national ambient air quality standards set under that Act have been understood to be based on “public health” alone.68 The EPA’s judgment is to be grounded only in benefits; the cost of compliance is irrelevant. 64 21 USC 376(b)(5)(B). 65 Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108 (DC Cir 1987). 66 Id. 67 42 USC 7409(b). 68 Lead Industries v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 (DC Cir 1980). See also Union Electric Company v. EPA, 427 US 246 (1976) (holding that EPA may not consider economic and technological feasibility when approving or disapproving a state implementation plan). As noted, the issue is currently before the Supreme Court. See note supra. agency to address only “significant” or “unacceptable” risks. On this view, risks that do not reach a certain level need not and perhaps may not be addressed. This is the prevailing interpretation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, under both the toxic substance provisions and the more general provisions of the Act.69 A requirement of a “significant risk” falls short of cost-benefit analysis in the sense that it is entirely benefitsbased; costs are irrelevant as such. Once benefits fall below a certain threshold, regulation is not required and in fact is banned.70 Once benefits rise above that threshold, regulation is permissible, even if the benefits seem low in comparison to the costs. agencies to consider whether a regulation controlling one risk would, in so doing, create a substitute risk. If so, agencies are permitted to decline to regulate, or to regulate to a different point. These are clear statutory recognition of health-health tradeoffs, which arise when there are health concerns on both sides of the equation, from both more and less regulation.71 Many statutory “consideration” requirements72 have an unambiguous feature of this sort, for example by requiring agencies entrusted with reducing air pollution problems to take account as well of “non-air quality health and environmental impacts.” The Toxic Substances Control Act similarly requires the EPA to take account of substitute risks.73 the extent feasible” or “achievable.”74 These expressions are far from transparent. But as generally understood, such statutes put the focus not on benefits but solely on costs, and on costs in a particular way: They forbid an agency from regulating to a point that is neither (a) technically 69 Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO v. API, 448 US 607 (1980); International Union, UAW v. OSHA, 37 F.3d 605 (DC Cir 1994). 70 American Trucking Assn. v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027 (DC Cir 1999), appears to endorse this view for regulation of air pollutants, on the theory that an interpretation that would allow the EPA to pick any point it chooses would violate the nondelegation doctrine. 71 See John Graham and Jonathan Wiener, Risk vs. Risk (1995). 72 42 USC 7429 (a) (2) (OSHA); 42 USC 300g-1(b)(4)(B) (Safe Drinking Water Act). 73 Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991). 74 See, eg, 29 USC 655(b)(5). feasible, because the relevant control technology does not exist, nor (b) economically feasible, because the industry cannot bear the cost without significant or massive business failures.75 The line between (a) and (b), usually treated as crisp and simple, is hardly that; whether a requirement is technically feasible will usually depend on the level of resources that are devoted to it. In practice, (a) and (b) therefore overlap in practice, with (b) serving as a separate category only on those occasions when even with massive use of existing resources, the technology cannot be brought into existence. Noteworthy here is the fact that while a significant risk requirement is entirely benefits-based, a feasibility requirement looks exclusively at the cost side of the equation. Such a requirement is a “block” of excessively expensive regulation. “take into consideration” various factors, including cost, in addition to the principal factor to which the statute draws the agency’s attention (such as clean air or water). The most common formulation, now standard, asks the agency to produce the “maximum degree of reduction” that is “achievable,” after “taking into consideration [1] the cost of achieving such emission reduction, and [2] any [a] non-air quality health and environmental impacts and [b] energy requirements.”76 The basic idea here is that the agency is supposed to qualify the pursuit of the “maximum” achievable reduction by asking (a) whether the cost is excessive, (b) whether energy requirements would be adversely affected, and (c) whether the “maximum” requirement might create health and environmental harms by, for example, increasing water pollution though reducing air pollution. Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, EPA is similarly instructed to back away from the maximum feasible level if the benefits of the stricter standard “would not justify the costs of complying with the level.”77 against benefits, mostly through a prohibition on “unreasonable risks,” alongside a definition of “unreasonable” that refers to both costs and benefits. The most prominent examples are the Toxic Substances Control 75 452 US 490, 508-09 (1976); ADL-CIO v, OSHA. 965 F.2d 962, 980 (11th Cir 1992). 76 42 USC 7429 (a) (2) (OSHA); 42 USC 300g-1(b)(4)(B) (Safe Drinking Water Act). 77 42 USC 300g-1(b)(6). Act78 and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.79 Here the agency is required to calculate both costs and benefits and to compare them against each other. If the costs exceed the benefits, regulation is unacceptable. More recently, cost-benefit analysis is mandated by the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments.80 While Congress has thus far resisted efforts to impose a cost-benefit “supermandate” calling for a general decision rule based on cost-benefit balancing,81 Congress has enacted legislation requiring assessment, and public disclosure, of costs and benefits of major regulations.82 OMB itself has been required to produce annual accounting of costs and benefits.83 
In the abstract, the distinctions among these kinds of provisions should be clear enough. A statute that calls for consideration of substitute risks does not require cost-benefit balancing, because it is more narrowly concerned to ensure that risks (generally to health) do not increase on balance; under a statute calling for health-health tradeoffs, it is irrelevant that costs as such exceed benefits. A statute that requires that regulations be “feasible” is ordinarily taken to entail no comparison between costs and benefits, but a cost-focused inquiry into what industry is able to do -- whereas a statute that regulates “significant risks” is ordinarily taken to entail no comparison between costs and benefits, but a benefit-centered inquiry into the magnitude of the risk to be addressed. 
Of course many open questions remain, and I will return to those questions in Part IV. Let us simply take this menu of options as the background for understanding the nature of the cost-benefit default rules. 
If Congress has been genuinely clear, the legal issue is at an end. But statutory terms are frequently ambiguous (this is an initial difficulty), and sometimes an interpretive problem is created by general language that seems not to reflect 78 15 USC 2605 (a). 79 7 USC 136a(a). 80 42 USC 300g-1(b)(3). 81 See Cass R. Sunstein, Congress, Constitutional Moments, and the Cost-Benefit State, 48 Stan. L. Rev. 247 (1996). 82 5 USC 1532, 1535 83 See, eg, section 625 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1998, PL 10561; section 638(a) of the 1999 Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act. anything like congressional consideration of the specific point at issue (this is a second difficulty). In the face of statutory uncertainty, cases provide support for each of the following principles. For some of the principles, the law is more developed than for others; but each of the principles is an identifiable part of contemporary public law. 
-- Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to make de minimis exceptions to statutory requirements, by exempting small risks from regulatory controls.84 -- Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to take costs into account in issuing regulations. In its current form, this principle means that where statutes are ambiguous, agencies will have the authority to consider costs as well as benefits.85 -- Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to balance the health risks created by regulation against the health benefits created by regulation.86 -- Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to decline to regulate past the point where regulation would be economically or technologically feasible.87 -- Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be expected to balance costs against benefits in issuing regulations.88 
D. De Minimis Exceptions 
principle authorizing agencies to make de minimis exceptions to regulatory requirements. The initial case was Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy.89 There the agency banned acrylonitrile on the ground that it counts as a “food additive,” migrating in small amounts from bottle into drinks within bottles. The FDA concluded that the ban was justified on safety grounds, a conclusion that the court found inadequately justified. But what is more important in the case is the general language with which the court remanded the case to the FDA. The court stressed 84 See, e.g. Committee on Sensible Transportation, Inc. v. Dole, 826 F.2d 60 (DC Cir 1987). 85 213 F. 2d 663 at XX. 86 This principle appears to underlie American Trucking Association v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027 (1999). 87 See NRDC v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146 (DC Cir. 1987). 88 956 F.2d 321 (DC Cir 1992). 89 613 F.2d 947 (DC Cir 1979). governmental assistance.255 Notwithstanding this risk, there are several possible grounds for making adjustments. For example, an agency might make a reasonable upward adjustment if it believes that children are largely at risk -perhaps because more life-years are at stake, perhaps because children are unable to protect themselves and hence have a special equitable claim to government resources.256 A downward adjustment would similarly be lawful if the agency finds that mostly old people are at risk, so that any extensions of lives would produce a low level of savings in terms of life-years. Or the agency might reasonably conclude that special attention should be given to risks faced by poor people or African-Americans, on the ground that existing injustice is compounded in a situation in which health and environmental dangers are thus concentrated. 
Agencies should also be permitted to take into account the fact that people care about relative economic position, not only absolute economic position, and thus to adjust market valuations upwards.257 And the agency could reasonably employ “incidence analysis” to conclude that regulation should go forward notwithstanding the fact tha benefits exceed costs (see the reference to distributional considerations in OMB’s “best practices” document, in the appendix). If, for example, the benefits are $800 million, but enjoyed mostly by low-income workers, whereas the costs are $900 million, but faced mostly by consumers generally, it seems reasonable for the agency to go forward, at least if Congress has not expressly precluded that judgment. 
There is a larger point here. In addition to knowing the benefits and costs of regulation, it is necessary to know who bears those costs and enjoys those benefits, and also the particular nature of those costs and benefits. Suppose, for example, that an occupational safety and health regulation would have a total cost of $600 million, and that the monetized benefits would be $400 million (including, let us say, 40 lives saved per year, and hence $200 million in monetized savings from fatalities averted). Is it clear that this regulation should not go forward? For various reasons it is not. If the people who are saved are children or teenagers, the uniform lives saved number might undervalue the relevant benefits. Equally important: What does the $600 million mean, concretely? Does it mean that prices will increase, by a little, for many people? 255 See Viscusi, supra note (documenting abuses of this kind). 256 See the acknowledgement of the relevance of life-years in American Dental Association v. Martin, 984 F.2d 823, 827 (7th Cir. 1993). 257 See Robert Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2001). That cost might be worth incurring. So too if the consequence of the $600 million expenditure would be a reduction in annual profits for companies that already make billions. Or does the cost mean that poor people will lose their jobs? An ideal cost-benefit analysis would tell us something about the incidence of both costs and benefits. It makes sense to say that the “bottom line” numbers will not be decisive when an incidence analysis shows that those numbers should be adjusted to take account of the identify of the winners and losers. Of course it is possible to think that we lack the tools to engage in a good incidence analysis, or that an assessment of distributional issues will be subject to interest-group manipulation, and hence that the “bottom line” numbers should be used for pragmatic reasons.258 
While these points give agencies a degree of flexibility, they do not give them carte blanche, because they operate in limited domains, and because they come with a duty of reasoned explanation. This duty is procedural, but it is far more than that. In the Corrosion Proof Fittings case, for example, it is hard to see how the agency could have justified the extreme cost-benefit ratios that applied to certain bans on asbestos.259 
theoretical point of view, involves the selection of the appropriate discount rate. How should the agency value future gains and losses? In terms of ultimate outcomes, the choice matters a great deal. If an agency chooses a discount rate of 2%, the outcome will be very different from what it would be an agency chooses a discount rate of 10%; the benefits calculation will shift dramatically as a result. If a human life is valued at $8 million, and if an agency chooses a 10% discount rate, a life saved 100 years from now is worth only $581.260 “At a discount rate of five pecent, one death next year counts for more than a billion deaths in 500 years.”261 OMB suggests a 7% discount rate (see Appendix); but this is highly controversial. A key question is therefore: What legal constraints should be imposed on the agency’s choice?262 258 See Viscusi, Risk Equity, supra note. 259 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991). 260 See Michael Gerrard, Demons and Anegls in Hazardous Waste Regulation, 92 NW L Rev 706, 742-43 (1998). 261 Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons 357 (1984). 262 Valuable treatments include Richard Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Col L Rev 941 (1999); Comment, Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-Benefit Analysis, 65 U Chi L Rev 1333 (1998). 
My basic conclusion is that it is much harder to untangle the theoretical issue than to identify the appropriate posture of reviewing courts. In this highly technical area, courts should adopt a posture of deference, requiring agencies only to produce a reasonable explanation for their choice and to show a degree of consistency. Part of the reason for deference is the extreme complexity of the underlying issues. Part of the reason is the risk that an aggressive judicial posture would contribute to the “ossification” of rulemaking263 -- a particular problem in this setting, because any particular discount rate will be easy to challenge, with reasonable arguments suggesting that it is too low or too high.264 To understand these points, some details are in order. 
Usually statutes are silent on the question of appropriate discount rate. In fact I have been unable to find any statute that specifies a discount rate for agencies to follow. On judicial review, the question will therefore involve a claim that the agency’s choice is arbitrary. Here the national government shows strikingly (and inexplicably) variable practices. As noted, the Office of Management and Budget suggests a 7% discount rate,265 departing from a 10% rate in the 1980s.266 But agencies are not bound by OMB guidelines, and they have ranged from as low as 3% (Food and Drug Administration, Department of Housing and Urban development ) to as high as 10% (EPA).267 In fact the same agency sometimes endorses different discount rates for no apparent reason -with EPA, for example, selecting a 3% rate for regulation of lead-based paint as compared to 7% for regulation of drinking water, and 10% rates, respectively, for regulation of emissions from locomotives.268 Here government practice seems extremely erratic. 
From the purely economic standpoint, there are serious conundrums here.269 The impetus for discounting future effects stems from the judgment that in the context of money, discounting future benefits and losses is entirely rational, even simple: A dollar today is worth more than a dollar tomorrow. There are two reasons: investment value (or opportunity cost) and pure time 263 Thomas McGarity, Some Thoughts on “Deossifying” the Rulemaking Process, 1992 Duke LJ 264 I am therefore disagreeing with the endorsement of “hard look” review in the excellent Comment, supra note. 265 See OMB, Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs, 57 Fed Reg at 53520 (1992). 266 See appendix for details; see also Revesz, supra note, at 950. 267 See Comment, supra note, at 1336-37. 268 Id. at 1337. 269 See id. at 1341-1350; see also Appendix for excerpts from OMB’s own account. preference.270 A dollar today can be invested, and for this reason it is worth more than a dollar a year from now. An emphasis on the investment value of money yields a discount rate of roughly 5%-7%. Quite apart from this point, people generally seem to have a preference for receiving money sooner rather than later. People value current consumption more than they value future consumption; for this reason alone, $1000 is worth more today than it is in a decade. An inquiry into pure time preference produces discount rates of 1%-3%. Though they lead to different numbers, both points justify discounting future income gains and losses. 
So far, so good. The problem is that notwithstanding conventional wisdom among economists, these points are not easily taken to justify a discount rate for the nonmonetary benefits of regulation (see table 5 for an overview of such benefits). If a regulation will save ten lives this year, and ten years annually for the next ten years, it cannot plausibly be urged that the future savings are worth less than the current savings, on the ground that a current life saved can be immediately “invested.” The point about investment value, or the opportunity cost of using capital, seems utterly irrelevant here. With time preference, things are less clear. Perhaps people would rather save ten lives today than ten lives in a decade. But it is unclear that this is so; and even if it is, what moral status would such a time preference have? Almost certainly it makes sense to say that it would be worse for you to lose your limb now than to lose it in ten years; in the latter case, you will have ten years of use of the limb. And probably it makes sense to say that agencies should attend to life-years saved, not only lives saved. But holding all this constant, the death of a thirty-five year old in 2004 does not seem worth more than the death of a thirty-five year old in preference of the chooser in 2002 is certainly relevant to determining that chooser’s own fate, and the timing of risks that might come to fruition for that chooser; but the chooser’s preference cannot easily be used to determine the fate of someone not yet born. 
These points suggest that, as Richard Revesz suggests, it is important to distinguish two issues that go under the name of “discounting” and that have yet to be separated in administrative practice: (a) latent harms, in the form of exposures whose consequences will occur late in someone’s lifetime; and (b) harms to future generations.271 It is reasonable to say that latent harms should count for less than immediate ones, since they remove few years from people’s lives. Some kind of discount rate is sensible here, although OMB’s 7% figure is probably too high.272 The case of harms to future generations, or people not yet born, is altogether different, and in that case the usual grounds for discounting monetary benefits are quite inapplicable. For this reason some people think that no discounting is appropriate for the nonmonetary benefits of regulation.273 On this view, a life-year saved is a life-year saved, and it does not matter, for purposes of valuation, when the saving occurs. 
But there is a major objection to this way of proceeding: It would appear to require truly extraordinary sacrifices from the present for the sake of the (infinite) future. Perhaps the “failure to discount would leave all generations at a subsistence level of existence, because benefits would be postponed perpetually for the future.”274 On the other hand, it is not clear that the assumption behind this objection is convincing. Technological and other advances made by the current generation benefit future generations as well, and hence impoverishment of the current generation would inevitably harm those who will come later.275 In any case there is a hard ethical question here – how much the current generation should suffer for the benefit of the future – and a judgment against discounting would not answer that question unless we were sure that as a matter of policy, we should be engaging in maximizing some aggregate welfare function.276 It is not at all clear that this form of maximization is the appropriate choice to make. 
At this point it should be clear that these issues are exceedingly complex and that agencies asked to engage in cost-benefit analysis have no clear path to an appropriate choice of discount rate. My principal topic, however, is not regulatory policy, but the implementation of the cost-benefit default principles. In the face of the underlying conundrums, the most that a reviewing court can require is a rationale for the agency’s choice that is both articulated and reasonable. There are several possibilities here,277 suggesting what courts should and should not do. 272 See id. at 981-87. 273 Id. at 987-1009 (offering a qualified version of this view). 274 See David Pearce and R. Kelly Turner, Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment 223-24 (1990). 275 Revesz, supra note, at 994. 276 Tyler Cowen and Derek Perfit, Against the Social Discount Rate, in Justice Between Age Groups and Generations 149 (Peter Laslett and James Fishkin eds. 1992). 277 For a good discussion, see Daniel Farber, Ecopragmatism (1999). ! Courts should not require costs and benefits to have the same discount rate, at least not if costs are to be absorbed in terms of dollars and benefits will come in terms of fatalities and illnesses averted. It follows that in Corrosion Proof Fittings case, the court of appeals was quite wrong to tell EPA to produce an “apples-to-apples comparison, even if this entails discounting benefits of a non-monetary nature.”278 ! Courts should not simply defer to agency decisions as a “policy choice,” as did one court in an unusually complex setting.279 What is necessary is some kind of explanation for the choice. ! Courts should acknowledge that good explanations can be given for a wide range of choices – between, say, a discount rate of 0% (for future generations, not latent harms) and 7% (OMB’s suggestion). So long as the agency gives a sensible rationale and departs from it only on the basis of articulated reasons, courts should respect the choice. The value judgments here can be reasonably disputed, and they should be made democratically, not judicially. It follows that in the context of discount rates, as elsewhere, the common law of cost-benefit analysis is to be developed at the administrative level, subject only to judicial review for reasonableness. 
In this Article I have attempted to identify the cost-benefit default principles, to defend their use, and to explore their meaning for the future. In the face of statutory ambiguity, courts are now permitting agencies to refuse to regulate when a significant risk is not shown; to refuse to regulate beyond the point where regulation is not feasible; to consider costs; and to engage in a form of cost-benefit balancing. At their least intrusive, the cost-benefit default rules allow the agency to go in the suggested direction when the statute is unclear. At their most intrusive, the principles require the agency to act in the way they suggest unless Congress has unambiguously said otherwise. 
I have argued on behalf of both the least and most intrusive version of the cost-benefit default rules, by suggesting that they are likely to give sense and rationality the benefit of the doubt. At the same time, I have urged that the argument on their behalf is presumptive only, and that in certain contexts, agencies have good reasons for embarking on a different course. The question is 278 Corrosion Proof Fittings, supa note, 947 F.2d at 1218. 279 880 F 2d at 465. whether agencies have been able to suffer a reasonable defense of their decision to that effect. 
I have also attempted to set out some guidelines for the future, both under the cost-benefit default principles and under statutes that point in the same direction. It is necessary for agencies to particularize the idea of “significant” and “de minimis” risks through quantitative guidelines. A large point here is that the statistical probability of harm is not all that matters; the size of the exposed population is important as well. “Feasibility” is not an off-on switch, and here too agencies should specify what they understand the term to mean, beginning with the admittedly vague notion that massive dislocations would be both necessary and sufficient to show that regulation is not feasible. We have seen that with respect to valuation of life and health, market measures can provide a good start, from which agencies are entitled to make reasonable adjustments. We have also seen that the most difficult issue involves selection of the appropriate discount rate. Reviewing courts should not require agencies to apply the same discount rate to life and health that they apply to money; with respect to discounting, there are good reasons to distinguish money from other goods. The most that courts can do is to impose ceilings and floors on agency judgments, by requiring a good rationale for whatever discount rate is chosen. 
The most general conclusion, signaled by the rise of the cost-benefit default principles, is that the nation is nearing the end of a “first generation” debate about whether to adopt a presumption in favor of cost-benefit balancing, and rapidly moving into a “second generation” debate about when the presumption is rebutted, and about what cost-benefit analysis specifically entails. If cost-benefit analysis is to be defended, it is not because of especially controversial judgments of value, but because of a belief that regulatory action should be judged largely in terms of its consequences.280 Suitably specified and understood, the cost-benefit default principles should be regarded, not as a technique for stalling desirable regulation, but as a pragmatic effort to ensure that regulation responds to serious problems rather than to trivial or imaginary ones. And if they are seen in these terms, the cost-benefit default principles operate not only a foundation for deterring regulation that promises to do less 280 Of course there is no way of assessing consequences, or even identifying them, that is entirely neutral on evaluative questions. What I mean to suggest is that agreed-upon understandings can do the necessary work here. See the outline of the track record of cost-benefit analysis at EPA, supra. 281 See the account, supra, of instances in which cost-benefit balancing spurred regulatory action. 
The following consists of excerpts from OMB’s “best practices” guidelines for cost-benefit analysis. Because the understanding of cost-benefit analysis is so much better developed within OMB than within courts and the legal culture, it is worth attending, with some care, to OMB’s suggestions. I have challenged some of OMB’s claims – especially on the appropriate discount rate – but there is no question that OMB has offered a helpful and thoughful treatment of many of the underlying problems. 
January 11, 1996 
Economic Analysis of Federal Regulations under Executive Order 12866 
. . . 
A. General Principles benefitcost analysis is that the benefits and costs often occur in different time periods. When this occurs, it is not appropriate, when comparing benefits and costs, to simply add up the benefits and costs accruing over time. Discounting takes account of the fact that resources (goods or services) that are available in a given year are worth more than the identical resources available in a later year. One reason for this is that resources can be invested so as to return more resources later. In addition, people tend to be impatient and to prefer earlier consumption over later consumption. 
(a) Basic considerations. Constant-dollar benefits and costs must be discounted to present values before benefits and costs in different years can be added together to determine overall net benefits. To obtain constant dollar estimates, benefit and cost streams in nominal dollars should be adjusted to correct for inflation. The basic guidance on discount rates for regulatory and other analyses is provided in OMB Circular A-94. The discount rate specified in that guidance is intended to be an approximation of the opportunity cost of capital, which is the before-tax rate of return to incremental private investment. The Circular A-94 rate, which was revised in 1992 based on an extensive review and public comment, reflects the rates of return on low yielding forms of capital, such as housing, as well as the higher rates of returns yielded by corporate capital. This average rate currently is estimated to be 7 percent in real terms (i.e., after adjusting for inflation). . . . 
Even those benefits and costs that are hard to quantify in monetary terms should be discounted.. . . . 
(b) Additional considerations. Modern research in economic theory has established a preferred model for discounting, sometimes referred to as the shadow price approach. The basic concept is that economic welfare is ultimately determined by consumption; investment affects welfare only to the extent that it affects current and future consumption. Thus, any effect that a government program has on public or private investment must be converted to an associated stream of effects on consumption before being discounted. 
Converting investment-related benefits and costs to their consumptionequivalents as required by this approach involves calculating the "shadow price of capital." This shadow price reflects the present value of the future changes in consumption arising from a marginal change in investment, using the consumption rate of interest (also termed the rate of time preference) as the discount rate. . . . 
are measured imperfectly because key parameters are not known precisely; instead, the economic analysis must rely upon statistical probability distributions for the values of parameters. Both the inherent lack of certainty about the consequences of a potential hazard (for example, the odds of contracting cancer) and the lack of complete knowledge about parameter values that define risk relationships (for example, the relationship between presence of a carcinogen in the food supply and the rate of absorption of the carcinogen) should be considered. 
. . . 
(a) Risk assessment. . . . Data relating to effects that can be identified may be sketchy, incomplete, or subject to measurement error or statistical bias. Exposures and sensitivities to risks may vary considerably across the affected population. These difficulties can lead, for example, to a range of quantitative estimates of risk in health and ecological risk assessments that can span several orders of magnitude. Uncertainties in cost estimates also can be significant, in particular because of lack of experience with the adjustments that markets can make to reduce regulatory burdens, the difficulty of identifying and quantifying opportunity cost, and the potential for enhanced or retarded technical innovation. All of these concerns should be reflected in the uncertainties about outcomes that should be incorporated in the analysis. 
The treatment of uncertainty in developing risk, benefit, and cost information also must be guided by the principles of full disclosure and transparency, as with other elements of an EA. Data, models, and their implications for risk assessment should be identified in the risk characterization. . . . . 
In order for the EA to evaluate outcomes involving risks, risk assessments must provide some estimates of the probability distribution of risks with and without the regulation. Whenever it is possible to quantitatively characterize the probability distributions, some estimates of central tendency (e.g., mean and median) must be provided in addition to ranges, variances, specified low-end and high-end percentile estimates, and other characteristics of the distribution. 
Overall risk estimates cannot be more precise than their most uncertain component. Thus, risk estimates should be reported in a way that reflects the degree of uncertainty present in order to prevent creating a false sense of precision. The accuracy with which quantitative estimates are reported must be supported by the quality of the data and models used. In all cases, the level of precision should be stated explicitly. 
Overall uncertainty is typically a consequence of uncertainties about many different factors. Appropriate statistical techniques should be used to combine uncertainties about separate factors into an overall probability distribution for a risk. . . . 
Uncertainty may arise from a variety of fundamentally different sources, including lack of data, variability in populations or natural conditions, limitations in fundamental scientific knowledge (both social and natural) resulting in lack of knowledge about key relationships, or fundamental unpredictability of various phenomena. The nature of these different sources may suggest different approaches. For example, when uncertainty is due to lack of information, one policy alternative may be to defer action pending further study. One factor that may help determine whether further study is justifiable as a policy alternative is an evaluation of the potential benefits of the information relative to the resources needed to acquire it and the potential costs of delaying action. When uncertainty is due largely to observable variability in populations or natural conditions, one policy alternative may be to refine targeting, that is, to differentiate policies across key subgroups. Analysis of such policies should consider the incremental benefits of improved efficiency from targeting, any incremental costs of monitoring and enforcement, and changes in the distribution of benefits and costs. . . . 
and costs is preferred where acceptable estimates are possible. However, monetization of some of the effects of regulations is often difficult if not impossible, and even the quantification of some effects may not be easy. Effects that cannot be fully monetized or otherwise quantified should be described. Those effects that can be quantified should be presented along with qualitative information to characterize effects that are not quantified. 
Irrespective of the presentation of monetized benefits and costs, the EA should present available physical or other quantitative measures of the effects of the alternative actions to help decisionmakers understand the full effects of alternative actions. These include the magnitude, timing, and likelihood of impacts, plus other relevant dimensions (e.g., irreversibility and uniqueness). For instance, assume the effects of a water quality regulation include increases in fish populations and habitat over the affected stream segments and that it is not possible to monetize such effects. It would then be appropriate to describe the benefits in terms of stream miles of habitat improvement and increases in fish population by species (as well as to describe the timing and likelihood of such effects, etc.). . . . 
regulation and those who enjoy its benefits often are not the same people. The term "distributional effects" refers to the description of the net effects of a regulatory alternative across the population and economy, divided up in various ways (e.g., income groups, race, sex, industrial sector). Benefits and costs of a regulation may be distributed unevenly over time, perhaps spanning several generations. Distributional effects may also arise through "transfer payments" arising from a regulatory action. For example, the revenue collected through a fee, surcharge, or tax (in excess of the cost of any service provided) is a transfer payments. 
Where distributive effects are thought to be important, the effects of various regulatory alternatives should be described quantitatively to the extent possible, including their magnitude, likelihood, and incidence of effects on particular groups. Agencies should be alert for situations in which regulatory alternatives result in significant changes in treatment or outcomes for different groups. Effects on the distribution of income that are transmitted through changes in market prices can be important, albeit sometimes difficult to assess. The EA should also present information on the streams of benefits and costs over time in order to provide a basis for judging intertemporal distributional consequences, particularly where intergenerational effects are concerned. 
There are no generally accepted principles for determining when one distribution of net benefits is more equitable than another. Thus, the EA should be careful to describe distributional effects without judging their fairness. These descriptions should be broad, focusing on large groups with small effects per capita as well as on small groups experiencing large effects per capita. Equity issues not related to the distribution of policy effects should be noted when important and described quantitatively to the extent feasible. 
. . . 
The calculation of benefits (including benefits of risk reductions) should reflect the full probability distribution of potential consequences. For example, extreme safety or health results should be weighted, along with other possible outcomes, by estimates of their probability of occurrence based on the available evidence to estimate the expected result of a proposed regulation. To the extent possible, the probability distributions of benefits should be presented. Extreme estimates should be presented as complements to central tendency and other estimates. If fundamental scientific disagreement or lack of knowledge precludes construction of a scientifically defensible probability distribution, benefits should be described under plausible alternative assumptions, along with a characterization of the evidence underlying each alternative view. . . . 
appropriate construct for valuing both benefits and costs. The principle of "willingness-to-pay" captures the notion of opportunity cost by providing an aggregate measure of what individuals are willing to forgo to enjoy a particular benefit. Market transactions provide the richest data base for estimating benefits based on willingness-to-pay, as long as the goods and services affected by a potential regulation are traded in markets. It is more difficult to estimate benefits where market transactions are difficult to monitor or markets do not exist. Regulatory analysts in these cases need to develop appropriate proxies that simulate market exchange. Indeed, the analytical process of deriving benefit estimates by simulating markets may suggest alternative regulatory strategies that create such markets. 
Either willingness-to-pay (WTP) or willingness-to-accept (WTA) can provide an appropriate measure of benefits, depending on the allocation of property rights. The common preference for WTP over WTA measures is based on the empirical difficulties in estimating the latter. . . . 
goods and services are to be valued at their market prices. However, in some instances, the market value of a good or service may not reflect its true value to society. 
If a regulatory alternative involves changes in such a good or service, its monetary value for purposes of benefit-cost analysis should be derived using an estimate of its true value to society (often called its "shadow price"). For example, suppose a particular air pollutant damages crops. One of the benefits of controlling that pollutant will be the value of the crop saved as a result of the controls. That value would typically be determined by reference to the price of the crop. If, however, the price of that crop is held above the unregulated market equilibrium price by a government price-support program, an estimate based on the support price would overstate the value of the benefit of controlling the pollutant. . . . 
In other cases, market prices could understate social values, for example where production of a particular good also provides opportunities for improving basic knowledge. 
. . 
A variety of methods have been developed for estimating indirectly traded benefits. Generally, these methods apply statistical techniques to distill from observable market transactions the portion of willingness-to-pay that can be attributed to the benefit in question. Examples include estimates of the value of environmental amenities derived from travel-cost studies, hedonic price models that measure differences or changes in the value of land, and statistical studies of occupational-risk premiums in wage rates. For all these methods, care is needed in designing protocols for reliably estimating benefits or in adapting the results of previous studies to new applications. The use of occupational-risk premiums can be a source of bias because the risks, when recognized, may be voluntarily rather than involuntarily assumed, and the sample of individuals upon which premium estimates are based may be skewed toward more risktolerant people. 
Contingent-valuation methods have become increasingly common for estimating indirectly traded benefits, but the reliance of these methods on hypothetical scenarios and the complexities of the goods being valued by this technique raise issues about its accuracy in estimating willingness to pay compared to methods based on (indirect) revealed preferences. Accordingly, value estimates derived from contingent-valuation studies require greater analytical care than studies based on observable behavior. For example, the contingent valuation instrument must portray a realistic choice situation for respondents -- where the hypothetical choice situation corresponds closely with the policy context to which the estimates will be applied. The practice of contingent valuation is rapidly evolving, and agencies relying upon this tool for valuation should judge the reliability of their benefit estimates using this technique in light of advances in the state of the art. 
Directly or Indirectly in Markets. Some types of goods, such as preserving environmental or cultural amenities apart from their use and direct enjoyment by people, are not traded directly or indirectly in markets. The practical obstacles to accurate measurement are similar to (but generally more severe than) those arising with respect to indirect benefits, principally because there are few or no related market transactions to provide data for willingness-to-pay estimates. 
For many of these goods, particularly goods providing "nonuse" values, contingent-valuation methods may provide the only analytical approaches currently available for estimating values. The absence of observable and replicable behavior with respect to the good in question, combined with the complex and often unfamiliar nature of the goods being valued, argues for great care in the design and execution of surveys, rigorous analysis of the results, and a full characterization of the uncertainties in the estimates to meet best practices in the use of this method. (b) Fatality risks. . . . 
Reductions in fatality risks as a result of government action are best monetized according to the willingness-to-pay approach. . . . Another way of expressing reductions in fatality risks is in terms of the "value of statistical lifeyears extended" (VSLY). For example, if a regulation protected individuals whose average remaining life expectancy was 40 years, then a risk reduction of one fatality would be expressed as 40 life-years extended. This approach allows distinctions in risk-reduction measures based on their effects on longevity. However, this does not automatically mean that regulations with greater numbers of life-years extended will be favored over regulations with fewer numbers of life-years extended. VSL and VSLY ultimately depend on the willingness to pay for various forms of mortality risk reduction, not just longevity considerations. 
. . . 
To value reductions in more voluntarily incurred risks (e.g., those related to motorcycling without a helmet) that are "high," agencies should consider using lower values than those applied to reductions in involuntary risk. When a higher-risk option is chosen voluntarily, those who assume the risk may be more risk-tolerant, i.e., they may place a relatively lower value on avoiding risks. Empirical studies of risk premiums in higher-risk occupations suggest that reductions in risks for voluntarily assumed high risk jobs (e.g., above 10-4 annually) are valued less than equal risk reductions for lower-risk jobs. However, when occupational choices are limited, the occupational risks incurred may be more involuntary in nature. 
As with benefit estimates, the calculation of costs should reflect the full probability distribution of potential consequences. Extreme values should be weighted, along with other possible outcomes, by estimates of their probability of occurrence based on the available evidence to estimate the expected result of a proposed regulation. If fundamental scientific disagreement or lack of knowledge precludes construction of a scientifically defensible probability distribution, costs should be described under plausible alternative assumptions, along with a characterization of the evidence underlying each alternative view. . . . 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
(Second Series) 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 1992). (February 1992). 1992). (July 1992). 
Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 1992). 
Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Adjudication (September 1993). 1993). Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 
Characteristics (November 1999) 
When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) and Satire (November 1999) on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) 
Ghost (February 2000) 
Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) (April 2000) (May 2000) (May 2000) 
Position (August 2000) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/ public_law_and_legal_theory Part of the Law Commons Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere. 
PUBLIC LAW AND LEGAL THEORY WORKING PAPER NO. 07 Culture and Government Money: 
A Guide for the Perplexed 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
2/16/00 working paper All rights reserved 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
Constitutional limits on government’s power to regulate the culture and the arts, newly salient in light of the controversy involving the Brooklyn Museum, are best understood by distinguishing among (a) content-neutral, (b) content-based, and (c) viewpoint-based restrictions, and also among (a) criminal and civil sanctions, (b) “penalties,” and (c) mere failure to fund. The resulting three-by-three matrix provides an understanding of the vast bulk of current constitutional law. At the same time, several serious puzzles are created by current law: the distinction between viewpoint discrimination and content discrimination can be thin in the context of art; it is hard to know what counts as a “mere” failure to fund; and the law contains important uncertainties about selective funding. There is discussion as well of government subsidies of the market for culture and art. 
Government devotes a great deal of money to the promotion of culture. With taxpayer money, the government supports artists, writers, musicians, and private institutions, including museums. But government must be selective; it cannot support all artists, or all museums, all of the time. With respect to culture, what are the limits on government’s power? When may government impose criminal or civil restraints, or withdraw benefits, or refuse to fund? These issues have become especially salient in light of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani’s effort to withdraw funding from the Brooklyn Museum, an effort growing out of his disapproval of the Museum’s controversial decision to display the show “Sensation.” 
In this essay I attempt to clarify the first amendment issues, principally by exploiting two sets of distinctions. The first is the distinction among 1) criminal and civil remedies, 2) penalties, and 3) “mere” failures to fund. The second is the distinction among 1) viewpoint-based rules, 2) viewpoint-neutral but content-based rules, and 3) content-neutral rules. For present purposes, the first set of distinctions should be * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay was originally produced for a joint School of the Art Institute-University of Chicago conference on issues arising from Mayor Giuliani’s effort to withdraw funding from the Brooklyn Museum. sufficiently clear. The second set of distinctions is designed to separate rules that aim at the speaker’s viewpoint (“no one may receive funding whose work opposes Christian theology”) from rules that aim at content but not viewpoint (“no one may receive funding unless their work deals with World War II”), and both from rules that do not turn at all on content (“no museum in New York may receive funding unless private donations are under $100,000 per year”). 
To get ahead of the story, and putting some qualifications and complexities to one side, the resulting set of constitutional principles looks like this: 
(the Brooklyn Museum case) Should be and probably is unconstitutional (?) 
constitutional (unless there is hidden viewpoint discrimination) 
outcome of a balancing test Depends on outcome of a balancing test Almost certainly constitutional 
The essay comes in four parts. Part I deals briefly with the simplest question, involving criminal and civil remedies imposed on art. Part II shifts to the general question of government largesse. After providing a brief treatment of government subsidy of culture, Part II explores the topic of “penalties.” Part III investigates the idea of a “mere failure to fund.” Part IV is a conclusion, with some observations about first amendment law in this context. 
The term “censorship” is a loaded and sometimes contested term, but it is usually taken to include any effort to impose criminal sanctions on speech. If the government seeks to criminalize private speech, including art, it faces an extremely heavy burden. Here the question is whether government can fit the speech at issue within the conventional categories of regulable speech, most prominently libel, incitement (“clear and present danger”), commercial speech, and obscenity. These are emphatically narrow categories.1 To show incitement, for example, government must demonstrate that the 1 See Stone et al., Constitutional Law (4th ed. 1996). speech at hand is both directed to incite, and likely to incite, imminent lawless action.2 It is hard to imagine artistic works that would be regulable under this standard. Notwithstanding the continuing controversy over whether “obscenity” should be regulable at all, it is clear that museums and artists have little to fear from the Supreme Court’s understanding of the constitutional standard. It was obvious, for example, that Robert Mapplethorpe’s work could not lawfully be counted as obscene, and his ultimate vindication in court was no surprise to informed observers. 
Though the law could have gone otherwise,3 what is true for criminal sanctions is equally true for civil remedies. If government authorizes a public enforcement official to collect civil fines for objectionable speech, or if it grants a right of recovery in tort to private litigants, it must meet the ordinary constitutional standards. It will be exceptionally difficult to meet this burden. 
There is one qualification to the discussion thus far: Content-neutral restrictions on speech meet a lower standard, one that involves a degree of balancing.4 The balancing requires an inquiry into the extent of the intrusion on the speech and the legitimacy and strength of the government’s justification for the intrusion. If, for example, government says that people may not use loudspeakers on the public streets after midnight, or may not engage in protected expression on private property, there is unlikely to be a legitimate constitutional complaint. The intrusion in speech is minimal and the government has good reason to protect people from loud noises on the streets after midnight. 
For the most part, however, this qualification is irrelevant to government control of art and museums: What would a content-neutral restriction look like in this context? We could imagine, perhaps, a performance artist who sought to defy generally applicable prohibitions on nudity in public places, and here there would be a genuine constitutional issue, with reasonable arguments both ways. But in general, criminal and civil remedies, in this setting, are likely to be based on the content of speech, and as such those remedies are overwhelmingly likely to be unconstitutional. 
The discussion thus far involved the simplest and most conventional first amendment cases. Shift now shift to a somewhat more complicated issue, arising whenever government attempts to eliminate “benefits” for those who have engaged in expressive activity of which government disapproves. These are cases involving what the complaining party would like to treat as “penalties” on constitutionally protected activity. The topic, then, is government withdrawal of subsidies.5 2 Se Brandenburg v. Ohio, 395 US 444 (1969). 3 See Schauer, Colum L Rev 4 See Stone et al., supra. 5 Of course criminal and civil sanctions can be seen as structurally identical. In such cases, government is also eliminating an entitlement, such as a property right, that is (speaking purely descriptively) governmentally conferred). 
To understand this problem, it is necessary to have some understanding of why, exactly, government subsidizes art and culture. As a matter of political reality, the answer lies partly in the self-interest of politicians and the electoral power wielded by people who want government to do exactly this. But there are arguments, and not merely power, involved here. First, art, music, and other cultural products often have a range of external benefits, and those benefits may not be adequately captured by artists and musicians; a government supplement may help to ensure an optimal level of protection. Second, the private market for culture may come with its own strings attached, and it is possible that private funding would ensure underproduction of art that is in some sense novel, unusual, or subversive. (Of course there is no assurance that public funding will sponsor such art.) Third, cultural products are desirable precisely because they are widely shared goods, and help to constitute a culture, providing a kind of social glue. A public museum, or a publicly sponsored celebration of one or another sort, may have exactly this function, which cannot easily be provided through the private sector. Consider, as possible examples, the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington, DC, and the famous “cows” exhibits throughout Chicago in the fall of 1999. 
With this background, let us define “penalties’ as the denial of benefits that would have been conferred if not for speech to which government objects. In the ordinary refrain, these are “penalties” on the exercise of what is claimed to be a constitutional right. Consider some easy cases from other contexts. A welfare recipient speaks out against the Mayor; welfare benefits are promptly withdrawn. A low-level government employee attends meetings for the Conservative Coalition; she is fired as a result. Someone with a government grant for scientific research turns out to be a member of the Socialist Party; when public officials learn about this fact, they withdraw the grant. In all of these cases, the first amendment has been violated. The government has used its power of “largesse” to punish the exercise of constitutional rights, by denying people benefits to which they would otherwise have been entitled, and by basing the denial on the exercise of constitutional rights. 
What does this mean in the cultural context? It means that government cannot withdraw, from a museum or artist, benefits to which either would be entitled, if the reason for the withdrawal is expression that is not independently punishable under the First Amendment. Suppose, for example, that government is leasing public property to a museum, but that in response to an exhibit to which government has objections, government cancels the release, or refuses to renew it (when it otherwise would). This is clearly a penalty, and therefore constitutionally unacceptable. This point is largely sufficient to resolve the problems raised by Mayor Giuliani’s effort to withdraw funds from the Brooklyn Museum as a result of a controversial and perhaps offensive exhibit. The best argument on behalf of the Mayor would be that he attempted a “mere” failure to fund (see below). But the facts reveal a penalty (on what would otherwise be the city’s course of action), not a mere failure to fund. The reason is that Mayor Giuliani proposed, not merely to deny funding to the exhibit in question, but to withdraw funds that had antecedently been committed to the Museum. There is an important general lesson here about government’s power to condition continued benefits on adherence to the government’s preferred views about speech content. 
A content-neutral penalty would be in a different category. Suppose, for example, that government finds it necessary to use buildings formerly leased to museums for other purposes, such as military functions or prisons. If so, there is unlikely to be a serious first amendment question. The best challenge would suggest that there is no good reason for the decision not to use the relevant buildings as an outlet for expression – that the shift from expressive to other purposes fails any sensible “balancing test.” This would be an uphill battle for plaintiffs, but the basic analysis is straightforward: It involves an assessment of the the strength and legitimacy of the government’s purposes, as compared with the burden on expressive activity. This is an analysis that is likely to lead courts to validate content-neutral measures that might otherwise count as objectionable penalties. 
When government is simply refusing to fund, its power is at the apex. In funding artistic work, government is inevitably selective, and if it is going to be selective, it is certainly permitted to make distinctions on the basis of content. Indeed, that is what selectivity means in this context. Content discrimination is inevitable. But there are many wrinkles here. They are best explored through distinguishing among a series of cases, actual and imaginable. 
Suppose that the government is funding private museums, on a per-exhibit basis. Suppose that it decides that for a certain year, it will provide funding only to projects that are done by American artists. It does this on the ground that it wants to support “domestic art.” There should be no constitutional problem with this decision. The government has a legitimate interest in funding American artists, and discrimination of this sort does not favor or disfavor any point of view, or indeed favor or disfavor any subject matter or speech of any particular content. To be sure, there might be some indirect connection between American citizenship and artistic content, and the first amendment problem would be heightened if the discrimination were conspicuously responsive to speech of a disfavored content.6 But in the absence of clear evidence of an implicit effort to regulate viewpoints, discrimination among artists is entirely acceptable. 
This view seems to follow from Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington,7 where the Court upheld a statute that allowed veteran’s organizations, but no other organizations, to deduct political contributions even if a substantial part of their activities were devoted to attempts to influence legislation. The Court emphasized that this distinction was not an effort to aim at the suppression of ideas, and that government could reasonably reward veterans in this way. The decision suggests that discrimination among artists should be generally be acceptable, so long as the discrimination is not a “cover” for viewpoint discrimination. Note that from this conclusion it does not follow that government could reserve funding to those who believe in God or who are prepared 6 Suppose, for example, that government imposed an “Americans only” policy immediately after a general funding program ended up subsidizing art that contained implicit criticisms of American culture. 7 461 US 540 (1983). to vote for the Republican party. Efforts of this kind should be invalidated on the ground that they amount to a form of implicit viewpoint discrimination, against both art (indirectly) and artists (directly). 
projects, for the year, relating to the subject of American history. Suppose that any museum is permitted to apply for funds, but no proposal will be considered unless it relates to American history. This decision is constitutionally objectionable. The government is not discriminating against any point of view. To be sure, it is favoring material of a certain subject matter, and this step is more controversial than 2 above. But a funding decision limited to a certain topic is unimpeachable. 
This answer would be easiest to reach if the funding decision at issue was one of a number of diverse decisions, as, for example, in a case in which one funding agency is selective in one way (American history only), another is selective in another way (World War II only), and yet another is selective in still another way (avant garde art). It would be somewhat harder if the funding restriction were global – if, for example, no government agency could fund art that did not relate to American history. In that case, it would be possible to fear viewpoint discrimination, and here a sense of context should be quite helpful. 
unambiguous viewpoint discrimination. Suppose, for example, that it decides to fund projects, for the year, relating to the subject of American history -- but it refuses to consider any project that “casts America or its leaders in an unfavorable light.” This is a harder case. At first glance, the refusal might seem plainly unconstitutional. Discrimination on the basis of viewpoint is he core concern of the first amendment,8 and the policy at issue plainly embodies viewpoint discrimination. On the other hand, government itself is perfectly entitled to speak in a viewpoint discriminatory way. If government officials decide, during a period of national celebration, only to celebrate and never to criticize, there would be no offense to the Constitution. Might not government funding be seen as analogous to government speech? If so, might not government be permitted to give funds only to programs of whose viewpoint it approves? 
The Court’s puzzling and ambiguous decision in Rust v. Sullivan9 seems to support this conclusion. There the Court appeared to held that Congress could discriminate on the basis of viewpoint in the grant of funds to private organizations engaged in family planning. More specifically, the Court said that Congress could require that taxpayer funds will be devoted only to “projects” in which those engaged in family planning do not counsel people about abortion, and do not engage in lobbying, dissemination of materials, and provision of speakers to increase the availability of abortion. In upholding this funding limitation, the Court said that government “has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the other,” and that its regulations were intended “to ensure that the limits of the program are observed.” It added that when 8 See RAV v. St. Paul. 9 500 US 173 (1991). “Congress established a National Endowment for Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles, it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and Fascism.” For the Court, it was crucial that the case involved no penalty but a mere failure to find. Here government “is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is simply insisting that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized.” 
Taken on its own, Rust might seem to stand for the broad principle that government can allocate its funds however it wishes, and hence that government can give money to the causes that it favors, to promote governmentally preferred points of view. In subsequent cases, however, the Court has raised serious questions about this reading of Rust. In Rosenberger v. Rector and Visitors of University of Virginia,10 the Court struck down a University of Virginia policy authorizing university subsidies of some student publications, but forbidding subsidies for student publications that “primarily promote or manifests a particular belief in or about a deity or an ultimate reality.” The University cited Rust, which appears strongly supportive of the selective subsidy. But the Court distinguished and narrowed its prior decision, in such a way as to leave unsettled the status of viewpoint discrimination in government funding. 
The Court explained that government can “regulate the content of what is or is not expressed [1] when it is the speaker or [2] when it enlists private entities to convey its own message.” Thus Rust was merely a case in which the government “used private speakers to transmit specific information pertaining to its own program.” This means that a government appropriation of “public funds to promote a particular policy of its own” can legitimately be accompanied by appropriate “steps to ensure that its message is neither garbled nor distorted by the grantee.” But it does not follow that government may impose “viewpoint-based restrictions” when the government “does not itself speak or subsidize transmittal of a message it favors but instead expends funds to encourage a diversity of views from private speakers.” In this case, the University of Virginia did not contend that those who were eligible for university support are the university’s agents; student organizations “are not subject to its control and are not its responsibility.” Thus when the university has decided to pay private speakers “who convey their own messages,” it “may not silence the expression of selected viewpoints.” 
There is obvious tension between Rush and Rosenberger; and the implications of the two cases, taken together, are far from clear. The distinction seems to be that in Rosenberger, the university did not contend that it was attempting to “convey its own message” or implement “its own program.” But what if the university said that its funding policies involved “its own program,” broadly speaking? What if the university denied that its purpose was “to encourage a diversity of views from private speakers”? What if the university said that it sought to encourage diversity, but subject to certain restrictions, on the ground that some funding decisions would create too much entanglement between the state and religion? In any case Rosenberger could be understood broadly or very narrowly, and as the opinion is written, it is not clear that it 10 515 US 819 (1995), stands as a barrier to a government decision to refuse to fund art that it deems offensive, even on the basis of viewpoint. 
Compare in this regard the Court’s most sustained encounter with question of government funding of the arts, National Endowment for the Arts v. Finley.11 There the Court was asked to assess a statute asking the NEA, in establishing procedures to assess the artistic merit of applicants, to “take[e] into consideration general standards of decency and respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public.” The Court upheld the statute against facial attack; but what is especially important here is what the Court did not say. The Court did not conclude that government could give out taxpayers funds however it chose. It did not accept a “strong” reading of Rust v. Sullivan, which would allow government to choose, in its discretion, its preferred candidates for public subsidization. Instead the Court found it necessary to emphasize that the statute at issue was not, in fact, a form of viewpoint discrimination. 
Thus the Court said that the considerations listed in the statute are “susceptible to multiple interpretation,” and nothing in law was introduced that “in practice, would effectively preclude or punish the expression of particular views.” Both the “decency” and the “respect” criteria could be understood in a constitutional fashion, as, for example, by attempting to give special consideration to “projects and productions . . . that reach, or reflect the culture of, a minority, inner city, rural, or tribal community.” Because artistic funding was necessarily based on content discrimination, this case was not covered by Rosenberger, which there was (what the Court called) an indiscriminate effort to encourage a diversity of views from the private sphere. And the Court left open the possibility that in particular cases, “the denial of a grant may be shown to be the product of invidious viewpoint discrimination.” Thus any “penalty on disfavored viewpoints” would present “a different case.” Justice Souter dissented on the ground that this was in fact a form of viewpoint discrimination; Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, concurred in the result, invoking a strong reading of Rust and suggesting that government may “earmark NEA funds for protects it deems to be in the public interest without thereby abridging speech.” 
It is not easy to reconstruct the law as constituted by Rust, Rosenberger, and Finley. The strong version of Rust appears to have been rejected by the Court; unambiguous viewpoint discrimination appears to be impermissible, even with respect to the allocation of government funds for art. On the other hand, government may itself speak as it wishes, and if government wants to create a “program” for a proposed point of view, and to enlist private speakers in the endeavor, it is permitted to do exactly that. Thus, for example, government might have a project for democracy, or a project for the reduction of smoking among teenagers, and it might pay private speakers to help. It might even be possible for government to have a special artistic project whose purpose is to encourage (for example) celebration of the nation’s natural beauty. In such cases, Rust would probably govern. But where the government is engaged in a general funding process for art, it is unlikely to be permitted to discriminate on the basis of viewpoint. Of 11 US course the distinction between a specific program and a general funding process is very far from transparent. 
deciding which museums to fund; suppose too that it chooses to fund museums that offer traditional art, rather than museums that specialize in avant-garde art. This is a somewhat harder case than those discussed those far. The reason is that the line that is being drawn is not merely based on subject matter (which would be acceptable), nor is it based purely on viewpoint (which would be unacceptable). Many artistically informed observers would think that a government distinction of this kind – traditional art yes, avant garde art no -- encodes something more like viewpoint discrimination. Probably the best conclusion is that since government is permitted to fund artistic work of a certain content, it can favor work that fits within aesthetically preferred categories, so long as it is not expressly discriminating against any point of view. If government is refusing to fund art that is perceived to threaten existing government institutions, the argument for invalidation is strengthened. And here too it matters whether the line is local or global. 
and Brooklyn Museum, government is likely to be refusing to fund projects out of deference to the sensibilities – moral, aesthetic, and otherwise – of taxpayers. What is the status of this deference? 
Here the key question involves the content of the relevant taxpayer sensibilities. If taxpayers are calling for viewpoint discrimination, the case is no different from case (3) above. If the government’s decision is based on the judgment that taxpayers would find the relevant work “offensive to traditional morality,” the issue is a bit harder, because the viewpoint discrimination is less obvious. But it seems reasonable to say that in such a case, the government, acting at the behest of taxpayers, is attempting to entrench traditional morality, and this is a form of viewpoint discrimination. This conclusion shows why Finley was such a difficult case; the Court’s conclusion that the statutory criteria showed content but not viewpoint discrimination seemed to be rooted in a judgment that they were merely “factors” and did not require government to accept or reject any particular position. 
If the government is deferring to purely aesthetic judgments, it is likely to be on firm ground. Here the analysis would be similar to that in 1, 2, and 4 above. If the government chooses not to fund a show consisting of avant-garde art, the ground that taxpayers would find the show “confusing” and “ugly,” it is probably acting constitutionally, unless there is reason to suspect that something else is at work. 
The upshot of this discussion is that deference to taxpayers should be analyzed similarly to any other form of selective funding. What matters is the ground for the selectivity. 
refusal to fund in the first instance, rather than a withdrawal of funds that have been promised. This case appears to fall between a mere failure to fund and an unambiguous penalty. Suppose, for example, that government withdraws support from an exhibit that turns out to have objectionable content; suppose too that no viewpoint discrimination is involved. If this would be acceptable as a failure to fund in the first instance, would it be objectionable if it is a withdrawal of funds already promised? 
A more concrete illustration: The government has decided to fund a series of museums. It withdraws funding from several shows of avant garde art. If the government withdraws funding from the museum in general, there is an unambiguous penalty, and the action is unconstitutional. If the government had refused to fund in the first instance, there would be (by hypothesis) no constitutional problem, But suppose that the withdrawal is a genuine withdrawal, not an initial failure to fund, and suppose too that it does not involve general defunding of the museum, but is limited to the shows that were receiving the relevant funding. Is the withdrawal of funds worse than a refusal to fund in the first instance? 
It might seem plausible to think that it is. A withdrawal of funds might well offer better evidence of an illicit government motive. When a selective funding agency refuses to give out resources in the first instance, its decision may be based on any number of grounds. And when funds are withdrawn, the case might seem closer to a penalty rather than a refusal to fund. In the case of withdrawn funds, it might seem sensible to say: Here the government is deciding to eliminate a benefit that it would otherwise confer, merely because of the exercise of a constitutional right. But this seems to be little more than a form of wordplay. Unless there really is grounds to believe an illicit motive is at work, and unless there is a penalty in the sense described in Part II above, a withdrawal should probably be treated the same as a failure to fund. 
My purpose in this Essay has been largely descriptive. I have attempted a sympathetic reconstruction of existing law, designed to show some coherence and order, and to generate answers to most of the disputed questions. Notwithstanding the evident order of most of the law, some serious difficulties remain. Consider just three points: • 
It is not clear that the distinction between viewpoint discrimination and content discrimination is always coherent, especially in the area of arts funding. At the very least, many forms of content discrimination might be seen (so to speak) as forms of viewpoint discrimination. Suppose, for example, that government has decided that it will not fund avant garde art, or that it wants to restrict the art that it subsidizes to material dealing with American culture. Would we not suspect that these lines embed a form of implicit viewpoint discrimination? Even without such suspicion, might we not think that any such distinction explicitly depends, in one way or another, on a certain viewpoint, embodying judgments about other viewpoints? 
The line between a penalty and a refusal to fund is far from secure. Whether there is a penalty depends on specification of the normal state of affairs, and when government is frequently involved in funding the arts, identification of the normal state of affairs may be quite unclear. Suppose, for example, that government refuses to fund an exhibit, because that exhibit contains art of which the government disapproves. Why oughn’t we to say that the museum is not receiving resources to which it would “otherwise” be entitled, that is, to which it would be entitled if not for its presentation of governmentally disfavored art? The question suggests that many “mere” failures to fund could as well be seen as “penalties.” Probably the best solution is to acknowledge the point but to insist that some forms of content discrimination are inevitable so long as government is funding at all. But this solution does not dissipate the difficulty of making the distinction, in principle, between penalizing and failing to fund. 
The Court’s decisions in Rust, Rosenberger, and Finley do not suggest anything like a straightforward line between permitted and prohibited arts funding. The special problem is in figuring out whether there is a special program (where selective funding is fine, even if based on viewpoint) or a general set of grants (where viewpoint discrimination is banned). Apparently government is not permitted to make this decision on its own, but it is not clear why, and it is not clear when the government’s characterization will be found unacceptable. 
These are difficult questions; but it is nonetheless possible to identify principles to resolve the bulk of imaginable problems. Government cannot impose criminal or civil sanctions on speech, outside of a few narrow categories of cases. The analysis of “penalties” proceeds in the same way. If people would otherwise have been entitled to government benefits, the benefits cannot be denied on the ground that people have engaged in speech that is not independently regulable under the first amendment. 
The hardest cases involve selective funding decisions, where government is engaging in what it attempts to categorize as a “mere” failure to fund. If government is refusing to fund material for content-neutral reasons, there is most unlikely to be a constitutional objection. If government is refusing to fund material because of a preference for a certain subject matter, there is no constitutional problem, unless the subject matter distinction is suggestive of viewpoint discrimination. Arts funding that involves viewpoint discrimination is forbidden, even if there is a “mere” failure to provide resources – at least outside of contexts in which government explicitly and selfconsciously adopts a specific program to encourage a specific point of view. These conclusions leave many open questions, but they create a framework with which to resolve most real-world disputes, and also to begin inquiries, both practical and theoretical, about the most troublesome cases. Readers with comments should address them to: 
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS: THE SEVERITY SHIFT 
How doesjuy deliberationaffect the predeliberationjudgments of individualjurors?In this paperwe make progress on that question by reporting the results of a study of over 500 mock juries composed of over 3000 juy eligiblecitizens. Ourprincipalfindingis that with respect to dollars, deliberationproduces a "severity shift," in which thejury's dollarverdict is systematically higher than that of the median of its jurors' predeliberationjudgments. A "deliberationshift analysis" is introduced to measure the effect of deliberation. The severity shift is attributed to a "rhetoricalasymmetry," in which argumentsfor higher awards are more persuasive than argumentsfor lower awards. When judgments are measured not in terms of dollars but on a rating scale of punishment severity, deliberation increased high ratings and decreased low ratings. We alsofind that deliberationdoes not alleviate the problem of erratic and unpredictable individual dollar awards, but in fact exacerbates it. Implicationsfor punitive damage awards and deliberation generally are discussed. 
INTRODUCTION 
How, if at all, is the outcome of group deliberation different from a statistical aggregation of individual predeliberation judgments? How might jury deliberations depart from the median or mean of individual judgments? Speculation is not difficult. Perhaps juries converge toward the midpoint of individual judgments; perhaps juries move away from, or toward, the high or low of individual extremes. Perhaps juries produce an outcome that is more just or more accurate; perhaps juries generate more predictable and less erratic judgments, so that unpredictability at the individual level, or at the level of the mean or median of (six or twelve) individual judgments, is further reduced by deliberation at the * Herbert D. Kelleher/MCorp Professor of Business, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Austin. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
*** Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University. The authors are grateful to Exxon Company, U.S.A. for support of the research in this Empirical Study. Exxon bears no responsibility for our analysis or our conclusions; the data reported and the opinions expressed here belong to the authors. For helpful comments we are grateful to participants in workshops at Harvard, Stanford, and the University of Chicago, and also to Robert MacCoun, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, and Michael Saks. 
1139 jury level. A pervasive question is whether a deliberating jury has the effect of producing outcomes that treat the similarly situated similarlyperhaps in terms of civil or criminal liability (do people who have engaged in the same conduct receive the same verdict?), perhaps in the determination of appropriate damage awards, either compensatory or punitive (do similarly situated people receive the same awards?).' 
In this Empirical Study, we attempt to make some progress on these questions. We do so principally by reporting the results of an extensive study of mock juries (over 3000 people and 500 juries in total). Six-person juries were asked to deliberate about the appropriate punishment in civil cases involving personal injury in two ways, by setting punitive awards in dollars and by indicating, on a rating scale, the severity of the punishment they wished to inflict on the defendant. Our most important and general finding is that with respect to dollar awards, deliberation produces a severity shift: Thejury's dollar verdict is typically higher, and often far higher, than the median judgment of the same jury's individual members before deliberation began. 2 
To compress a long story, our specific findings are these: " Jurors followed a simple principle of majority rule in deciding whether to impose punitive damages at all; the decision to award damages was largely a function of the majority of individual predeliberation votes. " Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments favored a high punishment rating, deliberation typically increased the rating of the group. " Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments favored a low punishment rating, deliberation typically decreased the rating of the group. * Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments favored large dollar awards, deliberation typically increased the dollar award of the group, often dramatically so: Among juries that voted to award punitive damages, 27% reached dollar verdicts that were as high as or higher than the highest predeliberation judgment of their individual members. " Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments favored small dollar awards, deliberation typically increased 559, 587 (1996) (Breyer, J., concurring) ("Requiring the application of law, rather than a decisionmaker's caprice, does more than simply provide citizens notice of what actions may subject them to punishment; it also helps to assure the uniform general treatment of similarly situated persons that is the essence of law itself."). 
produces more accurate judgments, becausejuries are more likely than individual jurors to apply the reasonable doubt standard correctly. See RobertJ. MacCoun & Norbert L. Kerr, Asymmetric Influence in Mock Jury Deliberation: Jurors' Bias for Leniency, 54 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 21, 21-22 (1988) (reviewing literature and empirical findings regarding hypothesis that deliberation makes jurors more lenient). the dollar award of the group, though the increase was smaller than for high dollar awards. 
With respect to punishment ratings, juries were neither more nor less consistent and predictable than the mean or median juror. With respect to dollar awards, juries were less consistent and predictable than the mean or median juror. With respect to dollar awards, jury deliberation substantially increased unpredictability. 
For punishment ratings, the principal effect of deliberation was thus to move group judgments toward a more extreme version of the original tendency (low or high) of individuals within that group. This effect is, we believe, closely related to phenomena frequently studied under the labels of "risky shifts," "choice shifts," and "group polarization." 3 For dollar awards-the more important issue-the effect of deliberation was to produce a severity shift, such that juries' dollar verdicts were systematically higher than the median predeliberation judgments of jurors. The severity shift stems, we believe, from a systematic rhetoricaladvantage held by those arguing for higher dollar awards, an advantage that operates independently of the particular case at issue. 
The study reported here has the advantage of being extremely close to-in fact part of the design is based on-an earlier one involving not deliberating juries but responses of 899 individuals to punitive damage cases. 4 Our earlier study focused on the question of predictability, which we understood to be a function of whether the judgment of one randomly selected jury is a good predictor of the judgment of other randomly selected juries judging the same case. 5 We found a remarkable consensus in the judgments of individual jurors, made on a rating scale, about a series of personal injury cases. That study therefore found that with respect to the underlyingmoral evaluation,groups of different (non-deliberat3. See, e.g., Daniel J. Isenberg, Group Polarization: A Critical Review and MetaAnalysis, 50 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 1141 (1986); Craig McGarty et al., Group Polarization as Conformity to the Prototypical Group Member, 31 Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 1, 3 (1992); David G. Myers & Helmut Lamm, The Group Polarization Phenomenon, 83 Psychol. Bull. 602 (1976); Russell Spears et al., De-Individuation and Group Polarization in Computer-Mediated Communication, 29 Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 121 (1990). More particularly, our data show a choice shift. See Johannes A. Zuber et al., Choice Shift and Group Polarization: An Analysis of the Status of Arguments and Social Decision Schemes, 62J. Personality and Soc. Psychol. 50, 50 (1992) (defining "choice shift" as "the difference between the arithmetic mean of the individual first preferences before discussion... and the group decision"). 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 Yale L.J. 2071 (1998). This presentation is geared to analysis of the legal issues; the underlying data, and relevant psychological points, are presented in more detail in Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, & Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, 16J. Risk & Uncertainty 49 (1998). 
unpredictability. We use the term "erratic" as a synonym for unpredictable. ing) jurors6 are likely to reach similar conclusions about the relative severity of different cases.7 Thus all-white, all-poor, all-rich, all-educated, all-poorlyeducated, all-male, all-female, all-young, and all-old juries would probably come to very similar rankings of a set of cases, at least in personal injury cases and very possibly elsewhere. 8 It follows that the median of the individual judgments of any random group of twelve people is likely to produce a moral judgment that predicts, with a reasonably high degree of accuracy, the judgment of any other group of twelve people (also defined by the median of the individual judgments of group members). 
At the same time, the study found that assessment of cases in terms of dollars produces great unpredictability.9 To be sure, ranking the cases by their aggregate dollar awards or by their aggregate punishment ratings produced very similar orderings of the cases from least to most severe. But dollar awards are unpredictable in the specific sense that punishment ratings are not: The judgment of any particular group of twelve (determined by taking the median judgment as that of the group) is a poor predictor of the judgment of other groups of twelve (determined in the same way). 10 We showed that the same case, presented to different jurors, will elicit similar ratings but quite different dollar awards, producing a situation where the similarly situated are not treated similarly. This unpredictability may well produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants or in any case muffled and confusing signals.' We concluded that the unbounded dollar scale contributes to evidently erratic monetary judgments in many areas of the law, including not only punitive damages but also compensatory awards in cases involving libel, sexual harassment, 12 "statistical juries" consisting of random groups of 12 individual judgments, with the mean or median judgment of each group of 12 reflecting the "verdict." See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2100-01. 

variability in punitive damage awards, such as compensatory damages, case category, case particulars, and jurisdiction. It has been proposed by some authors that when analyzed using these factors, punitive awards are reasonably predictable. See Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26J. Legal Stud. 623, 644 (1997). Because we hold these factors constant, they cannot account for the unpredictability that we documented previously and that we document here. 
Punitive Damages, 5 Sup. Ct. Econ. Rev. 179, 184 (1997). 
Sexual Harassment (Catharine MacKinnon & Reva Siegel eds., forthcoming 2000) (manuscript on file with the Columbia Law Review) (finding that compensatory and punitive damage awards are random in sexual harassment cases). pain and suffering, 13 tress. 14 and intentional infliction of emotional dis 
Our earlier study did not involve deliberating juries. In the absence of evidence about how deliberation would affect individual judgments, we analyzed statistical juries, by treating the median of a deliberating group as a good predictor of the ultimate judgment of the deliberating jury.15 We did so on the ground that the received wisdom seemed to support this approach. 16 In this Empirical Study, we investigate the received wisdom-and find overwhelming evidence that it is wrong. The dollar awards of deliberating groups were not close to any measure of central tendency; they were much higher. We also explore several questions of importance to those interested in damages, juries, and deliberative processes in general.1 7 The answers have implications not only for punitive awards, but also for other damage judgments (certainly when these are hard to monetize), possibly for questions of civil and criminal liability as well, and even for deliberation generally. 
As we have noted, the present study finds that as compared with the median of individual predeliberation judgments, deliberation significantly increases high dollar awards, increases high punishment ratings, decreases low punishment ratings, and modestly increases low dollar awards. To summarize a complex analysis, it follows that deliberatingjuries produce even more unpredictabilitythan was observedfor statisticaijuries. Moreover, dollar responses vary much more across juries than does punitive intent on a rating scale. Thus we find shared moral judgments but erratic dollar awards not only for individuals but for deliberative juries as well. 
What follows at the normative level? Without an independent theory of what awards should be, the evidence found here does not show whether deliberation, and the resulting severity shift, make dollar awards better or worse. The safest and most cautious conclusion is that to the extent that unpredictable punitive damage awards raise a serious concern, the problem is not removed by deliberation. To the extent that unpredictability is a problem, our findings about the outcomes of jury deliberation-predictable moral judgments but unpredictable dollar awards-raise further questions about whether punitive awards should be made by juries, or instead by judges or some kind of administrative insti13. See David W. Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior to Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 256, 259 (1989) (arguing that tort awards for pain and suffering "vary significantly and that neither the specific facts of the case nor differing theoretical views on the functions of the awards can explain such variation"). 

Disagreement 199-230 (1996) (exploring how a deliberative perspective can provide guidance in dealing with moral disagreement in politics); our analysis of group polarization raises some questions for the deliberative conception of democracy, though we leave those questions largely implicit here. tution.1 8 
Perhaps juries should be asked to come up with punishment ratings, not with dollar awards, and the legal system should "translate" jury ratings into dollar awards by some preset formula. Our findings also raise a set of novel issues about deliberation as a whole. Is deliberation anything to celebrate if groups tend to move further in the direction suggested by their original tendency-if (for example) high dollar awards go up, low punishment ratings go down, and groups opposed to gun control and in favor of affirmative action end up thinking a more extreme version of what individual group members originally thought? We offer a brief discussion of some of these issues, with particular reference to the effects of deliberation on punishment ratings and on dollar awards. 
Jury awards of punitive damages have become one of the most controversial topics in modem public law. 19 To take just one example, an award of $4.9 billion against General Motors attracted a great deal of national attention in July of 1999.20 It is now clear that the Due Process Clause imposes constraints on permissible awards. 21 A number of statutes, enacted and proposed, create punitive damage "caps,"22 and high awards have become a primary impetus for tort reform in general. 23 There are also controversial issues about punitive damage awards in civil 547, 549-52 (2000) (challenging jury verdicts on ground that they are often irrational). The point is generally discussed in Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2126-30. 
Tort Law 160-65, 184-85, 223-24 (1987) (developing economic model of damages); Marc Galanter & David Luban, PoeticJustice: Punitive Damages and Legal Pluralism, 42 Am. U. L. Rev. 1393, 1394-96 (1993) (defending punitive damages as a morally necessary part of a private law system); David G. Owen, The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40 Ala. L. Rev. 705, 705-08 (1989) (analyzing punitive damage rules in terms of moral theory and arguing that moral philosophy supports such rules); A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869, 870-76 (1998) (arguing that punitive damages should only be imposed if an injurer has a chance of escaping liability for an injury it caused, and claiming that current legal rules fall short of this goal); Symposium, The Future of Punitive Damages, 1998 Wis. L. Rev. 1, 1-426 (offering various assessments of the "future of punitive damages"). 
at A9. 
1533 & n.158 (1997) (discussing actual and proposed caps). A number of state supreme courts have invalidated such measures. See, e.g., State ex rel. Ohio Academy of Trial Lawyers v. Sheward, 715 N.E.2d 1062, 1090-95 (Ohio 1999) (striking down caps on punitive and general damages as violating state constitutional provisions of right to jury trial and due process). 
(1997) (listing "[e]xcessive, unpredictable, and often arbitrary damage awards" as a factor motivating the bill). For a general discussion skeptical of the attention paid to high awards, see Marc Galanter, Shadow Play: The Fabled Menace of Punitive Damages, 1998 rights cases, most notably in sexual harassment cases. 2 4 At the same time, the problems created by punitive awards bear on related questions in other areas of the law, involving, for example, compensatory damages for pain and suffering, libel, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. 25 Similar problems arise in the area of criminal sentencing whenever an administrative agency is asked to impose civil fines.2 6 
Participants in the legal system are often asked to come up with some kind ofjudgment, factual or normative, and then to "translate" that judgment into a dollar award. In the area of punitive damages, it is necessary to make some assessment of the character of the defendant's behavior, and then to ascertain the appropriate dollar amount to be paid to the plaintiff by way of punishment. In many domains, compensatory judgments raise similar puzzles. While juries are nominally expected to find a "fact"-what amount of money would restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante?-it is often extremely difficult to monetize the relevant harm, and normative judgments undoubtedly play a significant role. 27 In the case of punitive damages, it is extremely difficult for even experts to agree on what dollar amount constitutes adequate "punishment" or produces an appropriate deterrent signal. 
In all of these areas, the legal system is pervaded by a degree of unpredictability and variance, resulting in apparent arbitrariness, as the similarly situated are treated differently.28 An extensive study of pain and suffering cases found that as much as 60% of the awards consists of Wis. L. Rev. 1, 5-11 (arguing that the concern over high awards is the result of exaggerations). 
compensatory and punitive damage awards were "quite random" in sexual harassment cases). 
Assessments: A Proposal for the Comparative Additur/Remittitur Review of Awards for Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 1109, 1112-13 (1995) (analyzing common law methods of valuing nonpecuniary harms and discussing additur/ remittitur review as a means to control outlying awards); Randall R. Bovbjerg et al., Valuing Life and Limb in Tort: Scheduling "Pain and Suffering," 83 Nw. U. L. Rev. 908, 909 (1989) (proposing three alternative frameworks for valuing non-economic damages); Leebron, supra note 13, at 288-309 (reviewing the factors that cause variability in awards for pain and suffering prior to death). 
Remedies of Common Law, 1998 Wis. L. Rev. 131, 132-33. 
range of damage awards as a "lottery"); Michelle Chernikoff Anderson & Robert J. MacCoun, Goal Conflict in Juror Assessments of Compensatory and Punitive Damages, 23 Law & Hum. Behav. 313, 327-28 (1999) (discussing two studies that suggested jurors often fail to "compartmentalize" compensatory and punitive damages, leading to "leakage" between the two categories). 
Importance of Punitive Damages Awards, 42 J.L. & Econ. 527, 540-45 (1999) (suggesting that punitive damage awards vary in ways not explained by injury or defendant characteristics); Leebron, supra note 13, at 309-11 (discussing the implications of variability in awards). "noise," unexplained by objective factors. 29 A study of all reported sexual harassment cases was unable to connect either compensatory or punitive awards to any case characteristics that might be thought to explain jury judgments. 30 The punitive damage area is more complicated-a point to which we will return shortly-but there is evidence of significant variability here as well. 31 The most ambitious claims to the contrary attempt to show that once the compensatory award has been made, the punitive award becomes predictable to a certain degree; 32 but the same data show that at the time a case is filed (before the amount of compensatory damages is known), it is very hard to know the expected punitive award, and that there is generally a great deal of "noise" in outcomes. 33 
To understand the current study, it is necessary to understand its predecessor by way of background. Our earlier study involved a demographically diverse set of jury-eligible citizens from Travis County, Texas. 34 The relevant experiment involved twenty-eight personal injury cases, which respondents were asked to assess in one of three ways: outrageousness, on a rating scale (0 to 6); intent to punish, on a rating scale (also 0 to 6); and actual awards, on the unbounded scale of dollars. As noted, our principal findings were twofold. People's moral judgments are widely shared and predictable-in fact strikingly so-at least in the personal injury cases investigated in this study.35 But in spite of this point, and in the presence of shared moral judgments, people's judgments on a dollar scale-the scale, or "response mode," favored by the legal system-are highly unpredictable, in the sense that the median 
degree of unpredictability. Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, show that the logarithm of punitive awards is predicted reasonably well from a set of objective characteristics of cases in which awards were made; in particular, the authors show that the compensatory award is a fairly good predictor of the punitive award. See id. at 644. But the authors themselves note that the range of possible awards in regular (i.e., not logarithmic) dollars is still quite high even after controlling for the many factors in their regression model, including compensatory damages. For example, in their data, for a case with a $500,000 compensatory award, 5% of punitive damage awards would be $10,000 or less, but another 5% would be $6,500,000 or more. See id. at 657; see also Karpoff& Lott, supra note 28, at 540-45 (discussing the difficulty of predicting punitive damage awards and the consequences of that difficulty). 
Note also that predictability can be understood in different ways: (a) predictability exists when case characteristics predict punitive awards; (b) predictability exists when the judgments of one group of six or twelve predicts the judgments of another group of six or twelve; (c) predictability exists when an actor can assess expected liability when something goes wrong. Our principal emphasis here is on (b); Eisenberg's emphasis is on (a); both are relevant to (c). Of course the three are closely related in practice. We offer a more detailed treatment of predictability below. See infra Part II.B.8-9. 
judgment of any group of twelve people is an extremely poor predictor of the median judgment of any other group of twelve people.3 6 Lacking a reliable understanding of how deliberation would affect individual judgments, we used the median of groups of twelve individuals, randomly selected from our pool of 899 citizens and combined them into a large number of statistical juries.3 7 At least in this setting, the primary identifiable source of the noise is the difficulty jurors have in translating their punitive intent into dollars. Dollar awards are highly variable despite the existence of shared moral judgments. 
To explain why the use of the dollar scale would produce variability, we developed a theory of juror punitive damage judgments. The outrage model assumes that ajuror's basic response to a defendant's behavior is a reaction of outrage, which in turn leads to an intent to punish, which can be expressed on different response scales (for example, a dollar amount or a rating from 0 to 6). These scales vary not only in their complexity, but also in the precision and consistency of the measurements that they provide: Some scales are less reliable than others, in the sense that they are less consistent at producing the same answer to the same question, or different answers to different questions. As we have already seen, the dollar scale is in this sense an extremely unreliable expression of punitive intent, and it produces a high degree of arbitrariness. 
To understand the reasons for the noise in dollar damage judgments, we explored the close analogy between our findings with respect to the dollar scale and the outcome of psychological research on the problem of "magnitude scaling," which occurs when people are asked to indicate the intensity of their subjective responses to stimuli-the brightness of lights, the loudness of noise-along an unbounded numerical scale.3 8 In some of these experiments, the participants are given a "modulus," which specifies the number that is to be assigned to a particular standard stimulus. In other experiments, the participants are not given a modulus. In the absence of a modulus, variability increases dramatically; some participants assign high numbers, others assign low numbers. With the dollar scale, the underlying problem is that people are being asked to scale without a "modulus," that is, without a standard that would help give meaning to various numbers on the scale. 39 
The key point is that when a modulus is supplied, the variability greatly decreases; in its absence, respondents adopt their own moduli. Juries asked to assess punitive damage awards are in effect asked to scale without a modulus. Unpredictable judgments are a natural result even when people do not disagree about the significant issues 4 0-even when, that is, there is a kind of "bedrock" moral judgment in place. 41 If this point is correct, it helps explain the observed variability in dollar awards in many areas of the law. It also helps explain the disparities that led to the enactment of the Sentencing Guidelines; 42 before the guidelines, judges were being asked, in effect, to scale without a modulus, since the relevant scale (years) has a great deal in common with the dollar scale (i.e., bounded below at zero, but with great discretion at the high end). 
Our earlier study did not, however, involve deliberating juries, and a natural question was whether deliberating juries would produce similar or quite different results. Perhaps deliberation would reduce variability. 43 An alternative possibility was that the process of collective delibera40. For similar results in the context of compensatory pain and suffering awards, see MichaelJ. Saks et al., Reducing Variability in Civil Jury Awards, 21 Law & Hum. Behav. 243, tion would move the group further in the direction of the initial tendency suggested by the individual judgments. In any case, a test of deliberating juries would help to confirm or deny the wisdom of the decision to treat the median judgment of a group of twelve as the likely judgment of any deliberating group (for purposes of creating statistical juries). Hence our main purpose in this Empirical Study was to examine the effects of jury deliberation on dollar awards and, in particular, to see whether deliberation would increase or decrease predictability. In the process, we also hoped, as a secondary goal, to find out whether the original findingsshared moral judgments but erratic awards-would be replicated with a new sample of citizens from a different state, and with new and richer case materials. 
Jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited by a survey firm and paid $35 for their participation. Each juror was randomly assigned to a six-person jury, and each jury was assigned to a response mode order; half of the juries judged dollar awards first and punishment ratings second, and the other half completed the tasks in the opposite order. Each jury judged only one case, which was the subject of both its punishment rating (on a scale of 0 to 8) and its dollar award. Six juries (out of a total of 480) had only five members because an insufficient number of participants showed up at a given appointment time. A pilot test of twenty-nine juries was conducted in Phoenix to test the materials and procedure. Because adjustments were very minor, these juries were added to the main sample and the combined sample was analyzed together. Therefore, a total of 3048 citizens participated in 509 juries. 
The procedure consisted of four parts. In Part 1, all participants in a given session viewed a videotape for the case they would consider, read the corresponding written materials, and recorded their personal judgment of the appropriate punitive damage award or punishment rating. In Part 2, participants were randomly assigned to juries of six members, which were given thirty minutes to deliberate on and reach a unanimous verdict on a punitive damage amount or a punishment rating. In Part 3, a new individual response form was distributed, which asked participants to record a second personal judgment for the same case, using the type of verdict (punishment rating or dollar damages) complementary to the one they had already used. In Part 4, eachjury again deliberated to reach a unanimous verdict on this second type of judgment for the same case. Thus, for each individual, and for each jury, we have both a dollar award and a punishment rating for the case they considered. We use the terms dollar and punishment judgments to refer to the dollar awards and punishment ratings made by individuals. For juries we will refer to these as dollar and punishment verdicts. For purposes of understanding realworld behavior, the dollar awards are most important. We inquire into punishment ratings both to understand the relation between punishment ratings and dollar awards, and to see the effect of deliberation on both of these. 
How much should the defendant be punished because of their actions, and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses the jury's judgment of the appropriate level of punishment. 
None 
0 $ Damages 1 
Mild 2 3 
Substantial 4 5 
Severe 6 7 
Severe 8 
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the amount ofpunitive damages that the jury agreed on in the blank below. 
The case materials consisted of fifteen personal injury scenarios (summarized in Table 2).44 An example is provided in the Appendix. A videotape was prepared for each case, in which a professional actor read the text of the case and all instructions aloud. To maximize comprehension, participants were required both to view the videotape and to read the written version. The size of the defendant firm (annual profits of $100-$200 million) and compensatory damages ($200,000) were the same for all cases. Thus, the variability we observe cannot be accounted for by a model that depends on variability in compensatory damage awards or in the defendant's ability to pay. 
deliberation, 91% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on a punishment rating (a total of 461 verdicts) and 82% of juries reached a unanimous Kahneman, Schkade, & Sunstein, supra note 4, at 79-84, and five were completely new scenarios which, like the first 10, were based on real cases (Table 2). The main substantive elaboration on the original scenarios was the addition of a paragraph of closing arguments by the attorneys for each side. Case Williams v. National Motors Smith v. Public Entertainment 
Sanders v. A&G Cosmetics 
Lawson v. TGI International Newton v. Novel Clothing 
Windsor v. Int'l Computers 
Crandall v. C&S Railroad Dulworth v. Global Elevator Hughes v. Jardel Nelson v. Trojan Yachts Description 
guard Auto airbag opens unexpectedly, injuring driver Man suffers skin damage from using baldness cure Elderly woman suffers back injuries from using exercise video Child ingests large quantity of allergy medicine, needs hospital stay Employee suffers anemia due to benzene exposure on the job 
pajamas catch fire Disabled man injured when wheelchair lift malfunctions 
computer monitor Seaman injured when molten sulfur container fails Train hits car at crossing, injuring driver Shopper injured in fall when escalator suddenly stops 
verdict on a dollar award (a total of 416 verdicts). The remainder had not reached a verdict when the time limit expired; these were treated as hung. All further analyses were conducted on the 401 juries that reached both a punishment verdict and a dollar verdict.45 Because there were no statistically significant differences between the verdicts of juries that judged dollars first and those that judged punishment first, we analyzed together the verdicts made by dollar-first juries and punishment-first juries. 
StatisticalJuries? - We assessed the effect of deliberation on juror judgments by comparing each jury's verdict to the median predeliberation responses to ensure that comparisons between punishment and dollar verdicts, and between individuals andjuries, were based on the same set of respondents. Recreating our Tables and Figures with all available responses produces the same pattern of results, with some slight differences in exact numbers. judgment of the individuals who composed thatjury. We will refer to the median predeliberation judgment of the individuals in a jury as the verdict of the statisticaljury. To evaluate the effects of deliberation, we compare the verdicts of deliberatingjuies with those of statistical juries. 
The results observed for the fifteen cases are shown in Table 3.46 The cases are arranged in the Table in descending order of the median dollar verdict of deliberatingjuries. Note first that the median verdicts of deliberating and statistical juries produce very similar rankings of the cases. For dollars, there is a Spearman rank correlation 47 of .88 between the deliberating and statistical jury verdicts in Table 3; for punishment verdicts the average rank correlation is even higher, at .98. The correlation between punishment verdicts and dollar verdicts is also high, at .87. These results confirm the finding of earlier research that, in the aggregate, judgments of punitive intent and of dollar awards share the same core of moral outrage, and therefore produce the same ordering of cases. 
While there is agreement on the ordering of cases, the level of verdicts tells a different tale. Punishment verdicts are, on average, quite close for statistical and deliberating juries, but dollar verdicts show a dra46. The columns labeled DSM are explained below, at Part II.B.4. 
analogous to first converting each column to ranks (from I to 15 in this case) and then computing the correlation between the two sets of ranks. matic difference: Deliberating juries produce much higher awards, especially but not only at the high end. Indeed, 83% of the 330 non-zero dollar verdicts were above the median individual judgment for that jury. This is the most important finding in the study: the severity shift in dollar verdicts. 
In summary, then, aggregate verdicts from deliberating and statistical juries show strong agreement on the relative egregiousness of the cases, and for punishment verdicts, they do not dramatically diverge. Deliberating juries, however, produce dollar verdicts that far exceed the median judgments of the jurors that compose them. We now try to understand how this pattern might occur. To do so, we divide verdicts into three decisions: (1) the decision about whether to punish at all; (2) the decision about the appropriate punishment verdict; and (3) the decision about the appropriate dollar verdict. As we shall see, the effects of deliberation are quite different for each decision. 
jury is, presumably, whether to punish or to reject punishment by a verdict of $0 in damages or a 0 punishment rating. Table 4 shows the percentage of non-zero verdicts that were made by juries, in relation to the initial distribution ofjudgments among the jurors. The pattern is identical for punishment and dollar verdicts: When a majority of juror judgments (i.e., four or more) are 0, the jury verdict is virtually certain to itself be 0. When a majority ofjurors have non-zero judgments, the jury verdict is virtually certain not to be 0. Finally, if the jury is evenly split, the chance of a 0 verdict is about 50-50. 
Without detailed analysis of the deliberation transcripts, we do not know whether juries actually voted or explicitly agreed to adopt a majority decision rule. We observe only that the pattern of results is consistent with the adoption of such a rule. In contrast to other phases of the jury decision that we consider later, there is no evidence of any systematic effect of deliberation on outcomes (i.e.,juries were neither more nor less likely to punish than their jurors). Thus, for the decision of whether or not to impose punitive damages, there is no indication of any asymmetry of power or influence betweenjurors who were initially inclined to say yes and those who were inclined to say no. punishment verdicts chosen by the juries that determined that some punishment was appropriate. We wish to examine the relationship between the postdeliberation verdict of a jury and the predeliberation distribution of judgments among its members. For this purpose we introduce a deliberation shift analysis, which we will apply to both punishment ratings and dollar awards. The predeliberation judgments of jurors are first ranked, from the most lenient to the most severe; the eventual verdict of the jury is then inserted in that ordering, and its rank is computed. For example, suppose that the individual jurors had predeliberation judgments of $0, $200,000, $300,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, and $5,000,000, and that the jury verdict was $750,000. The jury verdict ranks fifth in the distribution of individual judgments of its members. In this instance, the jury was more severe than four of its original members, and less severe than two of its members, indicating that, overall, deliberation made judgments more severe. 
If the outcomes of deliberation were determined by a simple voting model, the jury verdict would always be in the middle of the distribution of initial judgments, at the median. There would be no shift, either toward greater leniency or toward more punishment. With no shift, for a jury of six (with the jury verdict added as the seventh member), the predicted position of the jury in the distribution of the opinions of its members is always fourth.48 The deliberationshift measure (DSM) is the difference between the observed and the predicted rank of the jury verdict, as a percentage of the maximum possible shift in the direction taken. To continue our dollar example above, since the jury verdict ranks fifth among its jurors' predeliberation judgments, the difference would be 5 - 4 = 1. For ajury of six, the maximum possible upward shift is 7 - 4 = 3, and the DSM would be 1/3, or 33%. This means that the rank of the jury verdict was 33% of the way from the rank of the median juror (4) to the rank of the maximum juror (7).49 The DSM is positive if the jury is more severe than its median member; it is negative if the jury is more lenient than its median member. If the jury verdict was higher than the judgment of the maximum juror, the DSM would be 100%; if it was lower than the judgment of the minimum juror, the DSM would be -100%. To study the systematic effects of deliberation, we computed the DSM for every nonhung jury, separately for punishment verdicts and for dollar verdicts. Table 3 shows the mean values of the DSM for each of the fifteen cases, for both punishment and dollar verdicts. 
there is a clear pattern in the results, which can be observed both in the column of DSM values and by comparing the statistical and deliberated rank would be 5.5; and so forth. 
the same interpretation for, a jury of any size. verdicts: Deliberation increased the severity of punishment for high-punishment cases and reduced it for low-punishment cases. Reading down the table, the DSM is positive for nine of the top ten cases, and negative for four of the bottom five cases. There was a severity shift for the highpunishment cases, and a leniency shift for the low-punishment cases. 
Because the table is arranged roughly in decreasing order of punitive intent, we can see that the DSM is positive for high-punishment cases (average for the top ten cases is 10%) and negative for low-punishment cases (average for the bottom five cases is -9%). Further, the correlation between the DSM and the median statistical jury verdicts is .67, which means that the more severe the individual predeliberation judgments, the greater the shift. In the language of the group polarization literature, we observe systematic choice shifts, in which deliberation generally increases differences among cases, by making severe verdicts more severe and lenient verdicts more lenient, relative to the predeliberation judgments of jurors. 
Damages. - We now turn to the task of understanding the remarkable difference between the dollar awards obtained from deliberating juries and those obtained from a statistical pooling of the predeliberation opinions of jury members. The basic result is that deliberation causes awards to increase, and it causes high awards to increase a great deal. As extreme but actual illustrations of the severity shift, consider a few examples from the raw data: " A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000, $300,000, $2 million, $10 million, $10 million, and $10 million reached a verdict of $15 million. " A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000, $500,000, $2 million, $5 million, and $10 million reached a verdict of $50 million. " A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $2 million, $2 million, $2.5 million, $50 million, and $100 million reached a verdict of $100 million. 
Now consider the DSM column for dollar verdicts in Table 3. Recall that the value of the DSM is positive if the jury verdict is more severe than the median judgment of its jurors and negative if the jury is more lenient. The pattern of results is clear: The DSM is generally positive, indicating that deliberation generally produced a severity shift. Furthermore, the DSM for dollar verdicts is much higher for high-punishment cases than for low-punishment cases: The correlation between the median punishment verdict and the DSM for dollar verdicts is .95. 
The difference between deliberating and statistical juries is very large, especially for the high-punishment cases: For the top ten cases in Table 3, the average DSM of 46% means that the jury verdict is about halfway between the second-highest and third-highest individual judgments. Even more surprising, for the ten high-punishment cases, 10% of jury verdicts were even higher than the highest individual judgment (i.e., 
HeinOnline -- 100 Colum. L. Rev. 1155 2000 the DSM was 100% for thesejuries). A further 17% of verdicts were equal to the highest individual judgment (i.e., a DSM of 83%). These extreme verdicts were less common for the five low-punishment cases, in which 15% of verdicts equaled the highest individual judgment, and none exceeded this maximum. The pattern is clear: Deliberation made dollar verdicts more severe, especially for high-punishment cases. 
Notably, we did not find that the degree of dispersion between individual predeliberation judgments contributed to greater or lesser shifts as a result of deliberation. For example, forjuries with non-zero verdicts for the same case, the average correlation between the standard deviation of individual judgments (a measure of dispersion) and the DSM was -. 05 for dollars and .08 for punishment (neither correlation is statistically different from 0). In other words, juries whose members were in rough agreement (i.e., had a low standard deviation) about dollars or punishment did not show a different shift from groups whose members were in substantial disagreement about dollars or punishment. 
Geography, Race, Gender, Education, Age, and Wealth. - A subsidiary but nonetheless important question is whether the findings of the earlier study were replicated under the current study's changes in stimuli, procedure, and sample. The answer is that the previous results were replicated in every essential respect. The findings in the Texas study were replicated in Arizona, and despite evident differences between the two regions, people from the two areas evaluated cases in the same way. As before, dollars and ratings produced very similar rankings of the cases (a rank correlation of .90 compared to .91 for the comparable condition in the previous study5 0 ). Different demographic groups again produced very similar average evaluations, as indicated by the extremely high correlations in Table 5. 
In addition, the ordering of case evaluations closely matched that in our previous study. There are ten cases common to both studies, and evaluations made by Texans in the previous study were highly predictive of those made by Arizonans in the current study-the rank correlation between the two samples was .90 for punishment ratings and .98 for dollar awards. Thus, the current, larger study, with several nontrivial changes, confirmed the conclusion of our previous study that individual moral judgments are predictable and shared, but expressing them in dollars produces unpredictability and confusion. 
Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, that is directly comparable to the current study, which contained cases with large companies and high harm. Gender Ethnicity Household Income Age TABLE 5. CORRELATION BETWEEN DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS ON INTENDED 
SEVERITY OF PUNISHMENT* Women Hispanic Other $30-50K >$50K 30-39 40-49 >50 
Men .99 White .92 .88 <$30K * Entries are correlations between mean responses to scenarios by respondents in the indicated demographic categories. 
important goal of the legal system is to treat the similarly situated similarly. Our previous study showed that both the dollar judgments of individuals and the dollar verdicts of statistical juries would probably fail this test of procedural justice, because of a high degree of unpredictability in damage awards for the same case, as well as inconsistency in distinguishing between cases of more and less egregious conduct. 51 Among many in the legal community there is the hope, and indeed the conviction, that deliberation by a group of jurors will overcome individual biases and produce more just and more predictable verdicts. As will be seen, our findings lend no support to this view. 
The simplest and most practical criterion for predictability is reflected in the distribution of possible verdicts for a given case (a criterion that asks the extent to which the identically situated are treated identically). This is of course a critical piece of information for a lawyer advising a client about whether or not to settle a dispute, or for an actor contemplating liability for a potentially tortious course of conduct. In our sample, we had multiple independent juries rendering punitive damage verdicts for the same case, and this information can be used to estimate verdict distributions. Table 6 presents selected distributional statistics for each case. The range of possible dollar verdicts is strikingly large. For example, each of the top five cases has a minimum award of $500,000 or less, and yet the average maximum award for these cases is over $83,000,000. Further, the maximum verdicts are 10 to 500 times as large as the median verdicts (for cases with non-zero medians). Even for the three cases at the bottom with zero medians (i.e., a majority of juries for that case awarded no punitive damages), plaintiffs could still be awarded $500,000. Also, although there is considerable noise (in part because the number of juries for each case is relatively small), the range of verdicts for a given case tends to increase in proportion to the median verdict.5 2 Note that these variations between juries occurred on identical presentations of identical facts, unaffected by differences in (for example) compensatory awards or lawyers' presentations. 
To make the uncertainty of these dollar verdicts more concrete, imagine that a statistically sophisticated and greatly experienced lawyer is advising a defendant about a possible punitive damages award, on the basis of the data illustrated by Table 6. For the purpose of the illustration, assume that the lawyer is not only sophisticated but also wise, and able to make unbiased predictions ofjury decisions: When she states that her best guess is an award of $X, the actual award is equally likely to be above or below X (this is her estimate of the median award). On the basis of our data the lawyer would be able to provide the client with the following information: "My best guess is that you will face ajudgment of $X. There are equal chances that it will be higher or lower than this amount. However, there is a lot of uncertainty about how much higher or lower it will be: There is a 10% chance that you will have to pay more than a times that amount, and there is a 10% chance that you will have to pay less than 1/b of that amount." 
Averaging across cases, the best estimates53 of a and b, respectively, are 7.74 and 6.61. On the basis of these values, a lawyer who prediits a verdict of $2 million should also estimate that there is a 10% chance that the actual verdict will be over $15.48 million, and a 10% chance that it will be less than $0.30 million. Because the range increases proportionately with the median (except for noise), the same values of a and b apply for any value of $X.5 4 Finally, these estimates assume a jury of six. The uncertainty would very likely be reduced somewhat with a larger jury.55 Sunstein, supra note 4, at 69. 
median/10th percentile ratios for each case, and then computed the geometric mean across cases for each ratio. The estimates reported here are for the nine cases that have neither a median of zero nor a 10th percentile of zero (see Table 6). 
and 10th percentiles for a given case on the median for that case. If the range goes up proportionately with the median, then this regression should have a good fit, and the constant in the regression should be close to zero. In fact, the line fits quite well (R2 = .66) and the constant is not significantly different from zero (p > .05). 
approximate how much smaller a and b would be for a jury of 12, under the assumption that uncertainty in deliberating juries would diminish at the same rate as in a statistical Case Reynolds Glover Lawson Williams Smith Nelson Hughes West Crandall Douglas Sanders Windsor Newton Dulworth Stanley the Introduction, we asked whether deliberating juries would produce dollar verdicts that are more predictable than those of statistical juries. We can now use the a and b analysis set forth above 56 to answer this question. As with the verdicts of deliberating juries, variability in the verdicts of statistical juries is roughly proportional to the median verdict.57 We can apply the same procedure as before to estimate the factors a and b, which measure the estimated relationship of the 10th and 90th percentiles for each case to the median award for that case. 
For statistical juries, our estimates of a and b are 2.88 and 4.11, which are both far lower than the corresponding figures of 6.61 and 7.74 for deliberating juries. In our example above, the lawyer's predicted range for a statistical jury verdict would be from $0.69 to $8.22 million compared to the range for a deliberating jury verdict of $0.30 to $15.48 miljury. In this case, since the jury would be twice as large, we divide a and b by the square root of 2. The resulting estimates are a = 4.67 and b = 5.47, which in the lawyer advice example would produce a predicted verdict range of $0.43 million to $10.94 million. 
and 10th percentiles of statistical jury verdicts for a given case on the median for that case, just as we did for deliberative jury verdicts, as discussed supra at note 54. Again, the line fits fairly well (R2 = .56), and the constant is not significantly different from zero (p > .05). lion. Obviously, there is far less uncertainty about the verdicts of statistical juries than about those of deliberating juries. 
This pattern is remarkably consistent across cases. There is greater uncertainty in deliberating jury verdicts than in statistical jury verdicts for each of the ten cases for which a can be calculated (those with non-zero medians), and greater uncertainty for eleven of the twelve cases for which b can be calculated (those with non-zero 10th percentiles). It is important to note that this estimation procedure effectively controls for the severity shift, and therefore that these differences are not due merely to the generally higher level of verdicts by deliberatingjuries. We conclude, rather to our surprise, that deliberation is a significantly poorer way of aggregating opinions than is statistical pooling-at least if the goal is to decrease the arbitrary unpredictability of awards. 
III. WHAT HAPPENED? SEVERITY SHIFrs, RHETORICAL ASYMMETRY, AND 
RELATED PHENOMENA 
We now turn to a discussion of these results. We emphasize three phenomena. The first is identified for the first time here, while the second and third have been studied in many previous experiments. " The first and most important phenomenon is the severity shift. We believe that this occurred because of a rhetorical asymmetry that gives one set of arguments an automatic, other-things-equal upper hand in a group discussion, so that groups will typically shift in the direction holding that upper hand. " The second phenomenon, described standardly though somewhat vaguely as a "choice shift," occurs when the decision of a group shifts toward a more extreme version of the view held, before deliberation, by the group's median member.5 8 Our evidence clearly shows choice shifts with respect to punishment verdicts, and because high awards increased much more than low awards, we think that something similar played a role in dollar verdicts as well. " The third phenomenon, known as "group polarization," occurs when individuals, polled privately after group discussion, shift toward a more extreme point in the direction set by the original distribution of views. 59 Because our jurors were not polled privately after discussion, we do not have direct evidence of group polarization, though there is reason to believe that it may have occurred. 60 
although it is possible to have one kind of movement without the other. See id. at 59. 
study] where the report of data makes it possible to check, group polarization occurs." (citations omitted)). Brown infers group polarization from the fact that "for ninety percent ofjuries that must reach unanimous agreement and do not hang, the final verdict is consistent in direction with the majority on the initial ballot." Id. Similarly, it is 
is the severity shift produced by deliberation. What mechanism causes a jury to decide on an award that exceeds the initial judgment of its median member-and sometimes to exceed the highest predeliberation judgment of all its members? 
We hypothesize that a feature of deliberation, a rhetorical asymmetry, helps produce the one-way movement that we observe. Specifically, we hypothesize that once the jury has agreed that there will be a non-zero dollar award, the arguments for a larger award have a rhetorical advantage and are more persuasive. If this is the case, then a jury would be drawn disproportionately toward the larger predeliberation judgments of its jurors. No such asymmetry would be expected for the punishment scale, if it is hypothesized that social norms give the advantage, not to anyone arguing that the conduct of a corporate defendant was "worse" in the abstract, but to anyone arguing for a higher dollar award against a corporate defendant. The key point has to do with the translation of a punishment judgment into a dollar award; those who argue that "more" money is necessary to punish a corporation appear to have the upper hand. The unbounded dollar scale affords great latitude in the expression of what "more" means. 
To examine the hypothesis of rhetorical asymmetry more directly, we asked eighty-seven University of Chicago law students whether it would be harder to argue for a smaller or a larger award. In this study, respondents were simply told that they were deliberating about punitive damage awards and were given no details of any particular case. They were first asked to generate arguments for a higher or lower award, and then asked which award (higher or lower) would be easier to justify. Half of the students were asked to argue for a higher award; half were asked to argue for a lower one. After generating the relevant arguments, they were asked to complete a second task, presented as follows: 
Imagine that ajury in a civil trial is deliberating about a personal injury case in which the defendant is a large corporation (with annual profits of approximately $200 million). The jury has already (a) unanimously ordered the defendant to pay an amount of compensatory damages that fully compensates the plaintiff, and (b) unanimously concluded that while the underlying conduct was not truly horrendous, it was sufficiently reckless to justify an award of punitive damages as well (in addition to compensatory damages). reasonable to infer, from the dramatic choice shifts we observe, that group polarization is highly likely, in the sense that individuals will likely have shifted in the direction indicated by the group's decisions. 
For a general overview and discussion, with many applications to legal problems, see Cass R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? When Groups Go to Extremes, 110 Yale L.J. (forthcoming Oct. 2000). In general, which position would you expect to be harder for a juror to argue for in a deliberation? (please circle the letter of your answer) [15%] a) it is harder to argue that damages should be higher [55%] b) it is harder to argue that damages should be lower [30%] c) the positions are equally hard to argue for 
The students were expressly told not to begin the second task (assessing the comparative difficulty question) until after they had completed the first (making arguments one way or the other).61 
The results confirmed our hypothesis: A clear majority (55%) thought that arguing for a lower award would be the more difficult rhetorical position. Further, of those who showed a preference, the margin was almost four to one that arguing for a larger award is easier. Moreover, being asked to justify a higher or lower award had no effect; both groups agreed that it is harder to argue for a lower award. Note that the University of Chicago study closely followed the jury study, in that the former, like the latter, involved a corporate defendant with $200 million in annual profits. It seems likely, then, that a rhetorical asymmetry played a substantial role in producing jury verdicts consistently above the median individual judgment, and sometimes even above the highest individual judgment. 
raises many issues. The concept can be understood in many ways. Taken very broadly, rhetorical asymmetry is ubiquitous: In any social arrangement containing norms, those who argue in the direction that is normative will have the advantage. Those who argue that slavery was wonderful, or that the Holocaust never happened, or that animals should be made to suffer, in a context where these positions are normative, will be at a rhetorical advantage compared to those who claim the opposite. A similar rhetorical asymmetry might also be at work in other deliberative contexts. We might imagine, for example, settings in which those arguing for higher criminal punishments would have a rhetorical advantage; it is also possible to imagine places in which people arguing for lower taxes would have an easier time in any debate. 
Narrow understandings of rhetorical asymmetry are possible and, for many purposes, more useful. Our claim here is quite narrow: that when people are asking "how much" questions in deliberating about punitive damage awards in dollars, one side has a systematic advantage, even ifthe underlying moraljudgments are identical (as measured on the bounded punishment scale). Would the same effect be found in deliberations about compensatory awards for libel, sexual harassment, and pain and suffering? Would the same effect be found for punitive damage awards if the defendant were not a corporation? If the plaintiff were a corporation? We turn to some normative issues below; 6 2 for the moment we note simply that there is much room for further study here. 
explanation for the severity shift would suggest that groups move toward the mean of individual dollar judgments, rather than the median. Because individual dollar judgments are skewed to the right, and include many extreme judgments, the mean will be above the median (this is true for 91% ofjuries), and could account, in theory, for the higher level of verdicts. From an analysis of our data, our basic conclusion is that while it is possible that movement toward the mean may have played some role in producing severity shifts, such movement cannot fundamentally account for them. The simplest demonstration of this comes from the fact that 27% of non-zero jury dollar verdicts were as high as or higher than that of the highest predeliberation dollar judgment of individuals. A fuller explanation requires a more detailed analysis. 
To examine the hypothesis that the mean of individual awards would predict jury dollar verdicts and hence the severity shift, we recomputed the statistical jury results using the mean individual judgment, rather than the median. 63 As expected, the mean juror produces higher statistical jury dollar verdicts than the median juror, although these are still lower than 64% of non-zero deliberative jury verdicts (albeit an improvement over the 83% figure for the median juror). This partial success, however, comes at a high price. Even though the mean juror's award is consistently higher than the median juror's award (and seemingly closer to jury verdicts), the mean is less reliable, and is actually a worse predictor of jury verdicts on the conventional measures of predictive success, than is the median: It explains less of the variance in jury verdicts (4% vs. 26%), and has larger prediction errors on average (compared to the median juror predictions, the root-mean-square error64 for the mean juror is 2.21 times larger, and the mean absolute error is 1.53 times larger). The choice between the median and the mean is mainly a matter of choosing between types of errors-with the median juror, the statistical jury's verdict is almost always too low, but almost never disastrously wrong. With the mean juror the signs of the errors are more balanced (2/3 too low and 1/3 too high), but there can occasionally be huge positive errors 
the basis for statistical juries has little effect because of the low level of skewness in the distribution of punishment judgments. 
differences between the predicted verdict (i.e., the median or average of predeliberation jurors) and the actual verdict (the jury verdict), taking the square of each difference, and then taking the square root of the average squared difference. In regression, the predicted value of the regression equation plays the same role as the mean or median do here, and the RMSE is thus analogous to the standard error of a regression (the estimate of a). The mean absolute error (MAE) is computed by taking the average of the absolute values (i.e., the magnitude, regardless of its sign) of the differences. (i.e., mean juror far above the jury verdict).65 Thus, even if the mean juror with its higher overall levels did fit jury verdicts better (and it does not), we would still need to account for a consistent upward movement in jury verdicts, relative to the mean juror, and for those verdicts that are at or above the maximum juror judgment, predeliberation. 
B. Choice Shifts and Group Polarization 
conventionally called a "choice shift" with respect to punishment ratings, pivoting around the rating of "3."66 Choice shifts of this general sort are common consequences of deliberation, and they have been found in many diverse tasks. The result is that groups often go in more extreme directions-both higher or lower on the relevant scale-than would the typical or average individual in the group. As noted, the related phenomenon of group polarization-for which we did not test here-occurs when individuals move to a more extreme position in the direction indicated by the mean of predeliberation judgments. We offer a brief summary of relevant literature. 
With respect to group polarization, consider some examples from relevant experiments. (a) A group with moderately profeminist attitudes becomes more strongly profeminist after discussion. 6 7 (b) Citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid after discussion. 68 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African Americans in American cities. 69 (d) After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question. 70 Choice shifts and group polarization stem from similar mechanisms, and for punishment ratings, the pattern described above is exactly what would be predicted from the literature on choice shifts. 71 judgments in a jury. 
to move up; when the median individual judgement is 3 or less, the jury verdict tends to move down. 
707-11 (1975). 
Moscovici & Marisa Zavalloni, The Group as a Polarizer of Attitudes, 12 J.Personality & Soc. Psychol. 125 (1969)). 
169 Science 778, 778-79 (1970). 

the phenomenon is defined by reference to scales having two sides, with a "neutral" midpoint, usually defined as zero (signaling neutrality on a question or no opinion). This is the arrangement by which it makes sense to speak of initial dispositions and their compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decisionmakers-for example, a committee or board-would be likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. 72 But the relevant experiments, originally conducted by James Stoner, found otherwise; they identified what has become known as the "risky shift."7 3 Deliberation tended to shift individual members in the direction of greater risk-taking (group polarization); and deliberating groups, asked to reach a unanimous decision, were generally more risk-inclined-sometimes far more risk-inclined-than the mean individual member, predeliberation (choice shift). 
In Stoner's original data, subsequent researchers noticed, the largest risky shifts could be found when group members "had a quite extreme risky initial position," in the sense that the predeliberation votes were weighted toward the risky end, "whereas the item [s] that shifted a little or not at all started out near the middle of the scale." 74 Discussion among very cautious individuals would produce a significant shift toward greater caution; discussion among individuals inclined toward risk-taking would produce a significant shift toward greater risk-taking; and discussion among individuals in the middle would produce smaller shifts in the direction indicated by their original disposition. In short, "group discussion moves decisions to more extreme points in the direction of the original inclination.... which means shift to either risk or caution in the direction of the original disposition, and the size of shift increases with the degree of initial polarization." 75 Similar results have been found in many conaggravation. Our punishment ratings, by contrast, lacked an obvious neutral midpoint, and of course dollar awards have no such midpoint. 
(discussing the phenomenon called the "risky shift" in the context of group polarization). 
Influence of Widely Held Values, 4 J. Experimental Soc. Psychol. 442 (1968); James A.F. Stoner, A Comparison of Individual and Group Decisions Including Risk (1961) (unpublished M.A. thesis, School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology). 
further in the direction of the dominant view, an idea that might be fortified with the thought that those with outlier positions (in favor of extreme awards) would be especially likely to hold out against a compromise view, thus producing pressure toward the extremes. We are unaware, however, of any studies of choice shifts that show a difference between the outcomes produced by a unanimity rule and the outcomes produced by majority rule. Note also that numerous studies show that group polarization occurs regardless of the decision rule and hence it is extremely unlikely that the unanimity rule accounted for our results here: "The shift effect is about equally robust regardless of whether a group decision is required." Myers & Lamm, supra note 3, at 611. Of course we cannot exclude the possibility that the results would be somewhat different without a unanimity rule; this is in fact a good area for subsequent empirical study, especially in light of continuing questions about the consequences of requirements of jury unanimity. texts, involving, for example, questions about economic aid, political leaders, race, 76 feminism, 77 and judgments of guilt or innocence. 78 
We do not know if our jurors were susceptible to a group polarization, because members were not polled individually afterwards. But group polarization usually occurs where choice shifts are found, and hence there is reason to suspect that this happened here as well. 79 What is most noteworthy is the finding of a choice shift for punishment ratings, and the related finding of much larger severity shifts for high dollar awards than for low dollar awards. 
main explanations for group polarization and choice shifts, both of which have been extensively investigated.8 0 Massive support has been found on behalf of both explanations.8 ' 
The first explanation involves social comparison8. 2 On this view, people want to be perceived favorably by other group members (and also to perceive themselves favorably), and once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such in comparison to other group members.83 The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort, and no one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.8 4 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. This dynamic helps explain a shift toward caution (the "cautious shift") as well as toward risk-taking (the "risky shift")85 
Juries, 2 Personality & Soc. Psychol. Bull. 63 (1976). 
Brown, supra note 60, at 207-08 (rejecting conformity explanation on the basis that "the risky shift is not convergence to the mean of initial positions, but, rather, to points on one side of the mean, the riskier side"). 
recent work in economics on reputational influences on behavior. See, e.g., Timur Kuran, Private Truths, Public Lies (1996). 
2000) (manuscript at 18-27, on file with the Columbia Law Review). 
granting that everyone wanted to see himself as reasonably audacious, that those who were really below the mean would be motivated to adopt riskier positions and so change the mean and produce the risky shift?" Brown, supra note 60, at 214. 
removal of pluralistic ignorance, that is, ignorance of what other people think (or are 
The second explanation emphasizes the role of persuasive arguments.86 The key point here is that an individual's choice or position on an issue is a function of the number and persuasiveness of arguments presented. Because a group that is inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. Thus it is suggested that "[t]he important thing that happens in discussion is that individual arguments are expressed and become fully shared." 87 Once the set of individual arguments is exposed to all individual members, there will be a movement toward a more extreme point in the direction of initial inclinations, simply because arguments in that direction have been pressed and repeated more frequently than opposing arguments. 88 
These two mechanisms help account for severity shifts as well; they help explain rhetorical asymmetry. As our University of Chicago study suggests, arguments for higher awards are more persuasive, other things being equal, than arguments for lower awards. This is exactly what is meant by rhetorical asymmetry, in the sense that certain arguments (for "sending a stronger signal") are, we hypothesize, more convincing than others (for "ensuring against overdeterrence"). In addition, social influences, given existing norms, are likely to push people toward higher awards, simply because a concern for reputation, and for self-conception, generally argues in favor of supporting higher awards in the face of conflict. People who argue for higher awards seem to want to give appropriate punishment to wrongdoing (a good thing to seem to want), whereas those who argue for lower awards seem, other things being equal, to be lenient toward wrongdoing by corporations, or solicitous to them (not a good thing to seem to be). We emphasize that these are simply descriptive points, and that social norms could be otherwise, as they apparently are in the context of criminal conviction, where leniency shifts have been observed.8 9 
IV. IMPLICATIONS AND REFORMS 
To know whether the dollar awards of deliberating juries are better than the dollar awards of statistical juries, it seems necessary to have a theory of appropriate punitive damage awards, and it is not our purpose willing to say they think). Note that it is implicit in these findings that people seem to want not to conform, but to be different from others in a desirable way. 
and recent work in economics on informational influences on behavior, and in particular, recent work on informational cascades. See, e.g., David Hirchleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188, 193-207 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn lerulli eds., 1995). 
discussion. 
here to set out such a theory. In its absence, the simplest conclusion from our study is that to the extent that there is a concern about unpredictable damage awards, deliberation is not likely to alleviate that concern, and indeed is likely to aggravate it, as demonstrated by our discussion in Part 11.90 
This unpredictability would probably be lower with larger juries (say of size twelve). But while this increase would almost certainly reduce the problem somewhat-because predictability generally increases with group size 9 1-there is little reason to hope that it would make a qualitative difference. In our current study, deliberating juries of six performed no more predictably than statistical juries of the same size when using the punishment scale, and were less predictable when using the dollar scale. The statistical juries in our previous study (which were the primary basis for our conclusions about unpredictable awards) contained twelve jurors. Thus, if the relationship between deliberating and statistical juries we found here holds, it is likely that deliberating juries of twelve would show less predictability for dollar awards than our statistical juries of twelve; and those juries showed an extremely high degree of unpredictability. 
Unpredictability is a serious problem forjury verdicts, partly because it ensures that the similarly situated will often not be treated similarly (and thus produces unfairness for plaintiffs and defendants alike), partly because it may produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants (if some of the awards are sufficiently high), and partly because of the sheer cost involved in litigation-related expenses. Of course, predictable awards might be nothing to celebrate if they are too high or too low. But unpredictability is in itself a cause for serious concern. How do our findings here bear on possible reforms? 
With respect to damage awards, compensatory as well as punitive, many proposals have been motivated by a desire to decrease unpredictability. This goal has, for example, played a role in proposals for damage caps, for simple multipliers (relating punitive awards to compensatory awards), and for informing the jury of average awards or of intervals.9 2 It has also played a role in constitutional limitations. 93 But many of these proposals would do nothing about the problem of scaling without a modulus; damage caps, for example, would reduce unduly high awards, but would not inform the jury of the meaning of various possible awards. 
them fixed across cases, we may well have understated true variance in punitive awards, because according to previous research, real juries anchor on their own compensatory award, rather than on some constant value. See Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, at 637-39, 647; Karpoff & Lott, supra note 28, at 543. 

effects). 
concurring) (suggesting that punitive damages award is "grossly excessive" and beyond the "constitutional limit"). In fact there is evidence that caps can act as "anchors," drawing jurors to them, and hence that caps can actually increase unpredictability. 94 For these reasons damage caps are unlikely to resolve the fundamental problem. 
An understanding of that problem motivated our earlier discussion of the possibility of eliciting from the jury not dollar awards, but normative judgments on a rating scale.9 5 These judgments might be converted into a dollar award through some kind of calibration function, based on experts ("technocratic populism") or on population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards ("predictable populism").96 Before our study here, it would be possible to question whether it is practical to ask a deliberating jury to make a moral judgment on a rating scale, hardly an ordinary practice in daily life, and indeed a task that might seem even odder than the somewhat more familiar one of punishing wrongdoers through dollar awards. 
The findings here do not lead directly to any particular reform proposal, but they add several points to the existing literature. First, they demonstrate that juries can use a punishment rating scale quite reliably. Juries are able to answer the normative question directly, and they are also able to use a rating scale far more reliably than the familiar dollar scale. And if deliberating juries are thought to have advantages over other, less populist institutions-as many people clearly believe 97 -then there is reason to consider a reform proposal that would involve directly eliciting the jury's moral judgment. As noted, this judgment might be converted into a dollar award by some kind of calibration formula, defined by expert judgments about what different dollar awards would mean or do to particular defendants, or instead by population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards. Either route could greatly diminish unpredictability. 98 
The data here, along with previous data, show that a calibration formula is also feasible to develop and use. 99 In such a reform, juries might be asked to perform two simple tasks: decide whether punitive damages should be awarded at all, and produce a "punishment rating" on a scale that has verbal descriptions to accompany the numbers. It is easy Courtroom: The Effects of Caps on Punitive Damages, 23 Law & Hum. Behav. 353, 367 (1999) ("[W]hen the cap was high, the size and variability of the punitive damage awards were higher than awards in a control condition in which the cap was absent."). But see Linda Babcock & Greg Pogarsky, Damage Caps and Settlement: A Behavioral Approach, 28J. Legal Stud. 341, 368 (1999) (finding "strong evidence that a cap reduces uncertainty about the trial outcome"). 

especially suited to send the community's 'message' through the medium of damages"). to imagine a possible jury instruction that would set forth these tasks. We have shown that this approach is entirely feasible, and also that it would increase predictability.10 0 
An additional point stems from the finding that deliberating juries do not reduce but actually increase erratic awards. We have seen as well that deliberation can produce juries in which group discussion yields awards much higher than those of even the highest of predeliberation judgments. Without saying whether the resulting judgments are good or bad, our findings fortify the suggestion that difficulties with the dollar scale make it hazardous to continue to rely on the current system, in which juries must map their moral judgments onto that scale without being given any guidance about the meaning of the various "points" on the scale. 101 
The most radical reform would be to dispense with the jury entirely and to move toward judicial judgments or even to develop a kind of penalty schedule, based on the judgments of some combination of representative and expert institutions. 10 2 We cannot evaluate these alternatives here. Of course the radical reform might be rejected if the relevant institutions would be unreliable, perhaps because bureaucracies might be vulnerable to the influence of politically powerful private groups. The question is one of comparative institutional competence. What we have added here is that the process of deliberation will increase awards generally and high awards dramatically, a result that cannot be comforting in light of the resulting unpredictability. 
answer all of the relevant questions, because choice shifts produce not only higher and lower dollar awards, but also higher and lower moral judgments. 
concurring in the result) (citation omitted): 
U[lury determinations of punitive damages are likely to contain an element of arbitrariness as long as the awards remain uncalibrated. To assure basic fairness, courts must consider ways of calibrating punitive damage awards. We must ask what anchoring variable will make an award of punitive damages an appropriate measure of punishment rather than a test of a jury's ability to imagine big numbers. 
valuation. See Murray B. Rutherford et al., Assessing Environmental Losses: Judgments of Importance and Damage Schedules, 22 Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 51, 51-56 (1998); Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury: Beyond Tort, in Analyzing Superfund 219, 241-44 (Richard L. Revesz & Richard B. Stewart eds., 1995). In the area of compensatory damages, see the plea for damages schedules in Bovbjerg et al., supra note 25, at 922, 937. In the punitive damage context, see Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2121-25; Viscusi, supra note 18, at 589-90. For problems with the current damages regime generally, see Atiyah, supra note 27, at 66-71. 
The topic of deliberation has attracted a great deal of recent interest in both political and legal theory.10 s Much of the relevant work depends on claims about the consequences of deliberation. But for the most part, the discussion in law and political theory has not been empirically informed. 10 4 Our study here provides a remarkable set of data about the effects of deliberation with respect to both "pure" moral judgments (as measured by punishment ratings) and dollar awards.10 5 An obvious question is whether our analysis of the data suggests that deliberation has moved people in better or worse directions. We offer some brief notations. 
It might seem tempting to say that with respect to both punitive intent and damage awards, there is no basis for choosing between the results of jury deliberation and the results that would be produced by taking the median of nondeliberating six-person groups. Consider just one case, in which the median individual predeliberation punishment rating was 5.5 and the median dollar award $250,000; after deliberation, the jury rating was 7.0 and the dollar award $3 million. Which is better? Without a substantive theory about appropriate punishment ratings or dollar awards, it might seem impossible to say. 10 6 
If social influence and persuasive arguments are at work, there is a tendency to move to a more extreme point in the direction of the group's initial inclination; but do these mechanisms produce improvements? It seems hard to know without evaluating the initial positions that produce social influence, and without knowing whether the arguments found to be persuasive are actually right. The finding of severity shifts, apparently rooted in rhetorical asymmetry, also raises troubling questions. The argument that "a stronger signal needs to be given to other wrongdoers," or that "we need to get the attention of this defendant," seems to be far more powerful than the argument, "wait, there is a threat of overdeter103. See, e.g., Deliberative Democracy (Jon Elster ed., 1998) (collecting theories of democracy revolving around "the transformation rather than simply the aggregation of preferences"); Gutmann & Thompson, supra note 17 (developing "a conception of democracy that secures a central place for moral discussion in political life"). 
See James S. Fishkin, The Voice of the People 161-76 (1998). 
theorists of deliberative democracy take to be the preconditions of well-functioning deliberation: an absence of strategic behavior, a willingness to listen, a norm of reciprocity, and equality among members. Undoubtedly some of those in the groups we studied behaved strategically and some were not willing to listen; some were undoubtedly more equal than others. Ours is a test of real-world deliberation, not ideal deliberation. An examination of the tapes gives an overall impression, however, that the participants generally listened well and obeyed a principle of equality. 
group polarization can be found in Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2075-82. rence," or, "a punitive damage award will give the plaintiff a windfall." Here too it is not clear whether the severity shifts lead to better judgments. 
It is always possible that the rhetorical asymmetry is counteracting some other kind of asymmetry, or a bias in the system. If, for example, jurors have a systematic bias against personal injury actions, a pro-plaintiff rhetorical asymmetry, with respect to dollar awards, might supply a corrective. What is disturbing about the rhetorical asymmetry that we have described is not necessarily that it produces worse awards, but its mechanical, case-independent quality. If the result of the rhetorical asymmetry is to produce better awards, it would not be a shock-stranger things have happened-but it would be a lucky coincidence. 
To be sure, there may be procedural reasons to have some confidence in the outcomes of a deliberative process. By hypothesis, more time is spent on the problem, and more time might well help, at least in general-judgments reached after deliberation will be more informed, simply because more arguments will be introduced; deliberation tends to increase consensus; and deliberation will, other things being equal, produce movement in the direction favored by more confident group members, and more confident people are likely (though hardly certain) to have some reason for their confidence. On procedural grounds, these points give some reason to think that with respect to punishment ratings, the outcomes of deliberation are likely to be better than the outcomes that would be produced by identifying the median or mean judgment of individuals. But because of the arbitrariness introduced by the selection of a modulus, we have no such confidence for dollar verdicts. There is little reason to believe that the dollar awards of actual juries are better than the dollar awards of statistical juries. If all existing punitive damage awards were doubled, or subject to a sliding scale of increase, so that small awards would go up a little, and large awards would go up a lot, would the system of civil penalties be better? We cannot insist on a negative answer, but it is far from obvious how one would defend an affirmative answer. 
CONCLUSION 
We have found that as compared with the median of individual judgments, deliberation makes low punishment judgments decrease and high punishment judgments increase. It also makes-and this is our most important finding-dollar awards generally increase, while making high dollar awards substantially increase, in a general severity shift. We have also found, somewhat to our surprise, that deliberating juries produce more unpredictability than would be found by taking the median of jurors' predeliberation judgments. 
These findings have implications for damage awards in general and also for understanding social deliberation. From the normative point of view, it is hard to know whether deliberative verdicts are better than the 
DEIUBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS median of predeliberative individual judgments. But five points seem clear. First, moral judgments about personal injury cases are very widely shared over diverse communities and demographic categories. Second, those shared moral judgments do not produce predictable dollar awards. Third, choice shifts occur in the context of punishment ratings; hence group judgments go to more extreme points in the direction of the inclination originally indicated by the median of predeliberation judgments. Fourth, dollar awards reflect a systematic severity shift, apparently a result of a rhetorical asymmetry in which arguments for higher awards have a general advantage over arguments for lower awards. Fifth, the problem of unpredictable and erratic dollar verdicts is increased, not alleviated, by the fact that juries are deliberative bodies. 
Joan Glover, a five-year-old child, ingested a large amount of a nonprescription allergy medicine called Allerfree, and required a three-week hospital stay. The Allerfree bottle used a faulty childproof safety cap. The Glovers sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company. The trial jury ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $200,000 in compensatory damages. 
Facts of the Case Established at Trial. - Joan's parents testified that after her birth they had "childproofed" their house and ensured that all of their medications had childproof safety caps. The Allerfree bottle carries a label reading "Childproof Cap." Joan found the pills in a kitchen drawer and ingested most of the bottle. The overdose permanently weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life. 
General Assistance is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of non-prescription medicines. The company has sold tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with childproof safety caps that were generally effective, but had a failure rate much higher than any others in the industry. Internal company documents showed that General Assistance had chosen to ignore federal regulations requiring more effective safety caps. An internal memo presented at trial says that "this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money"; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree might be punished for violating the regulation but says "the punishments are extremely mild; basically we'd be asked to improve the safety caps in the future." An official at the Food and Drug Administration had previously warned a General Assistance executive that the company was "on shaky ground on this one." 
ClosingArgument by Glovers' Attorney. - The attorney for the Glovers argued that General Assistance's disregard for children's safety and for the law was abhorrent and represented exactly the kind of reckless corporate greed deserving of a high award of punitive damages. He concluded that General Assistance's shocking profit-mongering should be punished so that the company would not feel itself at liberty to put children at risk in the future. 
General Assistance emphasized that while the cap had a high failure rate relative to others on the market, it had nonetheless been conceded at trial that the cap was effective in most cases. She argued that, given that the FDA official had only communicated with General Assistance verbally, and had not required the company to take any action, it was not at all clear that the cap was actually in violation of the regulation at all. 
Juror A states an amount of punitive damages. Juror B states an amount that is much higher, three times A's amount. (You are not expected to know the exact amounts stated by A and B.) 
What arguments would you expect to hear from Juror B, to support an award that is higher than Juror A's proposal? 
On the lines below, please write down a list of the arguments that you might expect to hear from Juror B in support of a higher award. Write as many distinct arguments as you can, briefly summarizing each idea in a short phrase or sentence. Please write only one distinct idea per line. 
In general, which position would you expect to be harder for ajuror to argue for in a deliberation? (please circle the letter of your answer) a) it is harder to argue that damages should be higher b) it is harder to argue that damages should be lower c) the positions are equally hard to argue for 
Very briefly, please write down the reason for your answer in the space below. 
The differences of opinion, and the jarring of parties in [the legislative] department of the government ... often promote deliberation and circumspection, and serve to check excesses in the majority. -Alexander 
In everyday life the exchange of opinion with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things from their standpoint and the limits of our vision are brought home to us.... The benefits from discussion lie in the fact that even representative legislators are limited in knowledge and the ability to reason. No one of them knows everything the others know, or can make all tie same inferences that they can draw in concert. Discussion is a way of combining information and enlarging the range of arguments. -John 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful above all to Daniel Kahneman and David Schkade for many helpful discussions. Thanks too to C. Edwin Baker, Robert Ellickson, Edward Glaeser, Robert Goodin, Christine Jolls, Dan Kahan, Timur Kuran, Lawrence Lessig, John Manning, Andrei Marmor, Wiktor Osiatynski, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, and David Strauss for valuable comments. Participants in workshops at Cornell and the University of Chicago provided a great deal of help. I am also grateful to participants in a conference on deliberative democracy at the University of Texas at Austin, and in particular to my commentators Norman Bradburn and Robert Luskin. Brian Lehman and Brooke May provided excellent research assistance. 

71 Each person can share what he or she knows with the others, making the whole at least equal to the sum of the parts. Unfortunately, this is often not what happens .... 
... As polarization gets underway, the group members become more reluctant to bring up items of information they have about the subject that might contradict the emerging group consensus. The result is a biased discussion in which the group has no opportunity to consider all the facts, because the members are not bringing them up. 
•.. Each item they contributed would thus reinforce the march toward group consensus rather than add complications and fuel debate. -Patricia 
I. INTRODUCTION 
" " " 
Affirmative action is under attack in the state of Texas. A number of professors at a particular branch of the University of Texas are inclined to be supportive of affirmative action; they meet to exchange views and, if necessary, to plan further action. What are these professors likely to think, and to do, after they talk? 
of people in the community, most of them tentatively in favor of greater gun control, come together to discuss the possibility of imposing new gun control measures. What, if anything, will happen to individual views as a result of this discussion? A jury is deciding on an appropriate punitive damage award in a case of recklessly negligent behavior by a large company; the behavior resulted in a serious injury to a small child. Before deliberating as a group, individual jurors have chosen appropriate awards, leading to an average of $1.5 million and a median of $1 million. As a statistical generalization, how will the jury's ultimate award tend to compare to these figures? * A group of women is concerned about what they consider to be a mounting "tyranny of feminism." They believe that women should be able to make their own choices, but they also think that men and women are fundamentally different, and that their differences legitimately lead to different social roles. The group decides to meet every two weeks to focus on common concerns. Is it possible to say what its members are likely to think after a year? deliberative compositions. 
Every society contains innumerable deliberating groups. 
Church groups, political parties, women's organizations, juries, legislative bodies, regulatory commissions, multimember courts, faculties, student organizations, those participating in talk radio programs, Internet discussion groups, and others engage in deliberation. It is a simple social fact that sometimes people enter discussions with one view and leave with another, even on moral and political questions.4 Emphasizing this fact, many recent observers have embraced the traditional 
American aspiration to "deliberative democracy," 
an ideal that is designed to combine popular responsiveness with a high degree of reflection and exchange among people with competing views.' But for the most part, the resulting literature has not been empirically informed.6 It has not dealt much with the real-world consequences of deliberation, and with what generalizations hold in actual settings, with groups of different predispositions and 
The standard view of deliberation is that of Hamilton and Rawls, as quoted above. Group discussion is likely to lead to better outcomes, if only because competing views are stated and exchanged. Aristotle spoke in similar terms, suggesting that when diverse people all come together ... they may surpass-collectively and as a body, although not individually-the quality of the few best .... [Wihen on individual judgments; the evidence discussed here shows that arguments often induce considerable movement. 
THOMPSON, DEMOCRACY AND DISAGREEMENT 128-64 (1996); JORGEN HABERMAS, BETWEEN FACTS AND NORMS 287-328 (William Rehg trans., Polity Press 1996) (1992); CASs R. SUNSTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION 133-45 (1993). 
DEMOCRACY, supra note 5, at 44; and Susan C. Stokes, Pathologies of Deliberation, in DELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY, supra note 5, at 123. Of special interest are James Fishkin's continuing experiments with the "deliberative opinion poll," in which groups of diverse people are asked to deliberate on public issues. See James S. Fishkin & Robert C. Luskin, Bringing Deliberation to the Democratic Dialogue, in THE POLL WITH A HUMAN FACE 3 (Maxwell McCombs & Amy Reynolds eds., 1999). Fishkin's groups do not polarize, at least not systematically; this result is undoubtedly a product of the distinctive setting, in which materials are presented on each issue, with corresponding claims of fact and value. For a discussion of Fishkin, see infra text accompanying notes 193-203. there are many [who contribute to the process of deliberation], each has his share of goodness and practical wisdom .... [S]ome appreciate one part, some another, and all together appreciate all.' But an important empirical question is whether and under what circumstances it is really true that "some appreciate one part, some another, and all together appreciate all." 
largely neglected8 statistical regularity-that of group polarization-and to relate this phenomenon to underlying questions about the role of deliberation in the "public sphere" 9 of a heterogeneous democracy. In brief, group polarization means that members of a deliberating group predictably move toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the members' predeliberation tendencies. 10 "[L]ike polarized molecules, group members become even more aligned in the direction they were PSYCHOLOGY: THE SECOND EDITION 200-48 (1986), 1 have been unable to find sustained discussions in the relevant literature in economics, sociology, philosophy, law, or political science, and there appears to be no treatment of the implications of group polarization for social behavior or the theory of democracy. Within the economics literature, an exception is Timothy Cason & Vai-Lam Mui, A Laboratory Study of Group Polarisation in the Team Dictator Game, 107 ECON. J. 1465 ( this psychological literature into economics." Id. at 1466. For one of the rare treatments within sociology, see Noah E. Friedkin, Choice Shift and Group Polarization, 64 AM. SOC. REV. 856 (1999). Group polarization is also explored in Kenneth L. Bettenhausen, Five Years of Groups Research: What We Have Learned and What Needs To Be Addressed, 17 J. MGMT. 345, 356-59 (1991). 
deliberations. A 1976 jury simulation study, BROWN, supra, at 226-29, tests for, and finds, group polarization, id. at 228; and a number of other mock jury studies, not intended to test for group polarization, collect evidence that it occurred in "every instance where the report of data makes it possible to check." Id. at 229; see also David Schkade et al., Deliberating About Dollars: The Severity Shift, 100 COLUJM. L. REV. 1139 ( 
JORGEN HABERMAS, THE STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION OF THE PUBLIC SPHERE (Thomas Burger trans., Mass. Inst. of Tech. Press 1989) (1962). 
to make a group decision, will shift toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the median predeliberation judgment. Second, the tendency of individuals who compose a deliberating group, if polled anonymously after discussion, will be to shift toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the median predeliberation judgment. Frequently these two phenomena are collapsed in the empirical literature, and I will not always distinguish between them here. But for some purposes it is important to distinguish them, and hence some work refers to the movement of groups as "choice shifts" and the movement of individuals as "group polarization." E.g., Johannes A. Zuber et al., Choice Shift and Group Polarization: An Analysis of the Status ofArguments and Social Decision Schemes, 62 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 50, 50, 59 (1992). I discuss this distinction in more detail below. Infra text accompanying notes 
Note also that in the experimental work, both extremism and tendencies are measured not by reference to anything external, nor to a normative standard, but by reference to the particular scale that is brought before the individuals who compose the group. Thus, for example, people might be asked, on a scale of-5 to 5, how strongly they agree or disagree with a particular statement. already tending." " Thus, for example, members of the first deliberating group are likely to become more firmly committed to affirmative action; the second group will probably end up favoring gun control quite enthusiastically; the punitive damages jury will likely come up with an award higher than the median, perhaps higher than the average as well, and very possibly as high as or higher than that of the highest predeliberation award of any individual member; and the group of women concerned about feminism is likely to become very conservative indeed on gender issues. Notably, groups consisting of individuals with extremist tendencies are more likely to shift, and likely to shift more; the same is true for groups with some kind of salient shared identity (like Republicans, Democrats, and lawyers, but unlike jurors and experimental subjects). 2 When like-minded people are participating in "iterated polarization games" -when they meet regularly, without sustained exposure to competing views-extreme movements are all the more likely. 
Two principal mechanisms underlie group polarization. The first points to social influences on behavior and in particular to people's desire to maintain their reputation and their self-conception. The second emphasizes the limited "argument pools" within any group, and the directions in which those limited pools lead group members. An understanding of the two mechanisms provides many insights into deliberating bodies. Such an understanding illuminates a great deal, for example, about likely processes within multimember courts, juries, political parties, and legislatures-not to mention ethnic groups, extremist organizations, criminal conspiracies, student associations, faculties, institutions engaged in feuds or "turf battles," workplaces, and families. At the same time, these mechanisms raise serious questions about deliberation from the normative point of view. 13 If deliberation predictably pushes groups toward a more extreme point in the direction of their original tendency, whatever that tendency may be, is there any reason to think that deliberation is producing improvements? 
One of my largest purposes is to cast light on enclave deliberation as simultaneously a potential danger to social stability, a source of social fragmentation, and a safeguard against social injustice and unreasonableness.14 Group polarization helps explain an old point, with 
SOC. PSYCHOL. 97, 112 (1990). 
preconditions of the sort that have been identified by those thinking of it in ideal terms. See, e.g., HABERMAS, supra note 5, at 99-131. 
JACOBS, RACE, MEDIA, AND THE CRISIS OF CIVIL SOCIETY: FROM WATTS TO RODNEY KING 140-51 ( clear constitutional resonances, to the effect that social homogeneity can be quite damaging to good deliberation. 5 When people are hearing echoes of their own voices, the consequence may be far more than support and reinforcement. An understanding of group polarization thus illuminates social practices designed to reduce the risks of deliberation limited to likeminded people. Consider the ban on single-party domination of independent regulatory agencies, the requirement of legislative bicameralism, and debates, within the United States and internationally, about the value of proportional or group representation. Group polarization is naturally taken as a reason for skepticism about enclave deliberation and for seeking to ensure deliberation among a wide group of diverse people. 
But there is a point more supportive of enclave deliberation: Participants in heterogeneous groups tend to give least weight to the views of low-status members16 in some times and places, women, African Americans, less-educated people. Hence enclave deliberation might be the only way to ensure that those views are developed and eventually heard. Without a place for enclave deliberation, citizens in the broader public sphere may move in certain directions, even extreme directions, precisely because opposing voices are not heard at all. The ambivalent lesson is that deliberating enclaves can be breeding grounds both for the development of unjustly suppressed views and for unjustified extremism, indeed fanaticism. 
This Essay is organized as follows. Part II discusses social influences on individual judgments, with particular reference to the phenomenon of social cascades. When a number of people have acted or spoken, observers who lack much private information are highly likely to follow their lead, a phenomenon that can drive participants in politics in unexpected and sometimes extreme directions. Part III offers a basic account of group polarization, with an elaboration of the underlying mechanisms of social influence and persuasive arguments. Parts IV, V, and VI deal with the implications of group polarization for democracy and law. Part IV is descriptive; it explores the likely consequences of group polarization for a number of issues at the intersection of law and democratic theory, including feuds, ethnic strife, juries, commissions, multimember courts, and deliberation via the Internet. Part V is normative; it draws the various strands together in an effort to show how group polarization can create deliberative trouble. It also traces the implications of the phenomenon for structuring deliberative institutions and links group polarization to central aspects of constitutional design. Part VI focuses on the role of deliberation inside and outside enclaves of like-minded people, emphasizing the need to 
MAKING IN HEALTH CARE 267, 273-76 (Gretchen Chapman & Frank Sonnenberg eds., 2000). ensure that members of deliberating enclaves are not walled off from other points of view. Part VII is a brief conclusion. 
A. In General 
A great deal of attention has recently been devoted to the topic of social influences on individual behavior. 7 Because many of these influences are analogous to what happens in group polarization, and because they have a bearing on democratic deliberation as well, it is worthwhile to offer some brief notations here. 
Social influences can lead groups to go quite rapidly in identifiable directions, often as a result of "cascade" effects involving either the spread of information (whether true or false) or growing reputational pressure. 
members of particular groups, quite rationally, to believe or to do something that members of other groups, also quite rationally, find to be baseless or worse. Local cascades can ensure that different groups end up with very different, but equally entrenched, views about the same issues and events. 9 
they think relevant others think and do.2" Thus, for example, employees are more likely to file suit if members of the same work group have also done so; 21 littering and nonlittering behavior appear to be contagious; 2 a good way to increase the incidence of tax compliance is to inform people of high 349 ( and LEE Ross & RICHARD E. NISBETT, THE PERSON AND THE SITUATION (1991). Group polarization is a surprising omission from both of these lengthy and highly illuminating treatments. 
the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in THE NEW ECONOMICS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 188, 189 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn lerulli eds., 1995). 
employees, by a Microsoft employee, in Michael Kinsley, The View from the Cafeteria:Microsoft Employees Don't Recognize Themselves in the Government's Suit, TIME, Apr. 10, 2000, at 152, 2000 WL 17632849; the discussion can reasonably be taken to show both cascade effects and group polarization. 
Shoves: Solving the Sticky Norms Problem,67 U. CHI. L. REV. 607 ( 
Claim Contagion,20 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 89, 101-10 ( 
of Norms To Reduce Littering in PublicPlaces, 58 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 1015, 1017 (1990). levels of voluntary tax compliance;23 television networks tend to follow one another; 4 and students are less likely to engage in binge drinking if they think that most of their fellow students do not engage in binge drinking, so much so that disclosure of low numbers of binge drinkers is one of the few successful methods of reducing binge drinking on college campuses." 
Social influences affect behavior via two different mechanisms.26 The first is informational. What other people do, or say, carries an informational externality2;7 if many other people support a particular candidate, or refuse to use drugs, or carry guns, observers, and particularly observers within a common group, are given a signal about what it makes sense to do. The second mechanism is reputational, as group members impose sanctions on perceived deviants, and would-be deviants anticipate the sanctions in advance.28 Even when people do not believe that what other people do provides information about what actually should be done, they may think that the actions of others provide information about what other people think should be done. Thus each person's expressive actions come with a reputationalexternality. People care about their reputations and they have an incentive to do what (they think) other group members think they should do. For example, reputational considerations may lead people to obey or not to obey the law, urge a certain view in group discussions, buy certain cars,29 drive while drunk, help others, or talk about political issues in a certain way. A concern for reputation exerts a ubiquitous influence on behavior, including that of participants in democratic debate, who often shift their public statements in accordance with reputational incentives.3 ° COMPLIANCE EXPERIMENT STATE TAX RESULTS 1, 5-6, 18-19 (1996), http://www.state.mn.us/ ebranchlmdor/reports/compliance/pdf. 

In the most vivid experiments involving group influences, conducted by Solomon Asch, individuals were apparently willing to abandon the direct evidence of their own senses.31 In the relevant experiments, a certain line was placed on a large white card. The task of the subjects was to match that line by choosing, as identical to it in length, one of three other lines that had been placed on a separate large white card. One of the lines on the second white card was in fact identical in length to the line to be matched to it; the other two were substantially different, with the differential varying from an inch and three-quarters to three-quarters of an inch. The subject in the original experiments was one of eight people asked to engage in the matching. Unbeknownst to the subject, the other people apparently being tested were actually there as Asch's confederates, serving as part of the experiments. 
In the first two rounds of the experiment, everyone agreed about the right answer; this seemed to be an extremely dull experiment. But the third round introduced "an unexpected disturbance. ' 32 Other group members made what was obviously, to the subject and to any reasonable person, a clear error. They matched the line at issue to one that was obviously longer or shorter. In these circumstances the subject had the choice of maintaining his independent judgment or instead yielding to the crowd. A large number of people ended up yielding. In ordinary circumstances, subjects erred less than 1% of the time, but in rounds in which group pressure supported the incorrect answer, subjects erred 36.8% of the time.33 Indeed, in a series of twelve questions, no fewer than 70% of subjects went along with the group, and defied the evidence of their own senses, at least once. 
Susceptibility to group influence was hardly uniform. Some people agreed with the group almost all of the time, whereas others were entirely independent in their judgments. Significantly, a modest variation in the experimental conditions made all the difference. The existence of at least one compatriot, or voice of sanity, dramatically reduced both conformity and error. When just one other person made an accurate match, errors were reduced by three-quarters, even if there was a strong majority the other way.34 By contrast, varying the size of the group unanimously making the erroneous decision mattered only up to a number of three; increases from that point had little effect. Opposition from one person did not increase subjects' errors at all; opposition from two people increased error to 13.6%; ABOUT THE SOCIAL ANIMAL 13 (Elliot Aronson ed., 1995). 
and opposition from three people increased error to 31.8%, not substantially different from the level that emerged from further increases in group size. 
More recent studies have identified an important feature of social influence, directly bearing on group behavior in democracies. Much depends on the subject's perceived relationship to the experimenters' confederates and in particular on whether the subject considers himself part of the same group in which those confederates fall. Thus conformity-and error-is dramatically increased in public statements when the subject perceives himself as part of a reasonably discrete group that includes the experimenter's confederates (all psychology majors, for example). 5 By contrast, conformity is dramatically decreased, and hence error is also dramatically decreased, in public statements when the subject perceives himself as in a different group from the experimenter's confederates (all ancient history majors, for example).36 Notably, private opinions, expressed anonymously afterwards, were about the same whether or not the subject perceived himself as a member of the same group as others in the experiment. Apparently, public statements of agreement with a majority view are particularly likely to be both inaccurate and insincere when relevant speakers identify themselves as members of the same group as the majority.37 
Both informational and reputational considerations appear to lead people toward the relevant errors. In Asch's own studies several people said, in private interviews, that their own opinions must have been wrong.38 On the other hand, these statements may have been an effort to avoid the dissonance that would come from confessing that the statement was false but made only for reputational reasons. Notably, experimenters find greatly reduced error when the subject is asked to give a purely private answer.39 And in the study described in the immediately preceding paragraph, people who thought that they were members of the same group as the social ties among group members in Brooke Harrington, Cohesion, Conflict and Group Demography (1999) (unpublished manuscript, on file with The Yale Law Journal), which shows that when social ties are in place, dissent may be suppressed and decisions may be worse as a result. 

themselves as being in a different group were speaking publicly. At the same time, the largest number of conforming, inaccurate responses came when people thought of themselves as being in the same group and were speaking publicly-even though the number of inaccurate private responses in that experimental condition was not notably higher than in other conditions. Id. at 
experimenter's confederates gave far more accurate answers, and far less conforming answers, when they were speaking privately.40 
Asch concluded that his results raised the possibility that "the social process is polluted" by the "dominance of conformity.... That we have found the tendency to conformity in our society so strong that reasonably intelligent and well-meaning young people are willing to call white black is a matter of concern." 41 Asch's experiments did not involve deliberation, for people were not exchanging reasons; indeed, one might expect that reasongiving on the part of Asch's confederates would have lessened the amount of conformity and error. What reasons could have been given for incorrect matches? But the existence of substantial numbers of mistakes as a result of mere exposure to the incorrect conclusions of others raises questions about whether and when deliberation within groups will lead people in the right directions. 
C. Social and Law-Related Cascades 
A great deal of recent work on social influence has raised the possibility of informational and reputational "cascades" ;42 this work has obvious relevance to law and politics.43 (Consider issues involving race and sex equality, global warming, capital punishment, AIDS, the filing of lawsuits, or presidential candidates.) Indeed, Asch's work demonstrates considerable individual susceptibility to cascade effects. What is striking about such effects is their epidemic-like nature, or the quality of apparent contagion. Group polarization is sometimes, but not always, a product of cascade effects. It is useful to understand the former against the background of the latter. 
members of a different group actually gave more accurate, nonconforming answers when speaking publicly, which creates an interesting puzzle: Why was there more accuracy in public than in private statements? The puzzle is solved by considering the likelihood that subjects could consider it an affirmative good to disagree with people from another group (even if they secretly suspected that those people might be right). In the real world, this effect may well be heightened when people are asked whether they agree with opponents or antagonists; they might well say "no" even when the answer is "yes," simply because agreement carries costs, either to reputation or to self-conception. 

87 Am. ECON. REV. 847 ( ECON. 797 (1992); Sushil Biikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades, 12 J. ECON. PERSP. 151 (1998); Andrew F. Daughety & Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment: Persuasive Influence and Herding Behaviorby Courts, I AM. L. & EcON. REV. 158, 159-65 (1999). 

When individuals lack a great deal of private information (and sometimes even when they have such information), they rely on information provided by the statements or actions of others. If A is unaware whether abandoned toxic waste dumps are in fact hazardous, he may be moved in the direction of fear if B seems to think that fear is justified. If A and B both believe that fear is justified, C may end up thinking so too, at least if she lacks reliable independent information to the contrary. If A, B, and C believe that abandoned toxic waste dumps are hazardous, D will need a good deal of confidence to reject their shared conclusion. 
People typically have different thresholds for choosing to believe or do something new or different. As those with low thresholds come to a certain belief or action, people with somewhat higher thresholds join them, possibly to a point where a critical mass is reached, making groups, possibly even nations, "tip."" The result of this process can be to produce snowball or cascade effects, as small or even large groups of people end up believing something-even if that something is false-simply because other people seem to believe that it is true. There is a great deal of experimental evidence of informational cascades, which are easy to induce in the laboratory;45 real-world phenomena also seem to have a great deal to do with cascade effects.' Consider, for example, smoking, participating in protests, striking, rioting, buying stocks,47 choosing what to put on television," even leaving bad dinner parties. 9 
Though the cascades phenomenon has been discussed largely in connection with factual judgments, the same processes should be at work for political, legal, and moral questions. Suppose, for example, that A believes that affirmative action is wrong and even unconstitutional, that B is otherwise in equipoise but shifts upon hearing what A believes, and that C is unwilling to persist in his modest approval of affirmative action when A and B disapprove of it. It would be a very confident D who would reject the judgments of three (apparently) firmly committed others. Sometimes people are not entirely sure whether capital punishment should be imposed, whether the Constitution protects the right to have an abortion, whether it is wrong to litter or to smoke. Many people, lacking firm convictions of their own, end up believing what relevant others seem to believe. 
Judges are also vulnerable to cascade effects.5" The same process is sometimes at work for the choice of political candidates, as a fad develops in favor of one or another-a cascade "up" or "down," with sensational or ruinous consequences. One can easily imagine cascade effects in the direction of certain judgments about the appropriate course of government regulation, the minimum wage, or even constitutional law; indeed, such effects seem to have been at work in the legal culture in the 1960s (with mounting enthusiasm for the Warren Court) and the 1980s (with mounting skepticism about that Court). It is even possible to imagine cascade effects with respect to questions of constitutional method (for example, textualism, originalism, democracy-reinforcing judicial review). Note that a precondition for an informational cascade is a lack of much private information on the part of many or most people. If people have a good deal of private information, or are confident about their own judgments, they are unlikely to be susceptible to the signals sent by the actions of others." 
There can be reputational pressures and reputational cascades as well,5 2 in which people speak out, or remain silent, or even engage in certain expressive activity, partly in order to preserve their reputations, at the price of failing to say what they really think. Suppose, for example, that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious environmental problem; suppose too that B is skeptical. B might keep quiet, or (like some of Asch's subjects) even agree with A, simply in order to preserve A's good opinion. C might see that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious problem and that B seems to agree with A; C might therefore voice agreement even though privately she is skeptical or ambivalent. 
It is easy to see how this kind of thing might happen in political lifewith, for example, politicians expressing their commitment to capital punishment (even if they are privately skeptical) or their belief in God behavior by courts). 
are less likely to "move" as a result of discussion. See infratext accompanying notes 98-99. (even if they are privately agnostic). People typically have different thresholds for yielding to perceived reputational pressure. Some people follow perceived pressure only when it is very severe (for example, because a large number of people impose it), whereas others will follow when it is mild (for example, simply because some relevant others impose it). Here too the consequence can be cascade effects-large social movements in one direction or another-as increasing numbers of people yield to a pressure that they simultaneously impose, eventually reaching a critical mass. At that stage, a large number of people eventually appear to support a certain course of action simply because others (appear to) do so. 
As in the context of the informational cascade, what is true for factual beliefs may be true as well for moral, legal, and political judgments. People might say, for example, that affirmative action violates the Constitution simply because of perceived reputational sanctions from saying the opposite; they might support or oppose the death penalty largely in order to avoid the forms of social opprobrium that might come, in the relevant community, from taking the opposing view. A precondition for reputational cascades is that in making the decision at issue, reputational considerations loom large. If people do not care about their reputations, or if reputation is a small component of the choice involved, the perceived intrinsic merits will be crucial, and cascades are unlikely to result. 
Are social cascades good or bad? No general answer would make sense. Sometimes cascades are quite fragile, precisely because people's commitments are based on little private information; sometimes cascades are rooted in (and greatly fuel) blunders. Sometimes cascade effects will eliminate group or public torpor by generating concern about serious though previously ignored problems. But sometimes cascade effects will make people far more worried than they should be, or otherwise produce large-scale distortions in private judgments, public policy, and law. It is reasonable to speculate that both the antislavery and the Nazi movements had distinctive cascade-like features, as did the environmental movement in the United States and the fall of communism." The serious risk with social cascades, both informational and reputational, is that they can lead to widespead errors, factual or otherwise. Cascades need not involve deliberation, but related problems infect processes of group deliberation, as I show below. 
How do small groups of like-minded people differ from large groups of heterogeneous people? What is likely to happen within isolated deliberating enclaves? How does all this bear on deliberative democracy? To answer these questions, and to understand the relationship between social processes within groups 54 and democratic theory, it is necessary to have an understanding of group polarization. 
A. 
The Basic Phenomenon 
Group polarization is among the most robust patterns found in deliberating bodies, and it has been found in many diverse tasks. Polarization "is said to occur when an initial tendency of individual group members toward a given direction is enhanced following group discussion."55 The result is that groups often make more extreme decisions than would the typical or average individual in the group (where "extreme" is defined solely internally, by reference to the group's initial dispositions). There is a clear relationship between group polarization and cascade effects: Both have a great deal to do with informational and reputational influences. An important difference is that group polarization, unlike cascade effects, involves deliberation. In addition, polarization may or may not involve a cascade-like process; polarization can result simply from simultaneous independent decisions to move toward the group extreme. 
Though standard, the term "group polarization" is somewhat misleading. It is not meant to suggest that group members will shift to two poles, nor does it refer to an increase in variance among groups, though this may be the ultimate result. 6 Instead the term refers to a predictable shift within a group discussing a case or problem. As the shift occurs, groups and group members move and coalesce, not toward the middle of antecedent dispositions, but toward a more extreme position in the direction indicated by those dispositions. The effect of deliberation is both to decrease variance among group members, as individual differences diminish, and also to eliminate various cognitive and motivational biases in individual decisions. For a general overview, finding mixed results, see Norbert L. Kerr et al., Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individualsand Groups, 103 PSYCHOL. REV. 687 (1996). 
PERSONALrIY& Soc. PSYCHOL. 1141, 1141 (1986). 
be greater variance among groups, notwithstanding small initial differences. A group whose members are initially but tentatively disposed to reject some proposal might start out very close to a group whose members are initially but tentatively disposed to approve of that proposal. If the two groups have a number of intragroup discussions, but no intergroup discussions, they may end up very far apart. produce convergence on a relatively more extreme point among predeliberation judgments. 
The basic phenomenon has been found in many nations. 7 Consider some examples: " " * * 
United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid. 8 
strongly profeminist after discussion. 9 
prejudice offer more negative responses to the question of whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African Americans in American cities.6" 
prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question.6 In all of these cases, deliberation moves people toward a more extreme point in line with their predeliberation positions. 62 B. Risky Shifts and CautiousShifts 
Group polarization was first found in a series of experiments involving risk-taking decisions. These experiments found what has become known as the "risky shift." 63 In the original experiments, male graduate students of industrial management were asked a range of questions involving risk. For twelve of the thirteen groups, the group decisions showed a repeated pattern toward greater risk-taking. After discussion, for example, the unanimous outcome assessed the acceptable probability of financial soundness as consistently lower than the median judgment of group members prior to deliberation. In addition, there was a clear shift toward greater risk-taking in private opinions. This shift-the "risky" shift-was promptly duplicated in a number of diverse studies, some involving all men and some involving all women. 
It is important to distinguish at this point between two aspects of these findings 64 usually not separated in the psychological literature and both relevant to law and policy. The first involves the movement of deliberating groups, when a group decision is necessary, toward the group's extreme end; call this a choice shift. This means that if a group decision is required, the group will tend toward an extreme point, given the original distribution of individual views. Undoubtedly the group's decision rule will matter here; a requirement of unanimity, for example, may well produce a shift toward the most extreme points, at least if those with the most extreme views are least tractable and most confident. The second involves the movement of (even private) individual judgments as a result of group influence; call this simply (as is standard) group polarization. This means that to the extent that the private judgments of individuals are moved by discussion, the movement will be toward a more extreme point in the direction set by the original distribution of views. It is possible to have one kind of movement without the other, though ordinarily the two accompany one another 5 as with risky shifts. 
Studies have shown that under certain conditions, it is possible, even easy, to induce a "cautious shift" as well. Indeed, certain problems reliably produce cautious shifts." The principal examples involve the decision whether to marry and the decision whether to board a plane despite severe abdominal pain possibly requiring medical attention. In these cases, deliberating groups move toward caution, as do the members who compose them. Burglars, in fact, show cautious shifts in discussions, though when they work together, the tendency is toward greater risk-taking.67 
In Stoner's original data, researchers noticed that the largest risky shifts could be found when group members "had a quite extreme risky initial Risky and CautiousShifts in GroupDecisions,4 J. EXPERIMENTAL SOC. PSYCHOL. 442 (1968). In this and the following paragraph, I draw from BROWN, supra note 8, at 200-06. 
polarization ....[T]he ongoing processes at these two levels may differ."). 

REP. 579, 586 (1991). position," in the sense that the predeliberation votes were weighted toward the risky end, whereas the items "that shifted a little or not at all started out near the middle of the scale." 6 Thus the direction of the shift seemed to turn on the location of the original disposition, and the size of the shift depended on the extremeness of that original disposition. Similar results have been found in many contexts relevant to law and democracy, involving, for example, questions about economic aid, architecture, education, political leaders, race, and judgments of guilt or innocence.69 Polarization has been found for questions of obscure fact as well as for evaluative questions, including political and legal issues7 ° and even the attractiveness of people in slides.7' C. Mechanisms 
What explains group polarization? It is tempting to think that conformity plays a large role, and as the Asch experiments suggest, individual judgments can be greatly influenced by the desire to conform. Perhaps conformity is sometimes at work, but the data make it clear that group polarization is not a matter of conformity; people do not shift to the mean of initial positions.72 The relevant movement goes to one or another side. Indeed, this is what defines, and what is most distinctive about, group polarization. 
There have been two main explanations for group polarization. Both of these have been extensively investigated and supported.73 The first explanation of group polarization-social comparison-begins with the claim that people want to be perceived favorably by other group members and also to perceive themselves favorably. Most people seek to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort. In the case of risk-taking, for example, they may want to be perceived (and to perceive themselves) as daring risk-takers, and their choice of position is partly a product of these 
Polarizationin Computer-MediatedCommunication, 29 BRIT. J. SOC. PSYCHOL. 121 (1990). 
finds that the effect lies in conformity to the "prototypical group member," defined as such by reference to a "meta-contrast principle: the less a person differs from in-group members and the more he or she differs from out-group members, the more representative is he or she of the ingroup." Craig McGarty et al., Group Polarization as Conformity to the Prototypical Group Member, 31 BRIT.J. SOC. PSYCHOL. 1, 3 (1992). This position raises many questions; it seems to have the strongest fit with the data in cases in which in-groups and out-groups can readily be understood as such by subjects. See id. 
also TURNER ET AL., supranote 11, at 142-70, for an overview and an attempt to generate a new synthesis. desires.74 No one can know what the desirable position would be until the positions of others are revealed. 5 People move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. Evidence confirms that mere exposure to the positions of others, without discussion, induces a substantial risky shift (though this shift is only about half as large as the shift produced by discussion).7 6 This effect helps explain a shift toward caution (the "cautious shift") as well.77 
The second explanation is based on the commonsense intuition that any individual's position on an issue is partly a function of which arguments presented within the group seem convincing. The choice therefore moves in the direction of the most persuasive position defended by the group, taken as a whole. Because a group whose members are already inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments going in that same direction, the result of discussion will be to move people further in the direction of their initial inclinations. The key is the existence of a limited argument pool, one that is skewed (speaking purely descriptively) in a particular direction.78 Hence there will be a shift in the direction of the Act-one that does not, however, identify the mechanisms discussed here-see E. Donald Elliott et al., Toward a Theory of Statutory Evolution: The Federalizationof EnvironmentalLaw, 1 J.L. ECON. & ORG. 313 (1985). 
Once the real location of the mean was known, should it not be the case, granting that everyone wanted to see himself as reasonably audacious, that those who were really below the mean would be motivated to adopt riskier positions and so change the mean and produce the risky shift? BROWN, supra note 8, at 214. 
SOC. PSYCHOL. 189 (1967). 
that is, ignorance of what other people think (or are willing to say they think). It is implicit in these findings that people seem to want not to conform, but to be different from others in a desirable way. While highly suggestive, however, the "mere exposure" finding does not confirm the social influence account; it is possible that the views of others simply provide an informational signal, quite apart from arguments, and hence that people move not in order to maintain reputation, but to do what is right. 
models in economics or law. (On those models generally, see GARY S. BECKER, ACCOUNTING FOR TASTES (1996); BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS (Cass R. Sunstein ed., 2000).) But individual behavior within groups, as described thus far, should create no such doubts. It is certainly rational to make assessments on the basis of arguments offered; if the most numerous and convincing arguments seem to justify a shift, individual shifts are entirely rational. More difficult questions might seem to be raised by "social influence" accounts of group polarization. But it is also rational for people to care about their reputations. If they change their assessment because of reputational considerations, then maintaining a certain reputation is simply part of what people care about (and there is nothing irrational about that). If people shift not for reputational reasons but because of a certain self-conception-if, for example, they think of themselves as people who are bold, or committed to a strong national defense, or left of center on issues of race-a change in position, after exposure to the views of others, also seems entirely rational. heightened, and it simultaneously raises some questions about the idea that certain group discussions produce "consciousness raising." It is possible, at least, that the consequence of discussion is not only or mostly to raise consciousness (an ambiguous idea to be sure), but to produce group polarization in one direction or another-and at the same time to increase confidence in the position that has newly emerged.' This does not mean that consciousness is never raised; undoubtedly group discussion can identify and clarify problems that were previously repressed, or understood as an individual rather than social product. But nothing of this sort is established by the mere fact that views have changed and coalesced, and are held, post-discussion, with a high degree of confidence. 2 
An understanding of group polarization also casts light on the imposition of liability for criminal conspiracy, which can be added to the penalty for the substantive offense in most jurisdictions. It is tempting to think that this kind of "doubling up" is indefensible, a form of overkill. But if the act of conspiring leads people moderately disposed toward criminal behavior to be more than moderately disposed, precisely because they are conspiring together, it makes sense, on grounds of deterrence, to impose additional penalties. Some courts have come close to recognizing this point in discussing the imposition of distinct sanctions on conspiracies.'23 C. Feuds,Ethnic andInternationalStrife, and War 
Group polarization is likely to be at work in feuds of all kinds. One of the characteristic features of feuds is that members of feuding groups tend to talk only to one another, fueling and amplifying their outrage, and solidifying their impression of the relevant events. Informational and reputational forces are very much at work here, producing cascade effects, and group polarization can lead members to increasingly extreme positions. These effects are present within ethnic groups and even nations, notwithstanding the usually high degree of national heterogeneity. In America, sharp divergences between whites and African Americans, on particular salient events or more generally, can be explained by reference to group polarization." 
Timur Kuran has explored the broader international phenomenon of "ethnification." Kuran's basic claim is that in many nations, including 
action. .. decreases the probability that the individuals involved will depart from their path of criminality."). I am grateful to Dan Kahan for pressing this point. Recall that while actual burglars show a cautious shift in general conversation, their practices show a shift toward greater risktaking (and correspondingly greater dangers for ordinary citizens). Cromwell et al., supra note 67. Turkey and the former Yugoslavia, ethnic strife is not the product of a reawakening of long-suppressed resentments, but instead of reputational cascades. In this process, a failure to engage in ethnically identified activity produces reputational sanctions, which grow in intensity over time as increasing numbers of people join the cascade. Initially people may be asked to dress in an ethnically identifiable way; later they may be asked to engage in certain celebrations and to participate in meetings; still later they may be asked to segregate themselves. Hence "the fears and antagonisms that accompany high levels of ethnic activity may be a result of ethnification rather than its root cause." Kuran does not refer to group polarization. But an understanding of this phenomenon would much fortify his analysis, by showing how within-group discussion (which is, under conditions of ethnification, an increasingly large percentage of total discussion) can ensure that ethnic groups, and individual members of ethnic groups, end up with a far stronger ethnic identification than the median member had before discussions began. In the extreme case, the result might be war.'2 6 And when a war begins, group polarization, if it operates at the national level, can help ensure continued hostility and antagonism. D. The Internet, CommunicationsPolicy, and Mass Deliberation 
Many people have expressed concern about processes of social influence on the mass media and the Internet. 7 The general problem is said to be one of fragmentation, with certain people hearing more and louder versions of their own preexisting commitments, thus reducing the benefits that come from exposure to competing views and unnoticed problems. 28 With greater specialization, people are increasingly able to avoid general interest newspapers and magazines and to make choices that reflect their own predispositions. The Internet makes it possible for people to design their own highly individual communications packages, filtering out troublesome issues and disfavored voices. Long before the Internet, it was possible to discuss the "racial stratification of the public sphere" by reference to divergences between white and African-American newspapers.'29 New communications technologies may increase this phenomenon. 30 
Group polarization explains why a fragmented communications market may create problems. 31 A "plausible hypothesis is that the Internet-like setting is most likely to create a strong tendency toward group polarization when the members of the group feel some sense of group identity." 132 If certain people are deliberating with many like-minded others, views will not be reinforced, but instead will be shifted to more extreme points. This cannot be said to be bad by itself-perhaps the increased extremism is good-but it is certainly troublesome if diverse social groups are led, through predictable mechanisms, toward increasingly opposing and ever more extreme views. Processes of this general sort have threatened both peace and stability in some nations. 33 Both fragmentation and violence are possible results. Group polarization can intensify if people are speaking anonymously and if attention is drawn, through one or another means, to group membership. Many Internet discussion groups have precisely this feature. 13' The Internet may thus serve, for many, as a breeding ground for extremism. 
An understanding of group polarization raises more general issues about communications policy. Under the "fairness doctrine," now largely abandoned,'35 broadcasters were required to devote time to public issues and to allow an opportunity for opposing views to speak. The second prong of the doctrine was designed to ensure that listeners would not be exposed to any single view. When the FCC abandoned the fairness doctrine, it did so on the ground that this second prong often led broadcasters to avoid controversial issues entirely, and to present views in a way that suggested a bland uniformity.'36 Subsequent research has suggested that the elimination of the fairness doctrine has indeed produced a flowering of controversial substantive programming, frequently with an extreme view of one kind or another; consider talk radio.33 Typically this is regarded as a story of wonderfully successful deregulation. But from the standpoint of group polarization, things are more complicated. The growth of issues-oriented programming with a strong, often extreme view may create group polarization, and all too many people might be exposed to louder echoes of their own voices, resulting in social fragmentation, enmity, and 25, 2000) (forthcoming 2001) (manuscript on file with The Yale Law Journal). 
Hightower & Luftus Sayeed, The Impact of Computer-Mediated Communication Systems on BiasedGroupDiscussion, 11 COMPUTERS IN HUM. BEHAV. 33 (1995). 

Evidence from the PostderegulationRadio Market, 26 J. LEGAL STUD. 279 ( affirmative answer to the question in the title). misunderstanding. Perhaps it is better for people to hear fewer controversial views than for them to hear a single such view stated over and over again. 
It is not clear what can be done about this situation. But it certainly makes sense to consider communications initiatives that would ensure that people are exposed to a range of reasonable views, not simply one. This was the original inspiration for the fairness doctrine, and there is reason to encourage media outlets to implement the same goal today. Thus Habermas's suggestion: 
The diffusion of information and points of view.., is not the only thing that matters in public processes of communication, nor is it the most important.... [T]he rules of a shared practice of communication are of greater significance for structuring public opinion. Agreement on issues and contributions develops only as the result of more or less exhaustive controversy in which proposals, information, and reasons can be more or less rationally dealt with.13 Perhaps a code of fair programming could promote voluntary selfregulation in this direction. 139 With respect to the Internet, Andrew Shapiro has suggested public subsidy of a civic icon that would promote exposure to substantive discussions from a variety of viewpoints. 4 ° An appreciation of group polarization suggests the need for creative approaches designed to ensure that people do not simply read their "Daily Me." 141 E. Deliberationand Polarizationin Public Institutions 
I now turn to brief discussions of group polarization in government institutions. 

Group polarization on juries is well-documented; the jury, in fact, is the only legal institution for which direct evidence of group polarization exists. In experimental settings, polarization has been found in numerous instances with respect to guilt and innocence, and indeed this appears to be an uncontradicted finding.'4 2 Outside of the experimental setting, we know that 
( 
102-14) (discussing Shapiro's proposal and other reforms designed to promote exposure to diverse ideas). 
the median predeliberation verdict predicts the final outcome ninety percent of the time in cases where juries do not hang; this provides "powerful presumptive evidence that group polarization occurs in real juries." 143 
The twentieth century has seen the rise of a number of "independent" regulatory commissions, including the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, and the National Labor Relations Board. A striking but generally overlooked provision of the relevant statutes requires bipartisan membership: The independent commissions cannot have more than a certain number of members from any one political party.144 A simple and undoubtedly correct explanation of this unusual requirement is that Congress wanted to ensure that no commission would be dominated by any single party. But an understanding of group polarization would strengthen any such concern on Congress's part. An independent agency that is all Democratic, or all Republican, might polarize toward an extreme position, likely more extreme than that of the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any member standing alone. A requirement of bipartisan membership can operate as a check against movements of this kind. 
Group polarization might also occur on multimember courts. Notwithstanding platitudes about judicial neutrality, judges often have a great deal of latitude, sometimes in the ultimate outcome, more often in determining the reach of their decision. If a court consists of three or more like-minded judges, it may well end up with a relatively extreme position, more extreme in fact than the position it would occupy if it consisted of two like-minded individuals and one of a different orientation. 
There is little direct confirmation of this general proposition. But considerable support comes from two studies of judicial behavior on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. 4 The first study finds a tendency toward more extreme results when a panel consists of judges from a single political party; most notably, a panel of three Republican judges is far more likely than a panel of two Republicans and one Democrat to reverse an environmental decision at the behest of industry challengers." This is precisely what would be predicted by group polarization: A homogeneous panel is far more likely to go in an extreme direction than a mixed panel. 
The second study is a bit more complex.147 Under Chevron v. NRDC,141 courts are supposed to uphold agency interpretations of law so long as the interpretations are "reasonable." The study found a dramatic difference in the way politically divided panels (with judges appointed by presidents from more than one party) and "unified" panels (with judges appointed by presidents from only one party) on the D.C. Circuit interpreted this stricture. On divided panels in which a majority of the panel might be expected to be hostile to the agency on, broadly speaking, political grounds, the court deferred to the agency 62% of the time.'49 But on unified panels, in which the court might be expected to be hostile to the agency, the court upheld the agency interpretation only 33% of the time. 50 Note that this was the only asymmetry in the data; when courts were expected to uphold the agency's decision on political controls, they did so over 70% of the time, whether unified (71% of the time) or divided (84% of the time).15 ' There is no smoking gun here, but it seems reasonable to speculate that the seemingly bizarre result-a mere 33% validation rate in cases in which the panel was unified-reflects a process of group polarization. A group of like-minded judges may well take the relatively unusual step of rejecting an agency interpretation, whereas a divided panel, with a check on any tendency toward extreme outcomes, is more likely to take the conventional route. 

Legislators are likely to be susceptible to group polarization, partly because of the effects of limited argument pools, and perhaps above all because of social influence (including the importance of conveying a proper signal to fellow legislators and constituents). Imagine, for example, that a group of Republicans and a group of Democrats are thinking about how to vote on a proposed law. If Republicans are speaking mostly with Republicans, and if Democrats are speaking mostly with Democrats, one should expect a hardening of views toward the more extreme points. Undoubtedly this is part (certainly not all) of the explanation of party-line voting. Mechanisms of group polarization will sometimes be at work with constituents as well. It is easy to imagine a society in which Republicans speak mostly with each other; one can imagine a society in which Democrats speak mostly with one another too. If this is the situation, polarization should occur within political camps. 
V. DELIBERATIVE TROUBLE? 
This Part turns to normative issues involving the relationship among group polarization, democratic theory, and legal institutions. I focus in particular on the implications of group polarization for institutional design, with special reference to the uses of heterogeneity and the complex issues presented by deliberation inside particular "enclaves." 
The central problem is that widespread error and social fragmentation are likely to result when like-minded people, insulated from others, move in extreme directions simply because of limited argument pools and parochial influences. As an extreme example, consider a system of one-party domination, which stifles dissent in part because it refuses to establish space for the emergence of divergent positions; in this way, it intensifies polarization within the party while also disabling external criticism. 
In terms of institutional design, the most natural response is to ensure that members of deliberating groups, whether small or large, will not isolate themselves from competing views-a point with implications for multimember courts, open primaries, freedom of association, and the architecture of the Internet. Here, then, is a plea for ensuring that deliberation occurs within a large and heterogeneous public sphere, and for guarding against a situation in which like-minded people wall themselves off from alternative perspectives. 
But there is a difficulty with this response: A certain measure of isolation will, in some cases, be crucial to the development of ideas and approaches that would not otherwise emerge and that deserve a social hearing.'52 Members of low-status groups are often quiet within heterogeneous bodies, and deliberation in such bodies tends to be dominated by high-status members. Any shift-in technology, norms, or legal practice-that increases the number of deliberating enclaves will likewise increase the diversity of society's aggregate "argument pool" while also increasing the danger of extremism and instability, ultimately even violence. Shifts toward a general "public sphere," without much in the way of enclave deliberation, will decrease the likelihood of extremism and instability, but at the same time produce what may be a stifling uniformity. '"53 And shifts toward more in the way of enclave deliberation will increase society's aggregate "argument pool," and hence enrich the marketplace of ideas,'5 4 while also increasing fragmentation, hostility, and perhaps even violence. 
No algorithm is available to solve the resulting conundrums. But some general lessons do emerge. It is important to ensure social spaces for deliberation by like-minded persons, but it is equally important to ensure that members of the relevant groups are not isolated from conversation with people having quite different views. The goal of that conversation is to promote the interests of those inside and outside the relevant enclaves, by subjecting group members to competing positions, by allowing them to exchange views with others and to see things from their point of view, and by ensuring that the wider society does not marginalize, and thus insulate itself from, views that may turn out to be right or at least informative. 
Ideas of this kind have a central place in the constitutional framework, with the system of checks and balances, bicameralism, and the Framers' explicit rejection of the "right to instruct" representatives.155 They also have an important emerging place on the Internet, where there are many current proposals to create a "public sphere" involving discussions among diverse people who would otherwise be in contact largely with those who are like-minded. 15 6 In these ways, an understanding of group polarization helps provide a better sense of how institutions, both old and new, might be restructured in the service of democratic ideals. 
A. Doubts and Questions 
It should be clear that the phenomenon of group polarization, placed alongside the phenomenon of social cascades, raises severe doubts about the view that deliberation is a simple or unambiguous good. Of course deliberation might be justified on many different grounds.'57 It may be that on the question at issue, there is a truth of the matter-a correct answerand deliberation might be thought to be the best way of reaching it. Perhaps group decisions, based on an exchange of reasons, are more likely to be right than decisions made by individuals. Alternatively, society might favor KURAN, supra note 30, at 176-95. 

102-03, 111-14). 
deliberation on a quite different ground: Doubting whether there is a truth of the matter, a society might seek a deliberative process on the theory that this is the only reasonable and fair way to reach a decision that will be imposed on the group.'58 Or deliberation might be seen as a way to reach some sort of shared understanding or to ensure a form of mutual respect. Group polarization does not create obvious difficulties for all of these accounts. But it does raise real questions about the widespread idea that deliberation is the best way of producing right answers. 
If the effect of deliberation is to move people toward a more extreme point in the direction of their original tendency, why is it anything to celebrate? The underlying mechanisms do not provide much reason for confidence. If people shift their position in order to maintain their reputation and self-conception, is there any reason to think that deliberation is making things better rather than worse? If shifts occur as a result of partial and frequently skewed argument pools, the results of deliberative judgments may be far worse than the results of simply taking the median of predeliberation judgments. 
To be sure, those who emphasize the ideals associated with deliberative democracy tend to emphasize its preconditions, which include political equality, an absence of strategic behavior, full information, and the goal of "reaching understanding." '59 In real-world deliberations, behavior is often strategic, and equality is often absent in one or another form. But group polarization is likely to occur even in the face of equality and of entirely conscientious efforts at reaching both truth and understanding. The existence of a limited argument pool, strengthening the existing tendency within the group, will operate in favor of group polarization even if no individual behaves strategically. By itself, this will produce group polarization, whether or not social influence is operating. 
In any case, social influences need not be inconsistent with the effort to produce truth and understanding. When people attempt to position themselves in a way that fits with their best self-conception or their preferred self-presentation, nothing has gone wrong, even from the standpoint of deliberation's most enthusiastic defenders."6 Perhaps group polarization could be reduced or even eliminated if we emphasized that full supra note 2, at 83-90. 
McCarthy trans., Beacon Press 1984) (1981). Thus Habermas distinguishes between strategic and communicative action and stresses "the cooperatively pursued goal of reaching understanding." Id. Compare Habermas's view with the treatment in GUTMANN & THOMPSON, supra note 5, at 52-94, referring to the idea of reciprocity, which emphasizes the desire to justify one's position by reference to reasons. 
THEORY 75, 77-90 (Jon Elster & Aanund Hylland eds., 1986) (discussing self-censorship as a check on invidious views). information is a precondition for good deliberation. By hypothesis, argument pools would not be limited if all information were available. But that requirement is extremely stringent, and if there is already full information, the role of deliberation is greatly reduced. 6 ' In any case, the group polarization phenomenon suggests that, in real-world situations, deliberation is hardly guaranteed to increase the likelihood of arriving at truth. 
Movements Right and Wrong 
Polarization does not necessarily mean that there has been a movement in the wrong direction. Perhaps the more extreme tendency is better. Recall that group polarization is likely to have fueled the antislavery movement and many other movements that deserve widespread approval. In the context of punitive damages awards, perhaps a severity shift produces good outcomes. Extremism need hardly be a word of opprobrium; everything depends on what extremists are arguing for. But when group discussion leads people to more strongly held versions of the same view with which they began, and when social influences and limited argument pools are responsible, there is little reason for great confidence in the effects of deliberation. 
If it is possible to identify a particular viewpoint as unreasonable, it is also possible to worry about group discussion among people who share that viewpoint. As noted, this is a basis for justifying the decision to make criminal conspiracy an independent crime; the act of conspiring itself raises the stakes, and by hypothesis the actions ultimately at issue are unlawful and beyond the pale.'62 An analogy can be found in discussions within hate groups, on the Internet and elsewhere. If the underlying views are unreasonable, it makes sense to fear that these discussions may fuel increasing hatred. This does not mean that the discussions can or should be regulated in a system dedicated to freedom of speech. But it does raise questions about the idea that "more speech" is necessarily an adequate remedy. 
B. The Virtues ofHeterogeneity 
The simplest lesson here involves both individual susceptibility and institutional design. For many people, mere awareness of the role of limited argument pools and social influences might provide some inoculation given a certain understanding of the facts. 
against inadequately justified movements of opinion within groups. More importantly, institutions should be designed to ensure that when shifts are occurring, it is not because of arbitrary or illegitimate constraints on the available range of arguments. This is a central task of constitutional design. In this light, a system of checks and balances might be explained, not as an undemocratic check on the will of the people, but as an effort to protect against potentially harmful consequences of group discussion.163 
We have seen that the system of bicameralism, often challenged on populist grounds,"6 might be defended by reference to the risk of group polarization. Indeed, James Wilson's great lectures on law spoke of bicameralism in these terms, referring to "instances, in which the people have become the miserable victims of passions, operating on their government without restraint," and seeing a "single legislature" as prone to "sudden and violent fits of despotism, injustice, and cruelty."165 Efforts to assure a plurality of views on regulatory commissions and courts can be defended on similar grounds. As supporting evidence, consider the findings that cohesive groups of like-minded people whose members are connected by close social ties often suppress dissent and reach inferior decisions, whereas heterogeneous groups, building identification through focus on a common task rather than through other social ties, tend to produce the best outcomes. 66 C. A Thought Experiment: VindicatingHamilton 
To explore some of the advantages of heterogeneity, imagine a deliberating body consisting of all citizens in the relevant group; this may mean all citizens in a community, a state, a nation, or the world. By hypothesis, the argument pool would be very large. It would be limited only to the extent that the set of citizen views was similarly limited. Social influences would undoubtedly remain. Hence people might shift because they want to maintain their reputation and self-conception, and to do this they must stand in a certain relation to the rest of the group. But to the extent that deliberation revealed to people that their private position was different from what they thought it was in relation to the group, any shift would be in response to an accurate understanding of all relevant citizens, and not a product of a skewed group sample. 
Madison). 
One-House Town, WASH. POST, Nov. 4, 1999, at A35, 1999 WL 23312778. 
Green McCloskey ed., 1967). 

This thought experiment does not suggest that the hypothesized deliberating body would be ideal. Perhaps all citizens, presenting all individual views, would offer a skewed picture from the normative point of view; in a pervasively unjust society, a deliberating body consisting of everyone may produce nothing to celebrate. Perhaps weak arguments would be made and repeated and repeated again, while good arguments would be offered infrequently. As I suggest below,'67 it is often important to ensure that there are enclaves in which polarization will take place, precisely in order to ensure the emergence of views that are suppressed, by social influences or otherwise, but are reasonable or even right. But at least a deliberating body of all citizens would remove some of the distortions in the group polarization experiments, where generally like-minded people, not exposed to others, shift in large part because of that limited exposure.'68 Many studies show that organizational performance is impaired by people's failure to voice diverse views,'69 and this is a tendency against which heterogeneity might guard. 
Here, in fact, is a way of vindicating the passages from Hamilton and Rawls with which I began. On this view, Hamilton and Rawls are not naive enthusiasts for deliberation, oblivious to empirical realities, but are insisting on the advantages of heterogeneity and of a wide argument pool being placed before the deliberators. Indeed, this was Hamilton's claim with respect to the "jarring of parties" within a bicameral legislature, a process that, Hamilton contended, would "check the excesses of the majority"excesses that can be reinterpreted in terms of the phenomena I have been describing. The Framers of the Bill of Rights originally rejected a "right to instruct," by which constituents could tell their representatives how to vote; the rejection was based on the idea that one job of the representative was to "consult" with people from different states of the Union, and to make decisions only after that consultation. 7 The rejection of the right to instruct, on the theory that deliberators should be talking to people with different experiences and viewpoints, seems to show an appreciation of the risks of group polarization. 
As I have suggested, central features of the constitutional design, including the system of checks and balances, can be understood in similar terms. Indeed, Madison defended his preference for large election districts and long terms of service as a way of counteracting polarization-type forces 
tasks (involving investment clubs). 
93 PSYCHOL. REv. 23 (1986); Harrington, supra note 83. 
within particular constituencies. 7 ' Rawls's reference to the need to "combin[e] information and enlarg[e] the range of arguments" through discussion with a range of people strikes precisely the same note.'72 
There are also potential vices in heterogeneity and potentially desirable effects from deliberating "enclaves," consisting of groups of like-minded individuals. It seems obvious that such groups can be extremely important in a heterogeneous society, not least because members of some demographic groups tend to be especially quiet when participating in broader deliberative bodies. A special advantage of "enclave deliberation" is that it promotes the development of positions that would otherwise be invisible, silenced, or squelched in general debate.73 In numerous contexts, this is a great advantage; many social movements have been made possible through this route (as possible examples, consider feminism, 174 the civil rights movement, religious conservatism, environmentalism, and the movement for gay and lesbian rights). 
The efforts of marginalized groups to exclude outsiders, and even of political parties to limit their primaries to party members, can be justified in similar terms. Even if group polarization is at work-perhaps because group polarization is at work--enclaves can provide a wide range of social benefits, not least because they greatly enrich the social argument pool. In fact, the First Amendment right of expressive association should be understood in precisely these terms. According protection to collective effort on behalf of shared goals is especially important in preserving political and cultural diversity and in shielding dissident expression from suppression by the majority. 
A. Low Status and High Status 
In deliberating bodies, high-status members tend to initiate communication more than others, and their ideas are more influential, partly (1985). 

MACKINNON, TOWARD A FEMINIST THEORY OFTHE STATE 83-105 (1989). 
Daly to exclude men from her class at Boston University. See Carey Goldberg, Facing Forced Retirement,Iconoclastic ProfessorKeeps On Fighting, N.Y. TIMES, Aug. 15, 1999, at A13, 1999 WL 30476861; see also Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 120 S. Ct. 2446 ( associational interest and right of exclusion of Boy Scouts); Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 622 (1984) (rejecting the right of exclusion of the Jaycees). because low-status members lack confidence in their own abilities, partly because they fear retribution. 17 For example, women's ideas are often less influential and sometimes are "suppressed altogether in mixed-gender groups," 176 and in ordinary circumstances, cultural minorities have disproportionately little influence on decisions by culturally mixed groups.177 It makes sense to promote deliberating enclaves in which members of multiple groups may speak with one another and develop their views. 
But there is a serious danger in such enclaves. The danger is that through the mechanisms discussed here, members will move to positions that lack merit but are predictable consequences of the particular circumstances of enclave deliberation. In the extreme case, enclave deliberation may even put social stability at risk (for better or for worse). And it is impossible to say, in the abstract, that those who sort themselves into enclaves will generally move in a direction that is desirable for society at large or even for its own members. It is easy to think of examples to the contrary, such as the rise of Nazism, hate groups, and numerous "cults" of various sorts; 7 ' readers can think of their own preferred illustrations. 
There is no simple solution to the dangers of enclave deliberation. Sometimes the threat to social stability is desirable. As Jefferson wrote, turbulence can be "productive of good. It prevents the degeneracy of government, and nourishes a general attention to... public affairs. I hold... that a little rebellion now and then is a good thing . ..""''.Any judgments about enclave deliberation are hard to make without a sense of the underlying substance-of what it is that divides the enclave from the rest of society. From the standpoint of institutional design, the problem is that any effort to promote enclave deliberation will ensure group polarization within a wide range of groups, some necessary to the pursuit of justice, others likely to promote injustice, and some potentially quite dangerous. This makes clearer the sense in which Edmund Burke's conception of representation-rejecting "local purposes" and "local 
Reactions with Constructive Conflict, 17 GROUP & ORG.MGMT. 153, 166 (1992). Interestingly, there is evidence that with changes in gender norms, some tasks show no gender differences in influence on groups. See Katherine W. Hawkins, Effects of Gender and CommunicationContent on Leadership Emergence in Small Task-Oriented Groups, 26 SMALL GROUP RES. 234, 243-44 (1995). 
FESTINGER ET AL., WHEN PROPHECY FAILS 3-30 (1956) (discussing conditions for continued commitment to implausible beliefs, including the need for social support). 
THOMAS JEFFERSON 416-17 (Merrill D. Peterson ed., 1975). prejudices" in favor of "the general reason of the whole" 8 -- is not contingently but instead essentially conservative (speaking purely descriptively, as a safeguard of existing practices). The reason is that the submersion of "local purposes" and "local prejudices" into a heterogeneous "deliberative assembly" 181 will inevitably tend to weaken the resolve of groups-and particularly low-status or marginalized groups-whose purely internal deliberations would produce a high degree of polarization. 
Hence James Madison-with his fear of popular passions producing "a rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, or for any other improper or wicked project" '82 -would naturally be drawn to a Burkean conception of representation, favoring large election districts and long length of service'83 to counteract the forces of polarization. By contrast, those who believe that "destabilization" is an intrinsic good,1"' or that the status quo contains sufficient injustice that it is worthwhile to incur the risks of encouraging polarization on the part of diverse groups, will, or should, be drawn to a system that enthusiastically promotes insular deliberation within enclaves. 
In a nation in which most people are confused or evil, enclave deliberation may be the only way to develop a sense of clarity or justice, at least for some. But even in such a nation, enclave deliberation is unlikely to produce change unless the members of different enclaves are eventually brought into contact with others. In democratic societies, the best response is to ensure that any such enclaves are not walled off from competing views, and that at certain points, there is an exchange of views between enclave members and those who disagree with them. It is total or near-total self-insulation, rather than group deliberation as such, that carries with it the most serious dangers, often in the highly unfortunate (and sometimes deadly) combination of extremism with marginality. 
B. The Public Sphere andAppropriateHeterogeneity 
For a designer or leader of any institution, it makes sense to promote ample social space both for enclave deliberation and for discussions WRITINGS AND SPEECHES OF EDMUND BURKE ON REFORM, REVOLUTION, AND WAR 116 (Ross J.S. Hoffman & Paul Levack eds., 1949). 

STUDIES MOVEMENT 39, 43, 53-57 (1986), which asserts the need for destabilization rights. involving a broad array of views, including views of those who have been within diverse enclaves.'85 The idea of a "public sphere," developed most prominently by Jurgen Habermas, can be understood as an effort to ensure a domain in which multiple views can be heard by people with multiple perspectives. 8 ' This understanding strongly supports current initiatives designed to ensure deliberation among dissimilar people on the Internet. 87 The fact of group polarization suggests that it could be desirable to take steps to reduce the likelihood that panels on federal courts of appeals consist solely of appointees of presidents of any single political party. 88 
Of course, any argument pool will be limited. No one has time to listen to every point of view. But an understanding of group polarization helps show that heterogeneous groups are often a far better source of good judgments, simply because more arguments will be made available. 
An understanding of group polarization is also relevant to the continuing debate over group representation. 89 The central issue here is whether identifiable groups should be represented as such in political institutions. Perhaps political groups should be allowed to have representation to the extent that they are able to get more than a minimal share of the vote. Perhaps steps should be taken to increase the likelihood that members of disadvantaged or marginal groups have their own representatives in the deliberating body. An understanding of group polarization is hardly sufficient to reach a definitive conclusion about these issues. But at least it can be said that group representation should help counteract the risks of polarization, and susceptibility to cascade effects, that come from deliberation among like-minded people. At the same time, group representation should help reduce the dangers that come from insulation of those in the smaller enclave, by subjecting enclave representatives to a broader debate. 
Seen in this light, the point of group representation is to promote a process in which those in the enclave hear what others have to say, and in which those in other enclaves, or in no enclaves at all, are able to listen to AND FIASCOS 267-71 (2d ed. 1982). 

(1990) (urging group representation as a means of ensuring expression of plural perspectives); Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Republican Revival, 97 YALE L.J. 1539, 1585-89 (1988) (urging group representation as a means of ensuring good deliberation about the public good). For an overview of the debate, see also the essays in CHOOSING AN ELECTORAL SYSTEM: ISSUES AND ALTERNATIVES (Arend Lijphart & Bernard Grofman eds., 1984). people with very different points of view. When groups are represented as such in private and public institutions, it is to promote the airing of points of view that otherwise go unheard. And there is a further benefit to group representation: It works to prevent self-insulation on the part of group members by ensuring that they hear what others have to say as well. Here the benefits of group representation extend to both members and nonmembers of the relevant groups. 

For a deliberative democracy, a central question is how to ensure appropriateheterogeneity. For example, it would not make sense to say that in a deliberating group attempting to think through issues of affirmative action, it is important to allow exposure to people who think that slavery was good and should be restored. The constraints of time and attention call for limits to heterogeneity; and-a separate point-for good deliberation to take place, some views are properly placed off the table, simply because time is limited and they are so invidious, or implausible, or both. This point might seem to create a final conundrum: To know what points of view should be represented in any group deliberation, it is important to have a good sense of the substantive issues involved, indeed a sense sufficient to generate judgments about what points of view must be included and excluded. But if we already know that, does deliberation have any point at all? 
The answer is that we often do know enough to see which views count as reasonable, without knowing which view counts as right, and this point is sufficient to allow people to construct deliberative processes that should correct for the most serious problems potentially created by group polarization. What is necessary is not to allow every view to be heard, but to ensure that no single view is so widely heard, and reinforced, that people are unable to engage in critical evaluation of the reasonable competitors. 
Of course, the provision of diverse views does not guarantee good deliberation. Among other things, most people are subject to "confirmation bias," in accordance with which exposure to a competing position will not dislodge and may even strengthen the antecedently held position."9 On questions of morality and fairness, and undoubtedly other questions as well, those who listen to diverse opinions may well emerge from the experience with an enhanced belief in the soundness of their original commitment. 9 ' But this is not a universal phenomenon, and at least an understanding of Prior Theories on Subsequently Considered Evidence, 37 1. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 2098, 2102-04 (1979). 
competing views is likely to weaken the forms of fragmentation and misunderstanding that come from deliberation among the like-minded. 92 C. The DeliberativeOpinion Poll:A Contrast 
James Fishkin has pioneered the idea of "deliberative polling," in which small groups consisting of highly diverse individuals are asked to come together and to deliberate about various issues.'93 Deliberative opinion polls have now been conducted in several nations, including the United States, England, and Australia. Fishkin finds some noteworthy shifts in individual views, but he does not find a systematic tendency toward polarization. In his studies, individuals shift both toward and away from the median of predeliberation views. For present purposes, what is noteworthy about Fishkin's experiments is that they do not involve isolated enclaves; this is part of the reason for the absence of polarization effects. 
In England, for example, deliberation led to reduced interest in using imprisonment as a tool for combating crime."9 The percentage believing that "sending more offenders to prison" is an effective way to prevent crime went down from 57% to 38%; the percentage believing that fewer people should be sent to prison increased from 29% to 44%; belief in the effectiveness of "stiffer sentences" was reduced from 78% to 65%. Similar shifts were shown in the direction of greater enthusiasm for procedural rights of defendants and increased willingness to explore alternatives to prison."' In other experiments with the deliberative opinion poll, shifts included a mixture of findings, with larger percentages of individuals concluding that legal pressures should be increased on fathers for child support (from 70% to 85%) and that welfare and health care should be turned over to the states (from 56% to 66%).97 On many issues, deliberation increased the intensity with which people held their preexisting convictions.19 These findings are consistent with the prediction of group polarization. But this was hardly a uniform pattern, and on some questions, deliberation increased the percentage of people holding a minority position 25 SMALL GROUP RES. 189, 199-202 (1994); Brian Mullen & Carolyn Copper, The Relation Between Group Cohesiveness and Performance:An Integration, 115 PSYCHOL. BULL. 210, 225 (1994). For evidence to this effect, see Harrngton, supra note 35, at 30-34. 

commitment to reducing the deficit; showing a jump, on a scale of 1 to 3, from 2.71 to 2.85 in intensity of support for greater spending on education; and showing a jump, on a scale of 1 to 3, from 1.95 to 2.16, in commitment to aiding American business interests abroad). (with, for example, a jump from 36% to 57% of people favoring policies making divorce "harder to get" )199 These are not the changes that would be predicted by group polarization. 
Several factors distinguish the deliberative opinion poll from experiments on group polarization. First, Fishkin's deliberators did not vote as a group, and while group polarization is observed when no group decision is expected,2 "o the extent of polarization may well decrease simply because members have not been asked to sign onto a group decision as such. Second, Fishkin's groups were overseen by a moderator; this attempt to ensure a level of openness is likely to have altered some of the dynamics discussed here. Third, Fishkin's groups were highly diverse and enclave deliberation was impossible. Fourth, Fishkin's studies presented participants with a set of written materials that attempted to be balanced and that contained detailed arguments for both sides. The likely consequence would be to move people in different directions from those that would be expected by simple group discussion, unaffected by authoritative external materials. Indeed, the very effort to produce balance should be expected to shift large majorities into small ones, pressing both sides closer to 50% representation; and this is in fact what was observed in many of the outcomes in deliberative opinion polls.20' 
In short, external materials shift the argument pool available to the deliberators and are also likely to have effects on social influence. Once certain arguments are on the table, it is harder to say how one or another position will affect a group member's reputation. The most sensible conclusion is that externally provided information, the existence of monitors, an absence of a group decision, and the great heterogeneity of the people involved in Fishkin's studies2 2 make the deliberative opinion poll quite different from the group polarization studies. 
Fishkin's experiments suggest that group polarization can be heightened, diminished, or possibly even eliminated by seemingly small alterations in institutional arrangements. To the extent that limited argument pools and social influences are likely to have unfortunate effects, correctives can be introduced, perhaps above all by exposing group members, at one point or another, to arguments to which they are not antecedently inclined. Current proposals would do well to incorporate an in commitment to spending on foreign aid; also showing a decrease, on a scale of I to 3, from 2.38 to 2.27 in commitment to spending on Social Security). 
exposure to the views of others). 

involving heterogeneous groups. Schkade et al., supra note 8, at 1154-56. understanding of these sometimes neglected facts.20 3 But the most important lesson is the most general: It is desirable to create spaces for enclave deliberation without insulating enclave members from those with opposing views, and without insulating those outside of the enclave from the views of those within it. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this Essay, I have discussed the phenomenon of group polarization and explored some of its implications for deliberation generally and deliberative democracy in particular. The central empirical finding is that group discussion is likely to shift judgments toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the median of predeliberation judgments. This is true if a group decision is required; if individuals are polled anonymously afterwards, they are likely to shift in precisely the same way. 
The underlying mechanisms are twofold. The first involves people's desire to stand in a particular relation to the group, perhaps for reputational reasons, perhaps to maintain their self-conception. Shifts occur as people find that it is necessary to alter their positions in order to maintain their selfconception or their desired relation to the group. The second mechanism involves limited "argument pools," as members of groups with a certain initial tendency typically hear a large number of arguments in support of that tendency, and few arguments in the other direction. When arguments are skewed toward a particular point of view, group members will move in the direction of that point of view. In a finding of special importance to democratic theory, group polarization is heightened if members have a sense of shared identity. And in an equally important finding, group polarization is diminished, and depolarization may result, if members have a degree of flexibility in their views and groups consist of an equal number of people with opposing views. 
In the abstract, and without knowing anything about the underlying substance, it is impossible to say whether group polarization is good or bad. But the mechanisms that underlie group polarization raise serious questions about the view that deliberation is likely to yield correct answers to social questions. Like-minded people engaged in discussion with one another may lead each other in the direction of error and falsehood, simply because of the limited argument pool and the operation of social influences. This point very much bears on deliberation within insulated groups and hence on Bruce Ackerman and James Fishkin. BRUCE ACKERMAN & JAMES FiSHKIN, DELIBERATION DAY (forthcoming). The problem lies in the highly territorial nature of the proposal, in which people would deliberate with those in their community. This is a recipe for group polarization and social fragmentation. emerging communications technologies, which allow a high degree of individual filtering; 204 insulation and filtering can compound error. The point also bears on the design of deliberating courts, legislatures, and regulatory agencies. Above all, an understanding of group polarization helps explain why like-minded people, engaged in deliberation with one another, sometimes go to astonishing extremes and commit criminal or even violent acts. 0 s 
This is the dark side of "enclave deliberation." But I have also emphasized that deliberation within protected enclaves can be highly desirable. Partly as a result of group polarization, enclave deliberation can produce positions that would otherwise fail to emerge and that emphatically deserve a public hearing. The case for enclave deliberation is strengthened by evidence that members of low-status groups are likely to be silent in, or silenced by, broader deliberating bodies. Group polarization within enclaves might even operate as a counterweight to this problem. 
In the abstract, it is not possible to specify the appropriate mix of enclave deliberation and deliberation within larger publics. But an appreciation of group polarization helps show why a free society takes steps to protect deliberation within enclaves, to ensure that those inside enclaves hear alternative views, and to ensure as well that those outside of particular enclaves are exposed to what enclave members have to say. Above all, it is important to avoid a situation in which people are exposed to softer and louder echoes of their own voices. 
In a heterogeneous society, this form of self-insulation can create serious deliberative trouble, in the form of mutual incomprehension or much worse. Legal arrangements will increase or reduce that trouble. I have outlined some approaches that might ensure that heterogeneity, far from being a source of social fragmentation, will operate as a creative force, helping to identify problems and even solutions that might otherwise escape notice. 
SHAPIRO, supranote 127. at 105-23. 
a defined median, group polarization can occur in heterogeneous groups as well. 
My goal here is to cast some light on a particular puzzle. Why did the overwhelming majority of Republicans - representatives and citizens alike - support the impeachment of President Clinton? Why did the overwhelming majority of Democrats - inside and outside of Congress - oppose impeachment? Consider some remarkable numbers. In the House of Representatives, 223 of 228 Republicans, or 98%, voted for impeachment on at least one count, whereas five of 206 Democrats, or 2%, voted for impeachment on at least one count. In the Senate, 51 of 55 Republicans, or 93%, voted to remove the President from office, whereas 0 of 45 Democrats, or 0%, voted to remove the President from office. Within the citizenry, there also were exceedingly sharp divisions, with the vast majority of Democrats believing that impeachment would be a mistake, and the vast majority of Republicans believing exactly the opposite. (Independents typically opposed impeachment and helped produce the large anti-impeachment numbers among the public as a whole.) What accounts for this difference? 
It is far too simple to say that one group was right and another wrong (though I believe that this is true'). Whatever the appropriate stance on the impeachment question, it simply defies belief to suggest that this pattern of judgments is what one would expect if each person, whether ordinary citizen or legislator, had been consulting his own conscience; surely independent judgments would have led to far more defections from the party line. I think that this is particularly true on the Republican side. Did so many Republicans really believe, in principle, that the President should be removed from office? But it is plausibly true on the Democratic side as well. This level of party solidarity is not what one would expect if people independently were consulting their consciences. 
With respect to legislators, as opposed to ordinary citizens, perceived electoral self-interest undoubtedly played a role. For example, a vote by a Republican to defect from the party position might have played well with the general electorate, which was averse to impeachment; but it also 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 129 2000 might have increased vulnerability to a primary challenge within the party, and in any case, have caused the defector a series of problems with party leadership. For many Republicans, and for many Democrats, a defection might have seemed much more trouble than it was worth. But at least on a straightforward account of electoral self-interest, it is not plausible to attribute all of these votes to perceived electoral pressures. Many Republicans and many Democrats would hardly have risked the political wrath of voters if they had voted otherwise on impeachment. At least some of them were free to vote as they wished. Some of them probably would have been helped, not hurt, if they had defected; certainly this is true for some Republicans, and it defies belief, again, to suggest that it was not true for any non-defecting Democrats. 
Even if we could explain the votes of representatives in terms of electoral self-interest, it remains necessary to explain the sharply divergent positions of citizens, with the dramatic split between people who identify themselves with the two parties. Of course, Democrats tend to like President Clinton much more than Republicans do. But on what ground would so many self-identified Republicans support impeachment, and so many self-identified Democrats oppose it? 
I believe that much of the answer to the otherwise puzzling pattern of judgments lies in certain characteristics of collective deliberations characteristics that tend to push groups in predictable directions. Above all, the pattern seems to have a great deal to do with grouppolarizationa process that leads groups in a more extreme version of the direction indicated by their original tendency. An understanding of group polarization helps explain some alarming behavior by individuals in social settings. It also sheds some new light on party-line voting. At the same time, it raises a series of questions and doubts about processes of public deliberation, especially but not only in the context of highly visible controversies like impeachment. 
There is a warning here, for the future, about a political process in which like-minded people talk principally to one another. The warning is that this kind of talk can lead to extremism, through entirely predictable processes; and when various groups go in opposite extreme directions, misunderstanding, confusion, accusation, and sometimes even violence may well be the result. 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 130 2000 
Although it has received little attention in law and political theory, group polarization is one of the robust findings in social psychology? The central point here is that the outcome of a group deliberation tends to be a more extreme version of the tendency indicated by the initial predisposition of group members. Deliberating groups thus move not toward the middle, but toward within-group extremes. For example, a group of people who tend to oppose affirmative action is likely, after discussion, to oppose affirmative action with some vehemence. Those inclined to support gun control will, after discussion, do so with great enthusiasm. People who tend to think well of an ongoing military build-up will strongly favor a military build-up after discussing the problem with one another. Those who believe that President Clinton is likely a victim of a concerted rightwing attack are likely, after talking together, to think that this is undoubtedly the case. Those who fear that the President is a criminal and a liar who is protected by an indifferent public and an obsequious media are likely, after talking together, to believe that this is a very optimistic picture of the situation, one that is far too favorable to President Clinton. 
There are two explanations for group polarization, involving two different mechanisms. Each of the mechanisms plays a role in producing group polarization and, as we shall see, each of them played a role in the impeachment debate. The first is based on persuasivearguments.The idea here is that people respond to the arguments made by others, and the argument pool, in a group with some initial disposition, will be strongly skewed in the direction of that disposition. Thus, a group whose members tends to oppose affirmative action will hear a large number of arguments in favor of abolishing affirmative action and a comparatively fewer number of arguments for retaining it. If people are listening, they will have a stronger conviction, in the same direction from which they began, as a result of deliberation. If people believing that President Clinton's impeachment was a constitutional atrocity speak to one another, they will be entrenched in this belief as a result of conversation together, simply because they will hear a range of arguments to this effect (and few good arguments the other way). There is considerable empirical support for the view that the argument pool has this kind of effect on individual views. 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 131 2000 
The second mechanism has to do with social influence. The central idea here is that people have a certain conception of themselves and a corresponding sense of how they would like to be perceived by others. Most people like to think of themselves as different from others, but only in the right direction and to the right extent. If you think of yourself as the sort of person who favors gun control less than most people do (because, let us say, you think that you are unusually disposed to reject liberal homilies), you might shift your position once you find yourself in a group that is very strongly in favor of gun control. If you stay where you were, you may seem less favorably disposed toward gun control than most group members, and this may be disconcerting, thus producing a shift. Or if you believe that you have a comparatively favorable attitude toward affirmative action, discussion with a group whose members are at least as favorable as you are might well push you in the direction of greater enthusiasm for it. Having heard group members, you might move your stated position, simply in order to maintain a certain self-conception and reputation, as one who likes affirmative action a bit more than most people do. If you want to seem to be unfavorably disposed to President Clinton, and so consider yourself, you may support impeachment in a group that does the same, not because you have a considered judgment in favor of impeachment, but because you do not want to seem, in the eyes of the group, to be a defender of President Clinton. There is a great deal of evidence that social influence is an independent factor behind group polarization; consider in particular the fact that mere exposure to the views of others can have this effect, even without any discussion at all. 
These points raise many questions about the value of deliberation and about the whole ideal of deliberative democracy, which lies at the heart of our constitutional order.' Of course, we cannot say, from the mere fact of polarization, that there has been a movement in the wrong direction; perhaps the more extreme tendency is better. But when group discussion tends to lead people to more strongly held versions of the same view with which they began, it may be nothing to celebrate. If social influences, rather than a full appreciation of relevant reasons, incline people in certain directions, the shifts that result may have very little to do with the merits. Those who believe in deliberation are likely to be pleased to find that arguments and reasons have an impact. But if the impact is a product of a skewed argument pool, the resulting changes in judgment may be 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 132 2000 a product of happenstance and distortion, rather than better thinking. I will return shortly to the relationship between the impeachment vote and group polarization. 
I 
The empirical findings on group polarization closely connect to theoretical work on social "cascades." 4 The question here is why social groups sometimes move quite rapidly in some direction or another and why groups of like-minded people may move rapidly toward or against an extreme outcome, such as impeachment. 
A central point here is that when individuals lack a great deal of private information, often they rely on information provided by the statements or actions of others. If A is unaware whether abandoned toxic waste dumps are hazardous, he may be moved in the direction of fear if B seems to think that fear is justified. If A and B believe that fear is justified, C may end up thinking so too, at least if she lacks independent information to the contrary. If A, B, and C believe that abandoned hazardous waste dumps are hazardous, D will have to have a good deal of confidence to reject their shared conclusion. The result of this process can be to produce cascade effects, as large groups of people end up believing something - even something that is false - simply because other people seem to believe it too. 
The same processes should be at work for political, legal, and moral questions; in fact we easily can imagine political, legal, and moral cascades - even pro-impeachment and anti-impeachment cascades. The same process may work for political candidates, as a fad develops in favor of one or another - a cascade with victory-producing or ruinous consequences. Sometimes people are not entirely sure whether affirmative action is a good idea, whether capital punishment should be imposed, whether the Constitution protects the right to have an abortion, whether it is wrong to litter or to smoke, whether perjury counts as a high crime or misdemeanor. Many people, lacking firm convictions of their own, may end up believing what (relevant) others seem to believe. There is an obvious analogy here to the persuasive arguments account of group polarization 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 133 2000 - though for cascade effects, what is crucial is the very fact of the belief, not its grounds. 
If the literature on cascades is correct, the White House was right to be worried about any small shift in public opposition to impeachment. If (as I suspect) many ordinary citizens were not really sure if the President should be removed from office, the large percentages who opposed removal were fragile. A small shift in the direction of pro-impeachment sentiment - from 70% against to, say, 58% against, and falling - could have started a cascade effect, if what people thought was dependent on what (they thought) others thought. 
Thus far the discussion has involved informational pressures and informational cascades. When information is at work, people care about what other people think because they do not know what to think, and they rely on the opinions of others to show what it is correct to think. But there can be reputational pressures and reputational cascades as well.5 Here people are influenced by what others say and do, not because they think that those others are likely to be correct (that would be an informational influence), but because they want to preserve their reputations. The basic idea is that people care about what others think of them, and they speak out, or remain silent, partly in order to cultivate the approval of others, even at the price of failing to say what they really think. 
Suppose, for example, that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious environmental problem; suppose too that B is skeptical. B may keep quiet, or even agree with A, not because B thinks that A is right, but simply in order to preserve Xs good opinion. C may see that A believes that hazardous waste dumps pose a serious problem and that B seems to agree with A; C therefore may voice agreement even though privately she is skeptical or ambivalent. It is easy to see how this kind of thing might happen with intense political debates. People who believe that President Clinton is a liar and a criminal might be entirely quiet in some contexts or even agree wholeheartedly with people who speak out on President Clinton's behalf. People who believe that impeachment was a terrible idea might not say so, and even may endorse impeachment, simply to preserve their reputations in certain communities. Undoubtedly 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 134 2000 this happened among some of those who supported impeachment, including within the House of Representatives. 
The consequence of all this can be cascade effects - large social movements in one direction or another - when a number of people appear to support a certain course of action simply because others (appear to) do so. Here, as with informational forces, what is true for publicly stated factual claims can be true as well for moral, legal, and political claims. This phenomenon is of course analogous to the social influence explanation of group polarization. The only difference is that the social influence explanation concerns presentation to self as well as presentation to others. 
How does all this bear on the impeachment of President Clinton? At first glance the answer is straightforward, and what has been said thus far should supply the rudiments of a basic account. 
Consider informational forces first. In both Congress and the nation, Republicans were talking mostly with Republicans; Democrats were talking mostly with Democrats. The result of these two largely independent sets of deliberations was to deepen the Republicans' commitment to impeachment, to heighten the sense that the President had indeed committed a high crime, to suggest that the President's arguments were weak and self-serving - and at the same time, to strengthen the sense, among Democrats, that Judge Starr was an unprincipled zealot, that the grounds for impeachment were implausible, and that this was something not very far from a coup d'etat on the part of the far right. 
To be sure, many diverse arguments were available to representatives and citizens alike; it was not as if the pro-impeachment or anti-impeachment case was invisible to those who disagreed with it. But it does seem reasonable to think that many Republicans, perhaps especially among the citizenry, were affected by a distorted argument pool, in which all or most of the articulated points had to do with the President's violation of his oath of office and failure to tell the truth under oath. In the relevant discussions, the best arguments on the President's behalf appeared 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 135 2000 infrequently, and when they appeared, they were likely to have been made half-heartedly. Many discussions among Democrats were affected by a similar skewed pool of arguments, in which the best claims on behalf of impeachment were not mentioned. No wonder that both groups would tend to polarize toward a more extreme version of views originally held. 
Social influences and reputational forces were undoubtedly at work as well. A Republican who rejected impeachment - whether representative or citizen - would be signaling that he was a certain sort: one who was willing to defect from the general party-line view that serious misconduct by the President warranted removal from office. Any particular Republican could be sending out a large signal of tolerance for illegality and misconduct by high-level Democrats. Indeed, the signal could be far more dramatic and extreme than anything the defector might have intended. And for representatives in particular, the consequence could be severe reputational sanctions, both within the House of Representatives and at the next election. If a range of Republicans could be convinced to reject impeachment, the signal would of course be muffled, and perhaps a cascade of anti-impeachment votes would be expected. There is safety in numbers. But the collective action problem was quite serious; without concerted action by a nontrivial number of Republicans, any particular defector would be in potential trouble. 
The same dynamic was at work for any Democrat who favored impeachment. The signal would be one of capitulation to a Republican witch-hunt - a signal that would be all the louder if very few Democrats were defecting. Once defections started, they could be hard to stop, because after a certain tipping point, the loud signal would be muffled. Thus, if a few Democrats had called for impeachment, a cascade could happen here as well. This was the White House's worst nightmare; it explains why the White House believed it indispensable to keep as many Democrats as possible in line. 
Here, then, is my basic account of the extraordinary party-line judgments among the citizenry at large, and also of the votes in both the House and the Senate. These were case studies in group polarization. Those who spoke with one another fortified their own preexisting views and made them all the more extreme. In this light, it should be unsurprising to find the change of heart from Republicans, such as Henry Hyde, who initially contended that impeachment should occur only if 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 136 2000 there was bipartisan support for it. Once the logic of group polarization set in, this moderate view was bound to shift. 
Of course, there are some differences between the legislative process and the contexts in which group polarization has been studied, above all because members of Congress are subject to external political sanctions. Even if members are persuaded that a certain course of action makes best sense, they may vote otherwise simply because of what their constituents want. Hence a limited argument pool, for members of a particular party, may matter much less than a clear signal from people back home. This point may explain some of the defections on both sides; certainly it explains why some members are able to resist party pressures and the logic of group polarization. Unambiguous electoral signals can be a powerful buffer against that logic (though for reasons I have given, the signals themselves may be a function of group polarization within the electorate). 
The same point bears on the relevance of social influence. Members of the Republican Party are likely to care a great deal what fellow Republicans think of them; but they probably care still more about what local voters think of them. To be sure, the two are not independent of one another. If a certain Republican seems like an outlier among Republicans generally - for example, if he seems less sympathetic to impeachment than his colleagues - his electoral prospects might be damaged simply by virtue of this signal. But analytically the two are different. Here too the votes of constituents may matter more than group deliberations (taking members of the same party as the relevant group). 
Because of the differences between representatives and constituents, it is even reasonable to think that polarization is likely to be more serious among the latter rather than the former. We can imagine a society - and it is not so far from our own - in which Republicans speak mostly with each other, at least about the issue of whether President Clinton should be impeached; we can imagine a society in which, on the same issue, Democrats speak mostly with one another too. If this is the situation, polarization should occur within political camps. Republicans will veer pro-impeachment; Democrats will veer anti-impeachment. Of course, there are multiple independent reasons why this may be so. Democrats 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 137 2000 tend to like President Clinton, and Republicans tend not to like him. But part of electoral polarization, on the question of impeachment, is undoubtedly a result of the social mechanisms discussed here. 
What lessons do these points have for party dynamics, especially in the context of highly visible public debates? Certainly they do not explain all of the picture. But they provide part of any account of why a vast majority of Republicans may think one thing and a vast majority of Democrats the opposite, when independent judgments by members would seem to make this pattern entirely inexplicable. For representatives, simple electoral calculations undoubtedly play a role; but a great deal depends on the limited information pool in the relevant communities and the particular signal given by defectors from the party. In the context of impeachment, I do believe that this helps explain an otherwise very puzzling set of judgments, perhaps above all the remarkable solidity of Republican pro-impeachment judgments in circumstances in which the Constitution and large percentages of the public seemed to argue in the other direction. And if the explanation contains some truth, it helps account for party-line thinking more generally, within legislatures and within the citizenry - and raises a host of questions and doubts about the value and the consequences of group deliberation. 
Of course, nothing I have said here demonstrates that group polarization moves people in bad directions. We can imagine many contexts in which it is entirely appropriate for people to end up with a stronger version of their initial position; perhaps discussion clarifies matters, and perhaps the argument pool, limited though it inevitably is, makes people see things in a more reasonable light. But nothing in the mechanisms that underlie polarization makes this inevitable. The most serious problems are likely to arise when deliberating groups, insulated from one another, polarize to more extreme positions partly because of their very insulation. In these circumstances, large groups - with initial tendencies that are different but not so very different - can shift in extreme opposite directions, with little understanding of how it is that they have ended up in such different positions. It is in this setting that group polarization carries 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 138 2000 a risk of balkanization, confusion, and even violence. 
The nation managed to avoid the worst of these problems in connection with impeachment, though in my view members of both parties the Republicans even more than the Democrats - suffered a great deal from their failure to engage the arguments put forth by the other side. If there is a warning here, there is therefore a lesson as well, about the need for deliberating groups to avoid the forms of insulation that can lead them, by the laws of social interaction, in unjustifiably extreme directions. 1 2 3 4 5 
See Cass R. Sunstein, "Impeaching the President," 147 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 279 (1998). 
See Cass R.Sunstein, "Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go To Extremes," Yale Law Journal(forthcoming October 2000). 
See Jon Elster, ed., Deliberative Democracy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). 
See Sushil Biikhchandani et al., "Learning from the Behavior of Others," The Journalof Economic Perspectives:a Journalof the American Economic Association (Summer 1998), p. 151. 
See Timur Kuran, Public Lives, Private Truths (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996). 
HeinOnline -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 139 2000 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Human Behavior and the Law of Work" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 100, 2000). JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 100 
(2D SERIES) 
Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=231922 Preliminary draft 6/2/00 All rights reserved 
The most fundamental issues in labor and employment law involve the choice among three alternatives: waivable employers’ rights, waivable employees’ rights, and nonwaivable employees’ rights. By combining standard contract analysis with a perspective informed by behavioral economics, it is possible to obtain a much better understanding of the underlying issues. Contrary to the conventional view: workers are especially averse to losses, and not so much concerned with obtaining gains; workers often do not know about legal rules, including key rules denying them rights; workers may well suffer from excessive optimism; workers care a great deal about fairness, and are willing to punish employers who have treated them unfairly, even at workers’ own expense; many workers greatly discount the future; and workers often care about relative economic position, not absolute economic position. These points suggest the advantages, in many cases, of relying on waivable employees’ rights, an approach designed to inform workers without providing the rigidity and inefficiency associated with nonwaivable terms. At the same time, these points suggest, though more ambiguously, the hazards of allowing workers to waive their rights in accordance with standard contract principles. Procedural constraints (e.g., cooling off periods) and substantive constraints (e.g., “floors”) on waiver may be appropriate. Norm change and preference change are also discussed. Applications include job security; parental leave; vacation time; health care; unionization; occupational safety and health; discrimination on the basis of age, race, and sex; waivers by unions; and workers’ compensation. The basic conclusion is that waivable employees’ rights are a promising and insufficiently explored option in many areas of labor and employment law. 
In allocating rights in the workplace, the law has many options. It might, for example, confer certain rights on employers, but allow employees to purchase those rights (to, say, health care or vacation time) through a voluntary trade. It might make certain employers’ rights nonwaivable; it might say, for example, that an employee, or a group of employees, cannot buy an employer’s right to donate money to political campaigns. It might give employees certain waivable rights, saying, for example, that an employee is presumed to have a right to at least four weeks of vacation each year, but that employers can buy that right through a suitable deal. Or it might give employees rights that cannot be waived, saying, for example, that no worker may be asked to trade the right to four weeks of vacation each year. There are many possible variations. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. 
The basic purpose of this Article is bring a better understanding of human behavior, with the assistance of cognitive psychology and behavioral economics,1 to bear on the most basic questions in employment law. 2 I offer two general claims. The first is that waivable workers’ rights represent a desirable approach for the future, partly because waivable rights lack the rigidity of nonwaivable ones, and partly because they ensure that the key information will be provided to workers. The second claim is that traditional approaches to employment law make many blunders, because they are based on an inadequate sense of workers’ actual values and behavior. Contrary to the conventional wisdom: workers are especially averse to losses, and not so much concerned with obtaining gains; workers often do not know about legal rules, including key rules denying them rights; workers are likely to suffer from excessive optimism; workers care a great deal about fairness, and are willing to punish employers who have treated them unfairly, even at workers’ own expense3; many workers greatly discount the future; and workers often care about relative economic position, not absolute economic position. In short, workers are like most people. They behave like homo sapiens, not like homo economicus.4 
More specifically, I attempt to see how a more realistic understanding of workers’ thoughts and actions, alongside suitably modified contractual principles, would help us to sort out the relevant inquiries in the choice among the four principal approaches to the law of labormanagement relations: (1) waivable employers’ rights, (2) waivable workers’ rights, (3) nonwaivable workers’ rights, and (4) waivable workers’ rights with constraints on permissible waiver. I suggest that in many situations, the law should confer certain entitlements on employees rather than employers, but allow those entitlements to be waived, either at a market price (an “unconstrained waiver”) or subject to governmentally determined floors, whether procedural or substantive (a “constrained waiver”). The principal purpose of this approach is to ensure that employers fully disclose contractual terms to employees, and allow employees to waive only when waiver is thought to be worthwhile, without producing the rigidity and inefficiency, and potential harm to workers and consumers alike, that are created by systems of nonwaivable, “one-size-fits-all” terms.5 
The basic idea could be applied to both unionized and non-unionized workplaces. It could even be applied to the question whether workers are collectively organized at all; a default rule might specify collective organization, and allow workers to opt out, rather than specifying the opposite, and allowing them to opt in.6 It is especially important to see that the default rule matters. What I will ultimately suggest is a kind of two-tiered system of employment law, involving (a) nonwaivable statutory minima, below which no workplace may go, and (b) 1 See Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1991); Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1471 (1998); Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 2 I use this term to refer to both “labor law,” traditionally taken to refer to the law relating to unions and unionization, and “employment law,” traditionally taken to refer to the law relating to statutory protections of workers. 3 This is the basic theme of Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession (2000). 4 See Richard Thaler, From Homo Economicus to Homo Sapiens, J Ec Persp (2000). 5 A system of nonwaivable terms is urged in Charles Fried, Individual and Collective Rights in Work Relations, 51 U Chi L Rev 1012 (1984); my criticisms of the more ad hoc system of modern statutory law would apply to Fried’s general proposal as well. 6 See Paul Weiler, Governing the Workplace (1993). waivable workers’ rights, involving an ample set of safeguards that employers may “buy” for a mutually agreeable fee.7 The real questions should involve the content of the two categories. 
In the workplace, as elsewhere, the law cannot “do nothing.”8 For even the most enthusiastic believers in private property and freedom of contract, it is necessary to start somewhere, not with “nature” or voluntary arrangements but with an initial allocation of legal rights. 
Most debates in American employment law have been framed narrowly and in terms of the three alternatives of waivable employers’ rights, collective bargaining, and nonwaivable workers’ rights. Under a system of waivable employers’ rights, the law confers an initial entitlement on employers, but employees can “buy” the relevant right if they have both the desire and the leverage to do so. It is important to emphasize that the employer has these rights not by nature, and not as a result of anything consensual, but because of a distinctly legal decision, to confer the relevant rights on the employer rather than the employee. The right at issue might involve the most fundamental questions for workers: job security, workplace safety, pensions, health insurance, leave policy, vacation time, freedom from race, sex and age discrimination, and so forth. 
This simple idea captures much of the common law of labor relations.9 The common law confers a wide range of entitlements on employers, subject to individual bargaining. The single exception is the labor power of the employee.10 Of course, the law grants employees, not employers, the right to the employee’s time and labor. (Slavery is an obvious qualification.) This is a right that employees can and do trade for money and other benefits of employment. The flexibility of the common law approach is its great advantage. But it is not clear that most workers have the information that would equip them to engage in appropriate bargaining, and it is possible to think that many individual employees, bargaining with employers, will lack the knowledge or the power to produce efficient or fair deals without some form of collective organization. In any case the allocation of initial rights to employers remains to be defended. 7 For a brief suggestion along the same lines for worker safety, see Susan Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics, 98 Yale LJ 341, 358-60 (1988). 8 See Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed, Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral, 85 Harv L Rev 1089, 1090 (1972). 9 Described and defended in Richard A. Epstein, A Common Law for Labor Relations, 92 Yale LJ 1357 (1983). What Epstein does not sufficiently acknowledge is the extent to which a number of rights are conferred on the employer by the common law; any suggestion that the common law reflects “laissez faire,” or promotes “voluntary interactions,” should be prefaced with this point. See in this vein Charles Fried, Individual and Collective Rights in Work Relations, 51 U Chi L Rev 1012, 1016 (1984): “Only by assuming that the preexisting common law system of property rights as some natural, preconventional status can the expropriatory thrust of the Wagner Act (to the extent that there is one) be criticized.” A better way to put it would be to suggest that the very claim that there is an exproprietary thrust in the Wagner Act depends on the (implausible) claim that the common law system of property rights has some natural, preconventional status. 10 Note the contrast with a system of slavery, in which the law confers on employers a right to employee labor. The employers’ right is waivable in the sense that the employer can pay the slave a salary or even giant the slave freedom, perhaps in return for consideration. 
In the 1930s, the United States ventured a second approach to labor-management relations. This approach, embodied in the National Labor Relations Act11 (NLRA), was a dramatic, even revolutionary step: a mechanism for solution of disagreements via collective bargaining. On this view, entitlements would generally begin in the same place where the common law put them, with employers. But workers would be allowed, even encouraged to organize as a group, and workplace management would be decided via a process of bargaining between employers and employees, thus organized. In some ways, the NLRA’s arrangement is more complicated and more interesting. With respect to “mandatory” subjects of bargaining – wages, hours, and working conditions – the NLRA can be understood to remove common law rights from employers and to create “bargaining entitlements,” that is, entitlements that are not owned by anyone in particular but that will be a product of bargaining, having been selfconsciously placed, as an initial step, in the hands of neither side.12 
This system of worker organization and collective rather than individual bargaining has been justified on many diverse grounds.13 Most obviously, collective bargaining would allow information to be shared and pooled among workers, and hence it would permit them to overcome the many evident barriers to informed bargaining. At the same time, union representation would resolve a collective action problem faced by individual workers, who would compete, perhaps to their collective detriment, in the process of seeking employment.14 Self-organization could create a kind of workers’ cartel, justified on the ground that the result would be to extract better deals from employers (possibly at the expense of nonunionized workers).15 In any case many of the goods provided by employers – safety, decent lighting, heat, pension benefits, formal procedures in the event of arbitrary discharge – are “local public goods” in the sense that they cannot be provided by one without being simultaneously provided to all or most. In these circumstances a collective voice might ensure against the underproduction of such goods.16 Perhaps union representation would also respond to short-sightedness, or bounded rationality, on the part of individual workers, producing outcomes that would best serve their long-term interests.17 Perhaps collective organization was simply necessary to produce industrial peace. Whatever its goals, the collective bargaining approach has fallen on hard times with the 11 29 USC 151 et seq. 12 See Michael Wachter and George Cohen, The Law and Economics of Collective Bargaining, 136 U Pa L Rev 1349, 1371-74 (1988). 13 The literature is immense. For summaries, see Richard Freeman and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do? ch. 1 (1984); Michael Harper and Samuel Estreicher, Labor Law 2-4 (1995). 14 For an early statement, see John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy 351(Jonathan Riley ed. 1994) ; see also Richard Posner, Some Economics of Labor Law, 51 U Chi L Rev 988 (1984); Richard Freeman and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do? 6-7 (1984). 15 The “union wage premium” is generally estimated at 10% to 20%, see Harper and Estreicher, supra note, at 14; Freeman and Medoff, supra, at 43-60. Unions also produce a mix in the compensation package, with particularly favorable effects on fringe benefits, see id. at 61-77. Thus unionized “establishments are especially likely to allot funds to deferred forms of compensation favoring senior workers, such as pensions, insurance, and vacation pay, and to have a large impact on smaller establishments.” Id.at 77. 16 Id. at 8-9. 17 For relevant evidence, see Freedman and Medoff, What Do Unions Do? (1984) (emphasizing distinct features to compensation packages favored by unions, placing emphasis on long-term problems). dramatic decline of union representation since the 1940s, a decline that obviously has something to do with workers’ uncertainty about whether unionization would help or hurt them.18 
The third approach involves nonwaivable employees’ rights. Under this system, the law confers the relevant right on employees, and employers and employees are forbidden from contracting around the legal guarantee. The relevant right might be a right to protection from occupational risks; it might be a right to be free from discharge on grounds of race, sex, or age; it might be a right not to be discharged for engaging in collective bargaining or for refusing to violate the law on the employers’ behalf. As a matter of history, the third approach seems largely a reaction to the first, fueled by complaints about employers’ “bargaining power” and about the perceived injustice of the common law approach.19 This system dominates the current system of statutory protections for workers in America20; it also dominates the more aggressively workerprotective system of employment and labor law in Europe. The rise of nonwaivable employees’ rights can be seen in part as a surrogate for a more robust system of collective bargaining.21 But at the same time, it can be seen as a way of relieving the pressure to create that very system. If statutory protections are in place, a union might seem unnecessary; the law is already giving employees what the union might have provided. A robust system of statutory guarantees would make union representation far less desirable. In addition, an approach based on nonwaivable workers’ rights might be criticized on grounds of its rigidity; perhaps many workers could be better off with the flexibility to trade some goods for others, and perhaps consumers would benefit as well.22 
Several possibilities are missing from this picture. Most important: What if the law allocates the relevant entitlement to employees, but also makes the right waivable, in the sense that the employer could buy it, and the employee could sell it, for a fee? In principle, there is nothing at all strange about this idea. With respect to the employee’s time, for example, the common law allocates rights in exactly this fashion; before employment, the individual has a property right (over the course of his day), but the employer can purchase the right for whatever amount the employee is willing to accept. We could easily imagine a system in which waivable workers’ rights were a far larger part of the picture. For example, employees might have, but might be permitted to waive, rights not to be discharged without good cause; rights not to fired on grounds or race, sex, religion, and age; rights to health insurance and occupational safety; rights to parental leave; rights to vacation time; and much more. All of these rights would operate as default rules for employers to purchase if a mutually agreeable deal can be arranged. 18 See Samuel Estreicher, Labor Law Reform in a World of Competitive Product Markets, 69 Chi-Kent L Rev 3 (1993). 19 See, e.g., Lawrence Blades, Employment At Will vs. Individual Freedom, 67 Colum L Rev 1404 (1967). 20 See, e.g., 29 USC 651 et seq. (Occupational Safety and Health Act); 29 USC 201 et seq (Fair Labor Standards Act, with minimum wage and maximum hour provisions); 42 USC 2000e-2000e-17 (Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII); 29 USC 2601 et seq. (Family and Medical Leave Act). 21 Cf. Charles Fried, supra note (arguing for a statement of nonwaivable entitlements as a replacement for collective bargaining). Fried’s argument is criticized in Cass R. Sunstein, Rights, Minimal Terms, and Solidarity, 51 U Chi L Rev. 1041 (1984). 22 This is a generalization of the argument in Richard Epstein, Forbidden Grounds (1995). Waiver might operate individually or collectively; the law may or may not impose constraints on waivers. 
What is absent from the traditional account is not only a full sense of the legal possibilities, but also an adequate picture of workers’ judgments and motivations. To the extent that analysis of labor law has worked from any such picture, it is the one found in traditional economics.23 But we know enough to know that this picture is inaccurate. Indeed, we know a great deal about how it is inaccurate, and about what must be done to make it more nearly correct.24 I attempt here to bring a better understanding of human behavior to bear on the various alternatives. 
The Article comes in eight parts. Part II discusses the debate over “at will” employment, with reference to emerging developments that suggest a possible waivable right to be discharged for cause. Part III discusses some arguments for a nonwaivable background rule, the standard approach in modern statutory law. Part IV generalizes the idea of waivable workers’ rights by briefly exploring a number of contemporary questions in employment law. Part V discusses problems with that idea, with particular reference to third party effects, information-processing, and collective efforts to change norms and values. Part VI discusses the difference between individual waivers and union waivers. Part VII deals with the fact that workers care partly about relative economic position, and not only about absolute economic position – a fact that helps support the idea of nonwaivable terms. Part VIII is a brief conclusion. 
The debate over the contract at will has recently become one of the liveliest in all of private law.25 In some ways this debate is unique, for reasons that I will discuss in some detail; but it also has features in common with related debates involving parental leave, vacation time, health care, age discrimination, and much more. With the large decline in private-sector unions,26 the common law is now a principal arena for new contests about the nature of management-labor relations, and the permissible grounds for discharge under the evolving common law have thus received a great deal of judicial as well as academic attention.27 My particular goal is to show how a better understanding of human behavior casts new light on the issue,28 in a way that unequivocally suggests the hazards of relying on a system of waivable employers’ rights, and that also suggests, though more equivocally, the value of creating waivable employees’ rights instead. 23 See, e.g., id. 24 For an overview, see Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1991); see also Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 25 For discussion, see Stewart Schwab, Life-Cycle Justice, 92 Mich L. Rev. 8 (1993); Richard Epstein, U Chi L Rev (1984); Pauline Kim, Norms, Learning, and Law, 1999 Univ of Ill L Rev 447; Pauline Kim, Bargaining With Imperfect Information: A Study of Worker Perceptions of Legal Protection in an At-Will World, 83 Cornell L Rev 105 (1997); Paul Weiler, Governing the Workplace (1991). 26 See Estreicher, supra note. The percentage has fallen from about 35% in 1945 to about 10% in 2000. 27 See Samuel Issacharoff, Contracting For Employment, 74 Tex L Rev 1783 (1996). 28 As far as I am aware, the only existing discussion of the contract at will, from the point of view, can be found in the illuminating discussion in id. 
In America, the general rule is of course that employment is “at will”; an employer can fire an employee for any reason or for no reason at all. In the last decades, however, courts have made three inroads on this rule. First, they have created a set of “public policy” exceptions to the at will rule.29 Hence an employer may not discharge an employee for refusing to commit a crime on his behalf. A key organizing idea here is that when a third party interest is at stake, there is an exception to the at will principle.30 Second, courts have found an implied “covenant of good faith and fair dealing,” an idea that seems to forbid opportunistic discharges -- as, for example, when an employer discharges an employee before receiving a commission, a pension, or some other benefit that seems to have been earned.31 The best rationale for these decisions is that they violate implicit contractual understandings.32 Third – and as we shall see, most interesting for current purposes – courts have made some movement toward “inferring” a contractual term of job security on the basis of ambiguous commitments from employers, such as a vague promise (referring to “permanent employment”) and employee manuals (even those that contain express disclaimers).33 In many states, the law is in flux. Montana has enacted a statutory program designed to replace the at will rule with a nonwaivable for cause regime,34 and in 1991, the National Conference of Commissions on State Laws adopted a similar rule as the Uniform Employment Termination Act.35 
B. Of Waiver and Default Rules: Does It Matter Who Has The Entitlement? Under the at will rule, the common law confers the relevant entitlement on the employer. But entirely within a system of freedom of contract, it would be equally possible to confer the entitlement on the worker. Might it be sensible to give workers protection against discharge without cause, but to allow them to waive that protection for an agreed-upon price36? The initial question is whether, in a regime of freedom of contract, the default rule matters at all. 
transactions costs are zero, the initial allocation of the entitlement does not matter.37 The Coase theorem actually suggests two different points. First: Whatever the content of the legal rule, the 29 See, e.g., Brigham v. Dillon Cos., Inc., 935 P.2d 1035, 1059-60 (1997); Petermann v. International Brotherhood of Teamsters, 344 P.2d 25 (1959); Remington Freight Lines v. Larkey, 644 NW2d 931 (Ind. App. 1994); Belline v. KMart Corp., 940 F.2d 184 (7th Cir. 1991). 30 See Stewart Schwab, Wrongful Discharge Law and the Search for Third Party Effects, 74 Tex. L. Rev. 1943 (1994). 31 Merrill v. Crothall-American, 606 A.2d 96 (Del. 1992); Hoffman La Roche v. Campbell, 512 So. 2d 725 (Ala. 1987); K Mart Corp. v. Ponsock, 732 P.2d 1364 (1987). Fortune v. National Cash Register Co., 364 NE2d 1251 (1977). 32 See Schwab, supra note. 33 See below. 34 Mont. Code Ann. 39-2-901 (1997) 35 Model Employment Termination Act, reprinted in Mark Rothstein and Lance Liebman, Employment Law 208-19 (1997) Statutory Supplement). 36 The possibility is omitted in the discussion in Epstein, supra note; Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 358-59 (5th ed. 1998), apparently on the emphatically false assumption that it would be no different from a waivable employers’ right. 37 See Ronald Coase, The Problem of Social Cost. 3 J Law and Econ 1 (1960). parties will bargain their way to the efficient solution. Second: Whatever the content of the legal rule, the parties will bargain their way to the same solution. If these points are right, it does not matter, assuming no transactions costs, whether an employer or an employee is given the relevant entitlement. The question is how the Coase theorem bears on the selection of default rules in the context of employment law. 
Let us begin by supposing that with respect to contracting around the job security term, transactions costs are zero. Is the Coase theorem correct? It is clear that the theorem is on firm ground insofar as it suggests that the parties will bargain their way to an efficient result, whatever the content of the legal rule. This is very close to a definition of efficiency. If the employer very much wants an at will rule, and if the employee does not care much about job security, the contract will provide for at will employment, regardless of the content of the legal rule. If the background rule is at will, there will be no contractual shift; if the background rule is for cause, the parties will bargain their way to an at will situation. Efficiency will follow no matter what the legal rule is.38 
Will the legal rule be not merely efficient but also the same? Notwithstanding the Coase theorem, there is good reason to think that it will not be.39 The principal reason is the endowment effect, in accordance with which people tend to place a far higher value on an object if it is initially allocated to them than if it is initially allocated to someone else.40 Default rules have a tendency to stick, in labor contracts as elsewhere. If people are initially given a right to a certain good, they are likely to ask more to give it up than they would be willing to pay for it in the first instance.41 If for cause protection is initially given to the employee, it seems reasonable to predict that the employee will demand more to relinquish job security than he would be willing to pay to obtain the right in the first instance. If a right to discharge at will is given to employers, it follows that employers will demand more to give it up than they would pay to purchase it in the first instance. Thus the allocation of the legal entitlement, to workers or to employers, will likely matter in the sense that the ultimate outcome will be affected by the increased value placed upon the right simply by virtue of the initial allocation.42 
So long as the right is initially allocated to one or another side, an endowment effect cannot be avoided; but much more thought needs to be given to the question how to select a default rule in the presence of endowment effects. This remains a largely unexplored question. Here are some relevant considerations: 38 Of course the legal rule may have distributional consequences. If the employment right at issue is a large part of the wealth of either side, its allocation to one or another side will contribute to relative wealth. But in this context, it is difficult to see how the choice of one or another waivable rule will have significant distributive effects. So long as the parties can bargain, workers are not going to be poorer or richer if the default rule is one way rather than the other. 39 See Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1993). 40 For evidence in the area of default rules, see Russell Korobkin, Behavioral Economics, Contract Formation, and Contract Law, in Behavioral Law and Economics 116 (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 41 See id. 42 Compare the suggestion in R. Posner, supra note, at 359: “If the requirement were optimal it would be negotiated voluntarily.” The suggestion is not wrong, but it neglects the possibility that the initial allocation of the right will determine what it is optimal. 
Whether one or another endowment effect is to be preferred cannot be decided on standard efficiency grounds. So long as transactions costs are zero, either allocation would produce efficiency. A less standard analysis, also aimed at efficiency, would ask who would gain most from one or another endowment effect. If, for example, workers, having been initially allocated for cause protection, would demand a great deal to give it up, and if employers, having been initially given at will protection, would be willing to sell job security for a small price, then we would have reason to believe that efficiency favors a for cause rule. The problem with this analysis is that it must usually be conducted in the absence of data, and involves some speculation about what people would do or prefer in (counterfactual) circumstances. 
The easiest cases for choosing one or another default rule involve third-party effects. Indeed, if there are significant third-party effects a nonwaivable rule would probably be best, so as to protect third parties. With job security, however, no such third-party effects are obvious. Compare the question how to handle rights to parental leave. Suppose that children benefit from parental leave requirements (a proposition that is not obviously true; if such requirements reduce wages and employment, children might be hurt as well). If so, the best approach is probably to create a nonwaivable right to parental leave. 
We might want to ask whether there is a distributional reason to favor one or another rule. I will take up this issue in more detail below. For the moment note two simple points. First, an allocation of the legal right to workers would tend to increase the wealth of workers as a class. Second, significant distributive effects should not be expected in this context, because the resource gain, from the initial allocation, is not a large part of workers’ wealth. An important question is whether aside from efficiency and distribution, desirable social effects would follow from creating a “sticky” default rule of a certain kind. An endowment effect of one or another sort might be supported if it could be shown to have valuable effects on social attitudes and norms. If, for example, it were thought important to inculcate an attitude, on the part of workers, of support for the right of job security, the case for a waivable workers’ right would be strengthened. The line between a very sticky default rule and a nonwaivable right might be one of degree rather than one of kind; I take up this point below. 
are not zero in the context of employment contracts. Some costs are presented merely by virtue of the need to generate paper to contract around an undesired background rule. Some costs come from the phenomenon of signaling.43 
a. Paper and information. If courts select a rule that most parties dislike, the paper costs, while unlikely to be huge, may not be trivial. It would be necessary to produce formal documents where silence would otherwise be sufficient. Probably more important are information costs. Employers are repeat players, and perhaps they have sufficient information to know what they are doing when they ask for or sign a waiver. But employees are frequently imperfectly informed, to say the least.44 If the legal right is allocated to employers, employees may refuse to ask for job security because they 43 For general discussion, see Eric Posner, Law and Social Norms (2000); in the context of employment law, see the discussion of severance pay in Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession 268-69 (2000). 44 See Pauline Kim, supra note. already believe that they have it, or because they are unable to think well about the subject. The existence of information costs means that the initial allocation of the legal right might turn out to matter a great deal, both to efficiency and to the ultimate outcome. I will return to this point shortly. 
b. Signaling. Signaling problems create special problems in the area of job security. An employer who is willing to offer job security might find that it is attracting marginal workers.45 At the same time, an employee who presses hard for job security might be signaling that he will deserve to be discharged. Even if employers and employees would generally be better off with a system of job security, many individual employers and individual employees will rationally refuse to negotiate for it. Note that these points apply to many contractual rights for which employees might bargain. An employee might fail to seek a right to parental leave, perhaps in the belief that such a right already exists, more likely with the thought that the very request would signal a lack of commitment to work. In these circumstances, a waivable employers’ right is likely to stick even if it is undesirable. There is evidence that this happens with respect to severance pay; employees do not seek severance pay because doing so sends a bad signal.46 The same stickiness may well be true of a waivable employers’ right. 
These points do not demonstrate that one waivable rule is better than another. But they are sufficient to show that the choice of the default rule is likely to matter a great deal, both to efficiency and to ultimate outcomes, 
Suppose, then, that the legal rule will indeed matter. Under the conventional approach, one with obvious implications for labor-management relations in general, courts should seek the default rule that best “mimics the market,” in the sense that it is the rule that employers and employees, armed with adequate information, would generally seek.47 In the context of labor law, it is not entirely clear that the legal system should choose the approach that would mimic the market, even if it can identify that approach. Perhaps a different approach will redistribute resources in a desired direction,48 or will have a salutary effect on the formation of preferences. But let us begin by approaching the choice of the waivable term in the conventional terms. 
right claim that this is what employees and employers would generally seek, and thus that the existing background rule “mimics the market.”49 On this view, employers have a strong reason to resist a for cause regime, partly in order to immunize themselves from illegitimate and even frivolous suits, and partly in order to ensure against shirking. Perhaps industrial custom supports 45 See David I Levine, Just-Cause Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse Selection, 9 J. Lab. Econ. 294 (1991); Issacharoff, supra, at 1794-9. 46 See Bewley, supra note, at 268-69. 47 See, e.g., Epstein, supra note. 48 See Christine Jolls, Accommodation Mandates, Stan. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2000). 49 This is the basic argument in Epstein, supra note. this view; certainly employment at will seems to be the general rule.50 With an at will rule, employers can prevent costly litigation whenever someone is discharged. They can also counteract the risk of opportunistic behavior by employees, in the form of shirking.51 More particularly, the right to discharge on whatever grounds the employer likes operates as an obstacle to employee performance that falls well below what the employee is able to do – a special virtue in light of the fact that shirking is both hard to monitor and hard to prove to third parties.52 And because operating a for cause system is likely to be expensive, most employers, and most employees, are the beneficiaries of the at will rule. 
For those who believe that at will is the market-mimicking rule, it is also important to emphasize that most employees are generally unlikely to object to this rule. In a market economy, employers are quite unlikely to fire employees for no reason.53 It is costly to get rid of good workers, and employers who fire people for no reason will have some trouble replacing them, simply because arbitrary discharges will have harmful reputational consequences, thus leading prospective employees to seek work elsewhere. A separate point is that employees typically develop at least some degree of firm-specific human capital; they are worth more to their own employer than they would be worth to other employers, because they have experience with the firm, and they know something about its operations and expectations. The fact that employees have firm-specific capital creates a built-in safeguard against unmotivated discharges.54 
If employers generally would lose a great deal from a for cause system, and if employees generally would gain little, the at will rule stands adequately defended, as a background rule that replicates the likely result of bargaining. The only people who stand to gain from a for cause system are marginal workers, prominently including those who deserve to be discharged for poor job performance, but who would be immunized, in practice, by an at will system. 
contentious empirical assumptions. Suppose, for example, that a for cause regime would not much affect employer practices, because in any sensibly designed system, discharge could occur at low cost whenever cause existed, and precisely because employers have little interest in discharging people for a reason other than cause.55 If for cause discharge is the ordinary practice, and if arbitrary discharges are infrequent, employees should have little to lose from a legal rule that requires cause -- unless (and perhaps this is the key point) the costs of administering a forcause regime turn out to be high. But where cause exists, employees would of course lose their suit in any case, and hence they are likely to bring suit, especially in light of the cost of doing so. A mechanism that pushes contests toward low-cost resolution –- such as arbitration – should ensure that employers have little to fear from a for cause regime. For all these reasons, it is 50 See J. Holt Verkerke, An Empirical Perspective on Indefinite Term Employment Contracts, 1995 Wis. L. Rev. 51 See Schwab, supra note. 52 See id. 53 See R. Posner, supra note, at 358-59. 54 See id. 55 This appears to be the aspiration of the Montana system, which encourages arbitration, and hence low-cost litigation. See Mont. Code Ann. 29-2-901 (1997). unclear that employers would greatly prefer an at will system to a sensibly designed for cause system. 
At the same time, it is reasonable to suppose that many employees might well care a great deal about obtaining for cause protection, if only to obtain immunity from employer malice or mistake. Employee concern is likely to be greatest in late career, when opportunistic discharges become more probable; it is here that employers have special incentives to discharge employees, in violation of an implicit deal.56 But even earlier, employees are likely to be willing to pay something for job security (or to require employers to pay something to take it away). On this view, a for cause regime might be the best market-mimicking approach. Crucial empirical issues here involve, first, the cost of operating a for cause system and, second, the extent to which employees would actually be at risk in an at will system. 
Because a final answer would turn on resolving those empirical issues, nothing said here demonstrates that a waivable workers’ right would be the market-mimicking solution – that such an approach would actually reflect the outcome of informed bargaining by most employers and employees. But enough has been said to show that any judgment on that point depends on empirical questions that cannot be answered by a priori arguments. 
is market-mimicking has to do with informational problems. Above all, employees are apparently unaware that in the face of contractual silence, they are entering into an at will arrangement. Even if they know the basic fact, they may not understand exactly what it means. 
Recent evidence, compiled by Pauline Kim, strongly suggests that workers believe that employment is generally for cause, not at will, and that discharge is therefore unlawful unless there is a job-related reason for it.57 In Missouri, for example, Kim found that extremely strong majorities of employees – 80% or more – believe that the following grounds for discharge, entirely lawful in Missouri, are in fact unlawful: the employer wants to hire someone else to do the same job; the employer mistakenly believes that the employee stole money; the employer personally dislikes the employee.58 Similar results were found in California and New York, notwithstanding substantial variations in the law of the three states.59 The most general finding is that overwhelming majorities falsely believe that discharges that fall short of good cause are prohibited by law.60 56 See Schwab, supra. 57 See Kim, supra note. 58 Id. at 134. 59 1999 U Ill L Rev at 451. 60 The point casts doubt on Judge Posner’s suggestion that in the context of job security, there “are not the sort of information problems that might be defeat transactions over workplace safety, for discharges are not such rare events that workers can’t be expected to evaluate the risk rationally.” R. Posner, supra note, at 359. If workers believe that the legal rule already protects them, they are unlikely to try to bargain for job security. As discussed below, there are other problems with the suggestion that risks will be evaluated rationally in this context. One of my principal points here is that claims like that of Judge Posner are empirical ones, to be assessed empirically, and cannot be asserted a priori. 
Why do workers misstate the law? As Kim notes, it is possible that workers’ belief to this effect is based on an understanding of workplace norms, rather than law.61 Perhaps the informal law of the workplace bars arbitrary discharges, even when state law does not.62 This is certainly possible; but why would workers say that what employers can do, as a matter of law, is the same as what they actually do, as a matter of practice? Behavioral economics and cognitive psychology suggest some possibilities. People tend to be optimists, and they often engage in wishful thinking63; they like to reduce cognitive dissonance, by drawing their beliefs about how things should be in line with their views about how things are. But I suggest a more particular hypothesis, one that remains to be tested. People’s beliefs about what the law is are likely to reflect their beliefs about what the law should be. But for present purposes, the key point is simple: The fact that workers believe that they have legal protection against arbitrary discharge much weakens the suggestion that an at will default rule accurately captures the shared understanding of the parties. 
D. The Information-Eliciting Default Rule: A Waivable Workers’ Right 
If we are uncertain about what rule would mimic the market, we might seek a background rule that operates not to mimic the market but to elicit information – that imposes on one or another of the parties the obligation to provide the crucial information to the other side (and also to courts).64 On which party should this burden be imposed? It makes obvious sense to say that employers can more cheaply propose a provision that will make matters clear. A simple conclusion follows: If employers really would like a system of at will employment, then courts should say that the background rule is for cause, simply in order to elicit, from them, a clear statement to this effect, so that both parties to the contract know its real content.65 
In the abstract, this view might be defended simply on the ground that a choice of the market-mimicking rule depends on empirical issues that have not been resolved. Without evidence, and without reason to believe that evidence would strongly support one or another solution, an information-forcing rule seems best. But Kim’s findings provide further support for this view. They are devastating to the idea that employees know that this is the rule, and enter into contracts with their eyes wide open. They strongly support the suggestion that the appropriate background rule is for cause, not to mimic the market, but so as to ensure that employers furnish the relevant information to the employee, and obtain a waiver if they can. 
The essential argument for a waivable workers’ right to job security is now in place. We lack much ground for confidence about the content of a market-mimicking rule. Lacking that confidence, a for cause regime seems best, as a way of forcing disclosure and overcoming what appears to be a lack of information on the part of workers. And if the argument is sound, it applies in many areas of labor and employment law, as we shall shortly see. 61 Id. 62 See Kim, supra note. 63 See Shelley Taylor, Positive Illusions (1992). 64 See Ian Ayres and Robert Gertner, Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts: An Economic Theory of Default Rules, 99 Yale LJ 87 (1989). 65 See id. 
These suggestions are not entirely without doctrinal support. In the last two decades, courts have moved in the direction of creating an informational-forcing default rule for job security. Mere silence does not create a waivable workers’ right. But ambiguous statements, plausibly taken as conferring job security, are often taken to prevent at will discharge; and if employers are to escape that result, they must do so via a disclaimer that is exceedingly clear. 
not create a contractual obligation to provide security.66 Employment manuals, for example, would not count as part of any contractual relationship. In the same vein, a statement by an employer or a personnel manager to the effect that the employee could work “as long as he did a good job,” or “permanently,” would not provide a for cause guarantee, at least if it was unaccompanied by a defined term for employment. 
These results seem odd; they treat a promise apparently giving something to an employee as if it had no meaning at all. How might the pattern of decisions be explained? One possibility is that courts, in the relevant cases, are making a claim about the reasonable expectations of most parties, having made or heard statements of this sort. Perhaps an employee who has been told that he has “permanent” employment does not reasonably understand this as a promise, rather than a hope or expectation. But another, more interesting possibility is that courts are creating a kind of information-forcing default rule, to the effect that ambiguous statements will not create a for cause situation, and employees must obtain greater clarity if this is in fact what they want. A justification for this seemingly harsh result is that it prevents both parties and judges from guessing about the meaning of words that cannot really be taken as face value. An oral reference to “permanent” employment cannot mean that the employer will be allowed to work there forever; the statement must be qualified in various ways, and perhaps the court does not want to have to do the qualifying on its own. Treating the promise as a kind of goal, rather than a promise, prevents judicial guessing-games. 
decades. Courts have read employment manuals to create enforceable obligations, even when the relevant terms have ambiguity (as in, it is “the policy” of the company to fire people for cause). In Toussaint v. Blue Cross,67 for example, the personnel manual said, in general terms, that it “is the policy of the company to treat employees in a fair and consistent manner and to release employees for just cause only.” It was clear that under longstanding law, this statement would not be sufficient to overcome the at will presumption, in part because no term of years was identified. Nonetheless, the Michigan Supreme Court held that this was sufficient to create an obligation of continued employment, notwithstanding the absence of a specified term of years. 
Indeed, some cases have entrenched the relevant provisions, to the extent that a disclaimer is unlikely to be effective unless it is exceptionally clear. Thus, for example, the Wyoming Supreme Court was confronted with an employee handbook containing the following language: “READ CAREFULLY BEFORE SIGNING. I agree that any offer of employment, 66 See Clarke v. Atlantic Stevedoring Company; Mark Rothstein et al., Employment Law (1999). 67 408 Mich 579 (1980). and acceptance thereof, does not constitute a binding contract of any length, and that such employment is terminable at the will of either party, subject to appropriate state and/or federal laws.”68 The court held that the disclaimer was ineffective notwithstanding this express statement. The reason was that it “was not set off by a border or large print, was not capitalized, and was contained in a general welcoming section of the handbook.”69 The court’s decision is hardly unique. In a number of cases, courts have said that disclaimers must be extremely clear.70 
In addition, oral promises are frequently taken as binding, even if they have a degree of ambiguity. Thus, for example, in Toussaint v. Blue Cross,71 the court was confronted not only with a personnel manual but also with statements, from personnel officers to employees, that an employee would be able to continue to work “as long as I did my job,” and or as long as “I was doing the job.”72 In an alternative holding, the court held that these statements were sufficient to justify an action for wrongful discharge, even if a specific term of years was not identified. Many cases find oral statements of this kind sufficient to create a right not to be discharged without cause.73 
These cases might be taken to reflect a new understanding of the reasonable expectations of employees, when presented with statements of this kind. Perhaps the modern cases reflect a belief that reasonable employees think that such statements give them job security. But the decisions might also be understood as a modest step in the direction suggested here: toward a waivable workers’ right to job security, on information-forcing grounds. The idea is that the employer is in the best position to control the sorts of statements that are made to employees, and if ambiguous statements are made, the employer ought to correct the ambiguity, so as to negate any employee belief that a for cause arrangement has been created. The disclaimer cases fit this rationale particularly well. They are a kind of consumer protection measure, saying that if there is any chance that the employee will misunderstand what he has been promised, it is the employer’s job to make an unambiguous correction. 
It is a quite short step from these cases to a waivable employees’ right to job security. The evidence suggests that ordinary employees, not told anything at all, are in the same position as employees told that their employers’ “policy” is to retain them unless their performance is unsatisfactory.74 Employees typically believe that this is both policy and law. And if this is the understanding of most employees, employers should be required to make a correction.75 
Thus far I have suggested that in the context of job security, a waivable employers’ right might be preferred over a waivable workers’ right, on the ground that the former is the market68 McDonald v., Mobil Coal, 820 P. 2d 986, 987 (1991). 69 Id. 70 See, e.g., Jimenez v. Colorado Interstate, 690 F Supp 977 (D Wyo 1988). 71 408 Mich 579 (1980). 72 Id. at 610. 73 See Rothstein et al., supra, at xx; cases 74 See Kim, supra note. 75 See Isasachroff, supra note; Note, Reversing the Presumption of Employment At Will, 44 Vand L Rev 689, 710 (1991). mimicking rule, but that without good evidence on that question, a waivable workers’ right seems better, because it is an information-forcing rule. I have also suggested that the default rule will indeed matter. But I have not discussed whether a nonwaivable workers’ right would be best of all, and it is now time to discuss that possibility. 
Many of those who challenge the at will system stress the possible inequality of bargaining power between employers and (many) employees, and suggest that a shift to a for cause system would produce a desirable form of redistribution to employees, above all to the most vulnerable workers.76 The reference to “inequality of bargaining power” must mean that many of the deals between employers and employees are harsh from the standpoint of the latter, and that the law should attempt to ensure a fairer arrangement. We should accept the claim of harshness, at least with respect to many of the relevant deals. Some employees have few good options, and in these circumstances, the best arrangement that they can get is often quite harsh, even unfair, in the sense that they are working very hard and receiving little in return. There is no reason whatsoever to think that the market wage has any special moral status.77 
But the redistributive argument nonetheless stands on fragile ground – not because the existing distribution of entitlements and resources is good, but because blocking the exchange, through a nonwaivable right to job security, is an unlikely way to produce the desired redistribution.78 A nonwaivable workers’ right to job security – and there is a general lesson for employment law here -- is an unreliable way of redistributing resources to workers. A “for cause” provision does not redistribute resources from employers to employees; it produces restructured deals, which may or may not benefit employees as a class. When mandatory for cause provisions are imposed, someone is going to have to pay for them. The burden may well fall on consumers or even workers themselves, in the form of lower wages, worse retirement benefits, or lower employment on balance (through, for example, more extended screening of job candidates, or refusals to take risks by employing people in the first instance). There can be no assurance that any redistribution to employees will make them better off as a class.79 In fact there is evidence that workers might lose in salary or other benefits most of, or as much as, they gain via the nonwaivable term (with the qualification that unionized workers appear to suffer from lower, or no, wage offsets).80 76 See Clyde Summers, Individual Protection Against Unjust Dismissal, 62 Va L Rev 481 (1976); Lawrence Blades, Employment At Will vs. Individual Freedom, 67 Colum L Rev 1404 (1967). 77 To some this will be a controversial claim and I will not defend it here. 78 For an overview of the theoretical considerations, see Lawrence H. Summers, Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits, 79 Amer. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proceedings) 177 (1989). For a recent discussion with special reference to benefits limited to subgroups of workers, see Christine Jolls, Accommodation Mandates, Stan. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2001). 79 Note the possibility that workers care not about absolute economic position but mostly or partly about relative economic position; if this is true, nonwaivable workers’ rights might be justified on the ground that they provide a beneft, in the form of increased job security, while also keeping relative economic position constant. See Robert Frank, Choosing the Right Pond (1983); see also section VII below. 80 See Jonathan Gruber, The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits, 84 Am. Econ. Rev. 622 (1994), and Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, Did Workers Pay for the Passage of Workers’ Compensation Laws, 110 Q J Econ. 713 (1995) (finding substantial wage offsets): “Analysis of the effect of the introduction of workers’ compensation on wages shows that in the coal and lumber industries, workers experienced substantial wage offsets. In the coal 
The redistributive argument for nonwaivable terms might be fortified with the suggestion that workers face a collective action problem that is best solved via law. John Stuart Mill outlined the argument long ago, suggesting that with respect to a reduction in hours worked, the limitation “will not be adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to one another to abide by it. . . . For however beneficial the observance of the regulation might be to the class collectively, the immediate interest of every individual would le in violating it; and the more numerous those were who adhered to the rule, the more would individuals gain by departing from it. . . . Assuming then that it really would be the interest of each to work only nine hours if he could be assured that all others would do the same, there might be no means of their attaining this object but by converting their supposed mutual agreement into an engagement under penalty, by consenting to have it enforced by law.”81 
Mill’s suggestion is sufficient to show that with respect to any particular contract term, workers who are currently employed at a firm might well do better with a nonwaivable legal constraint than without one. But as an argument that nonwaivable terms promote redistribution, two problems remain. First, and as noted, the compensation package might be adjusted to the detriment of workers; it is even possible that workers will lose in wages what they gain in reduced hours, and the resulting package might be worse from their point of view.82 Second, the result of the nonwaivable term might well be to increase unemployment, even if – indeed precisely because -- current workers are made better off.83 The increase in unemployment is a serious problem from the distributive point of view, especially because the people who are thrown into joblessness are likely to be among the least advantaged members of society. 
These points do not demonstrate that nonwaivable terms cannot be justified from the standpoint of producing desirable redistribution.84 Perhaps the wage offset will be less than 100%; in the unionized sector, for example, there appears to have been no wage offset as a result of workers’ compensation legislation.85 Perhaps the adverse effect on unemployment will be low and justified in light of the benefits of the nonwaivable term for larger classes of people; perhaps the problem of increased unemployment can be taken care of through other means. My conclusion is not that nonwaivable terms are always indefensible on redistributive grounds.86 It is that the case for such terms, on those grounds, is fragile, and depends on highly uncertain empirical issues. industry the offsets were large enough to cover not only the expected monetary value the benefits, but also the employers’ costs of purchasing the insurance to provide those benefits.” Id. at 736. 81 J.S Mill, Principles of Political Economy 351(Jonathan Riley ed. 1994). 82 See the evidence of substantial wage offsets for workers’ compensation and parental leave, supra note. But note the relative position problem, taken up in section VII below. 83 On the ambiguous evidence that labor unions increase compensation packages while also decreasing employment, see Freedman and Medoff, supra note, at 21, 43-60. 84 See, Jolls, supra note (discussing the circumstances in which desirable redistribution will occur). 85 See Fishback and Kantor, supra, at 734. 86 It is generally agreed that regulation via a nonwaivable term is inferior to regulation via a redistributive income tax. But it is possible that the choice is not between these two options, but between no redistribution at all and regulation via a nonwaivable term. 
B. The Problem of Information, With Notes from Behavioral Economics 
A sensible reason to create nonwaivable workers’ rights is to ensure that the employee is adequately informed. We have seen that shifting the entitlement to the worker, while maintaining freedom of contract, is a way of counteracting worker ignorance.87 But this may not be sufficient. If workers are allocated the right, but asked to waive it, will they know what they are doing? This is an empirical question, and it lacks an obvious answer. 
not believe that a waiver is effective even if they are asked to sign it. The most striking evidence here comes from Kim’s study. One of Kim’s questions asked employees to evaluate the effects of a personnel manual providing that the employer “reserves the right to discharge employees at any time, for any reason, with or without cause.” 88 In New York, California, and Missouri, this kind of provision eliminates any employer obligation. Nonetheless, in all three states about threequarters of respondents persisted in the belief that a pure cost-saving discharge would be unlawful notwithstanding the disclaimer.89 
It would be possible to respond to such evidence by endorsing a mandatory for-cause regime. Perhaps employees simply cannot be adequately informed of an employer’s decision to purchase the relevant entitlement. But if the costs of a mandatory regime are very high, this would seem an unfortunate conclusion. The best strategy might be to require extremely clear language so as to ensure that waivers are voluntary and knowing, as, for example, through strong verbs and specific language.90 
peculiarly immune from probabilistic harms faced by others. For example, 90% of drivers believe that they are safer than the average driver and less likely to be involved in a serious accident.92 Perhaps workers who waive their rights will believe, wrongly, that they are peculiarly immune from the risk to which they are subjecting themselves. If this is the case, waivers will be inadequately informed. It is not clear how to respond to this possibility. Perhaps the best remedy is not to be a ban on waiver, but efforts to inform employees in the clearest possible terms, so as to ensure that they are made aware that the risks are ones that they themselves will face. 87 It is also possible to think that job security, like safety, is a public good, in the sense that it cannot be provided to one employee without simultaneously being provided to many; job security requires procedures to test the legitimacy of termination, and these procedures are a public good. See Paul Weiler, Governing the Workplace (1993). To keep the discussion from becoming unwieldy, I defer it until a treatment of the issue of safety. See below. 88 1999 University of Illinois Law Review at 465. 89 Id. 90 Id. at 465 n. 63. 91 See Shelley Taylor, Positive Illusions (1989); Christine Jolls, Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules, in Behavioral Law and Economics 288, 290-92 (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 92 See Shelley Taylor, Positive Illusions 10 (1989). standards,” more protective than the legal minima, that workers could waive for compensation.112 The waivers might be agreed upon individually or collectively, via unions or other representative structures. 
The proposal has many virtues. By calling for certain nonwaivable minima for truly dangerous conditions, it responds to potential problems with inadequately informed waivers. At the same time, the proposal grants workers a presumptive right to extra protection; the endowment effect should ensure that workers do not relinquish that right for little or nothing. To those who fear that workers will waive their right to “safety” for too little, it might be responded that safety cannot be determined through some “off-on” switch. The question is the appropriate degree of safety, and informed people can sensibly resolve that question in different ways, trading degrees of safety in return for other goods. A special point on behalf of Rose-Ackerman’s proposal is that expensive safety regulation can be harmful not only to workers’ incomes but also to workers’ health.113 To the extent that such regulation decreases wages, and increases unemployment, it can produce mortality and morbidity increases as well. The central question is whether cognitive and motivational problems will lead workers to waive their rights for too little. If the set of nonwaivable minima is adequate, and if the initial grant of the right goes to workers, there is good reason to experiment with a two-tiered approach of this kind. 
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) forbids employers from discriminating against anyone who is over forty years of age; it also bans practices of mandatory retirement. Through these provisions, it creates an obvious incentive for employers to devise some kind of “retirement package” by which older workers might be encouraged to retire. Although such packages might be deemed a form of age discrimination, it is easy to imagine circumstances in which such a package would be in the mutual interest of employer and employee. Suppose, for example, that the employee is generally interested in retiring in any case, but would not do so without some kind of financial cushion. Suppose too that the employer wants to replace the older worker with a younger one, believing that the younger worker will produce substantial productivity gains, at least in the long term. 
Incentives for early retirement seem a natural and mutually beneficial solution, and in fact they were a widespread response to the ADEA.114 To be worthwhile, employers would naturally seek not only retirement, but also a promise not to sue for violations of the ADEA. Initially, courts reacted with some ambivalence to the resulting plans.115 Generally they upheld workers’ waivers of statutory rights, but required that any waiver be “knowing and voluntary.” Confusion about the meaning of this requirement helped spur Congress to enact the Older Workers Benefit Protection Act,116 which, as discussed above, authorizes knowing and voluntary 112 Note that it is possible to urge that any waiver should be collective rather than individual; this issue is taken up below. 113 See Symposium, J. Risk and Uncertainty; Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs, in Free Markets and Social Justice (1997). 114 See Linda Messinger, Voluntary Acceptance of Early Retirement Offers, 20 Ariz St. LJ 79 (1988). 115 See Blistein v. St. John’s, 74 F3d 1459 (4th Cir 1996); Wamsley v. Champlin, 11 F3d 534 (5th Cir 1993). 116 29 USC 626(f)., waivers. Because OWBRA does not permit employees to waive rights that postdate the execution of the waiver, it does not quite amount to the kind of waivable workers’ right that I have been discussing here. Instead it permits something like a settlement of a preexisting claim; the settlement operates as a waiver. The question therefore becomes why employers are not permitted to ask for waivers before the unlawful activity occurs. Why shouldn’t employers be allowed to obtain a waiver of a right to bring suit for alleged age discrimination, if employees are willing to agree? 
Christine Jolls has suggested that prospective waivers should indeed be allowed.117 On her view, the ADEA has, as one of its central purposes, the prevention of opportunistic discharges, which occur when employers discharge employees in late career, in violation of an implicit promise to provide continued benefits. The statute therefore has a “hands tying” rationale that ensures enforcement of these contracts in spite of employers’ incentives to act opportunistically. This is an efficiency argument for the ADEA; but there is a parallel efficiency case for allowing the workers’ right to be waivable. On Jolls’ view, “the basic efficiency argument in favor of prospective waivers is that they allow parties for whom age-based wages are not desirable – or at least not sufficiently desirable to warrant the costs of imposing legal liability for cost-based decisions about older workers – to avoid unnecessary and costly regulation of their private affairs.”118 
There is, however, a potential problem here: myopic behavior by workers. As Jolls acknowledges, young workers are in a poor position to assess the harms possibly to be incurred by their future selves several decades hence.119 The possibility of myopia may be a sufficient ground to bar waiver. In principle, it does seem unlikely that waivers of the right to be free from age discrimination would be adequately informed. If waivers are nonetheless to be permitted – as I think they should be – it is because freedom from age discrimination is unlikely greatly to benefit workers, and hence the resulting deals are unlikely to hurt workers. 
A great deal of attention has recently been given to various proposals to improve workers’ lives through longer vacations, extended leave time, and health care. Critics have argued that statutory mandates would provide a kind of rigid, “one-size-fits-all” approach to diverse workplaces, and that the best approach is to allow people to bargain as they wish. It should now be clear that the criticism is quite reasonable. If employees would like to sacrifice vacation and leave time, or health care benefits, in return for other elements of a compensation package, why should they not be permitted to do so? 
The contract at will situation has a special feature not present here: Empirical evidence that workers believe that they already have the right in question. We lack evidence that showing that workers believe that employers are obliged to provide them with vacation and leave time or health care. Perhaps they do. Even if they do not, there are good reasons to ensure that if workers are not going to have these rights, they are made expressly aware that this is something that they 117 Id. 118 Christine Jolls, Hands-Tying and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 74 Tex L. Rev. 1813, 1845 (1994). 119 Id. will not have. The natural proposal is that workers have waivable rights to a certain level of vacation and leave time, along with health care protection – and that employers are able to purchase these rights for a fee. 
It is possible to respond that workers will relinquish these rights too cheaply or that collective action problems will induce workers to act against their best interests. The response is generally weak, for reasons discussed above. But workers might lack the information to give fully knowing waivers, and a form of myopia might produce impulsive action. As in the context of occupational safety and health, the best response to this concern would be to produce nonwaivable minima along with procedural or substantive constraints on the waiver of rights that exceed those minima. What I am generally envisioning, in short, is a two-tiered system, in which workers are providing with a floor below which no workplace may go, together with a set of waivable rights that respond to the legitimate claim that one size does not fit all. Of course it would be necessary to say a great deal more in order to grapple with the details. 
In 1991, the United States adopted, for the first time, a statute requiring employers to provide parental leave.120 The Family and Medical Leave Act requires employers to allow employees up to 12 total weeks of leave during any 12 month period, if the reason for the leave is to care for a new-born child, to care for a spouse, son, daughter or parent with a serious health problem, or because of a serious health problem of the employee’s own.121 Employers are not required to allow employees to allow employees to continue to work at a reduced rate; nor are they required to pay employees during the time off. The basic idea is that an employee will not lose her job if she takes leave for one of the stated reasons. 
The most notable feature of this legislation is that it transforms a waivable employers’ right into a nonwaivable workers’ right. Is the legislation desirable? It is tempting to think that it is, because it gives employees an important right that they would otherwise deny in many or most cases. But this is no simple transfer of resources for employers to employees, and an obvious question has to do with who really bears the costs of parental leave legislation. There is good evidence that those who bear the costs are the same as those who receive the benefits – that parental leave legislation results in a proportional wage reduction for its beneficiaries, mostly women. If this is the case, is the statute undesirable for that reason? On one view, it certainly is; the government has simply forced workers to receive in leave time what they would otherwise receive in income, and the fact that they chose the latter, not the former, suggests that the latter is what is in their best interests. 
But by now it should be clear that this argument is not decisive.122 Workers may be myopic in failing to seek parental leave protections, especially in light of the fact that before having a child, it is hard to have a full and vivid sense of the demands that arise after the child is born. For many workers, there may be no self-conscious thought about parental leave at all; this may be “edited out” at the time that employment is sought. As in the context of the contract at 120 29 USC 2601. 121 29 USC 102. 122 For an illuminating treatment of some of the complexities here, see Jolls, Accommodation Mandates, supra note. will, both employers and employees may face a signaling problem. Employers who offer parental leave may find themselves attracting a disproportionate number of workers who want to take such leave; employees who ask about leave policies in advance may be signaling that they are not entirely committed to the workforce. Indeed, workers may face a norm against parental leave, and they may not even know that this norm is something that it is possible to challenge. In any case parental leave policies can be defended, not principally as protecting workers, but as protecting children and others for whom workers would like to care. If there are third-party effects, the case for an inalienable right is greatly strengthened. 
At first glance, these considerations would seem to be reasons for disallowing waivers. But they are not decisive. If parental wages fall as a result of parental leave legislation, children will be correspondingly hurt. In the general run of cases, there is little reason to think that parents will not consider the well-being of their children in deciding whether and how much leave time to take. Whether workers are in a poor position to make that balance in advance cannot be decided a priori. A real problem is that in initial bargaining, workers are unlikely to be thinking about considering parental leave when they first take the job.123 And it would be possible to remedy this problem by giving employees the relevant right, and by allowing them to trade it if and only if the employers makes the trade worth their while. In these circumstances it would seem to make sense to consider a two-tiered system here as well, combining statutory minima with a more ample set of waivable rights. 
All states now provide workers’ compensation programs. Moreover, the right to benefit from such programs is not waivable. Workers enter the employment relationship with assurance that in the event of accident, they will receive appropriate compensation. Workers’ compensation programs do not merely have ex post consequences. They also have substantial incentive effects, leading employers to reduce accidents and injuries. Indeed, there is reason to think that workers’ compensation programs are far more effective than OSHA in improving workplace safety.124 
By itself, however, these points do not justify making workers’ compensation programs nonwaivable. As in the context of parental leave legislation, there is good evidence that that workers’ wages are cut correspondingly; what they receive from the program, in the event that they need it, is what they lose in wages. In this circumstances, why shouldn’t workers be able to waive the relevant rights? If they did, they would be self-insurers, and self-insurance, so long as it is genuinely voluntary, is not an obviously implausible model for workplace injuries. 
There are some familiar answers here. Workers may lack the information that would make a waiver sufficiently informed, perhaps because of myopia, excessive optimism, or dissonance reduction. But there is an independent issue. Workers who do not wish to waive their rights may face a collective action problem, and this problem may well justify a nonwaivable workers’ right. More particularly, there is a distinctive free rider problem in this context. To see this, return to the fact that the consequence of workers’ compensation programs is to lead employers to increase safety in the workplace. The increases often happen because employers 123 Compare the discussion of severance benefits in Bewley, supra note. 124 See W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability 178 (1991). introduce capital improvements designed to reduce deaths and injuries. To the extent that these will be made in any case, employees who waive their rights for a fee will receive many of the protections of the program without paying for it. It is here that there is a problem. If safety is a local private good – something that, when provided to some, will also be provided to all – rational individual choices, by workers, are likely to lead to a large number of waivers, and hence a failure to create incentives to increase safety. This, then, is an area where the argument for creating a nonwaivable workers’ right is especially strong. 
What of the right to unionize itself? Should that right be waivable? By whom? These issues are best approached by dividing the inquiry into three issues: individual waivers of the right to unionize; appropriate default rules for union status; and collective waivers of the right not to be faced with “company-dominated unions.” 
the foundation of modern labor law, are not waivable by individual employees. Employers may not “buy” the right to fire employees who join unions as through, for example the “yellow dog” contract. The rights to join a union, to strike, and to engage in activity for mutual and protection are not subject to waiver. Why does the statute make this choice, rather than creating a system of waivable employees’ rights? 
There is no obvious answer. The best justification would rely on some combination of the reasons described above, involving informational, cognitive, and motivational problems. Perhaps many workers would not know what they were waiving, especially in light of the possibility that the potential benefits of unionization would not be readily apparent at the time the waiver was requested. Perhaps both employers and individual workers would face a signaling problem, akin to that which could arise if, in an at will regime, an employer emphasizes that it will provide job security (and thus attracts marginal workers), and an employee requests the same (and thus signals a realistic risk that the employer will want to fire him). 
rights coexists with what is, from the standpoint of the real-world status of unions, probably even more important: a basic background of a crucial waivable employers’ rights: no collective representative is in place until employees have affirmatively voted for it. The ordinary assumption of the workplace, and hence the default rule, is nonunion. The situation that workers face is one in which organization must be sought, through the processes of union election. Note that nothing is inevitable or natural about this situation. On the contrary, this “tilt has its roots in the common law background . . . the tacit legal assumption that the ‘natural’ state for a workplace is nonunion, with management exercising on behalf of the shareholder-owners the prerogatives of property and contract law to establish the firm’s terms and conditions of employment.”125 It would be easily possible to imagine a different regime, in which workers are presumed to favor collective organization, but in which they are permitted to vote otherwise. If 125 Paul Weiler, Governing the Workplace 228 (1992). union representation is thought to have significant advantages, a system of this sort might well be preferred. 
Many variations are possible. On one approach, workers would start employment with a presumption in favor of collective organization. A vote would be help to choose the particular form of that organization (including the particular union that would represent workers); at the same time, employees could be asked to reject the option if collective organization if they could be convinced that this is in their best interests. An advantage of this approach is that it could help overcome the effects of management tactics, many of them unlawful, to help overcome unionization.126 Another advantage is that this approach would work like an information-forcing default rule. If we are unsure whether failures of unionization stem from worker preferences or from employer pressure, a presumption in favor of collective organization would help untangle that issue. And to the extent that such organization confers benefits on workers without imposing correlative costs,127 there is much to be said for enlisting the endowment effect on its behalf. If, on the other hand, collective organization is thought to produce few real benefits for organized workers, and at the same time to increase both prices and unemployment, the existing default rule would stand on firm ground. What is most important is to see that the default rule represents a choice among a range of options and that it is likely to have extremely important effects; any such rule has to be defended against reasonable alternatives. 
employment law arise as a result of the statutory ban on employer-sponsored workers’ organizations.128 Employers are not allowed to create labor organizations, even if employees would be satisfied with them – apparently on the theory that employer-sponsored labor organizations cannot be trusted to protect employee interests.129 The theory seems to be that the employer should be on only one side not of the negotiating table, not on both sides. Thus Senator Wagner emphasized the coercion and deception involved in the use of company dominated unions, with the suggestion that such “sham” organizations were actually served the employer’s interests, not that of workers. Hence the statutory prohibition was (and is) defended with reference to a fear of employer coercion, a belief that employees lack the information to make ex ante waivers, a risk of deceptive practice on the part of employers, and a perception that workers’ preferences, in this context, may be adaptive to an unjust status quo. 
In theory, these objections may have made sense in the 1930s, when company unions were primary tools in union avoidance, and were commonly used as part of a package of unionbusting tactics. But in the last two decades, circumstances have changed in two important ways.130 First, private sector unions have dramatically declined, and hence the real choice is not between unions and company-supported substitutes, but between no union and a companysupported substitute. It is hardly clear that no organization at all is best for workers. Second, 126 See id. 127 This is the theme of Freedman and Medoff, supra note. 128 See 8(a)(2). 129 For general discussion is Samuel Estreicher, Employee Involvement and the Company Union Prohibition, 69 NYU L Rev 101 (1994); Mark Barenburg, Democracy and Domination in the Law of Workplace Cooperation, 94 Colum L Rev 753 (1994). 130 I borrow here from Estreicher, supra note. there has been a sharp decline in “Taylorist” conceptions of the workplace, which posit a sharp split between “brainwork” and the highly mechanical work of ordinary laborers. There is a great deal of new interest, on the part of employers themselves, in finding ways to increase the role of employees in designing more efficient workplaces, partly because this step increases worker satisfaction, partly because it appears to have desirable effects on production. The consequence of these two developments has been to impose sharp pressure on the prohibition on employeesponsored unions. 
Suppose, for example, that an employer wants to create some kind of employees’ organization to improve efficiency, safety, and working conditions. Under current law, this step is likely forbidden.131 The relevant right cannot be waived by workers acting individually or even collectively. But suppose that workers have thought long and hard about the issue, and have decided that they would do better with a company unions than without collective representation and with an ordinary union. The conventional response here is that the employees’ judgment to this effect cannot be trusted, because the result of a company union is to place the employer on both sides of the bargaining table. In this view, the ban on company unions is designed to ensure against a kind of deceptive packaging – the appearance without the reality of collective representation – and at the same time to counteract the risk that workers’ preferences will adapt to an unjust status quo. And if it were correct to say that without company unions, most workers would be faced with a choice between well-functioning unions and an absence of collective representation, this argument might be convincing. But the truth is that for a variety of reasons, unions are not a likely option for most workers – and also that for many workers, some kind of employee participation plan seems highly attractive, a source of genuine improvements in workers’ well-being.132 The conclusion is that with at least with procedural constraints designed to ensure real freedom of choice, workers should be allowed to waive the apparent protections of the ban on company unions, at least if they do so collectively. 
In this section, I generalize from this discussion to identify some grounds for disallowing waiver. The central cases involve third-party effects, inadequate information, and efforts to change norms and preferences, which involve third-party effects of a distinctive kind. 
Most obviously, a nonwaivable background rule makes most sense when there are thirdparty effects. There are many examples. As we will see, unions are not allowed to waive workers’ rights to distribute work-related materials, partly because there is no identity of interests between the waiving union and the workers whose rights have been waived. The problem is that the waiver has effects on third parties, that is, workers with interests distinct from those of the union. 131 See Electromation, 309 NLRB 990 (1992), enforced, 35 F.3d 1148 (7th Cir. 1994) 132 See G.W. L. Rev. 
In a series of common law cases, moreover, courts have created “public policy” exceptions to the at will rule. The core cases involve situations in which an employer discharges an employee for refusing to commit a crime (perjury, price fixing) on the employer’s behalf.133 In other cases, courts have disallowed discharges when the employer is punishing employees for cooperating with the authorities with respect to possible illegality at the company.134 The defining theme is that employers may not discharge employees if the consequence is to impose harms on outsiders to the contractual relationship.135 It should be obvious that waivers are unacceptable in these circumstances. The waiver is invalid not to protect workers, but to ensure that others are not adversely affected. For the most part this category of cases is reasonably straightforward, and hence it is not necessary to discuss it in detail here. 
In some cases, waivers will be inadequately informed. We have seen that this is a key reason that the law is more hospitable to union waivers than to individual waivers; unions are in a far better position to know what they are doing. Individual waivers may be inadequately informed for a large numbers of reasons, including excessive optimism, dissonance reduction, “editing out,” and myopia. 
A great deal of empirical research is necessary to see the extent of the problem. For the moment, the best approach is to block exchanges that most reasonable people would be unlikely to waive,136 but otherwise to allow waiver unless there is a particular reason for confidence that workers are giving up too much for too little. When there appears to be a serious risk to this effect, it might be best, not to block waiver entirely, but to impose procedural or substantive limits on acceptable waivers. Requirements of full disclosure, along with a “cooling off” period, might be a minimal way to proceed. 
Now let us turn to some of the most difficult cases for waiver, involving what are perhaps best treated as subtle third-party effects. 
discrimination suits. Seeking to reach a mutually advantageous solution, he asks his employees to sign an agreement, waiving their rights to bring suit for race or sex discrimination. The employer adds that he believes that discrimination is wrong and that he does not plan to discriminate. He is willing to make a premium for a waiver, not in order to discriminate, but to insulate himself from frivolous or trumped-up lawsuits. Suppose too that a nontrivial number of employees are willing to waive their rights, because they believe that this is otherwise a good place to work, because the premium is not trivial, and because they are willing to take their chances on the matter of race and sex discrimination. Let us assume, plausibly, that if employees are presumed to have the relevant entitlement, requests for waivers will be relatively rare, partly 133 See Petermann. 134 Palmeteer. 135 Se Schwab, supra note. 136 See Rose-Ackerman, supra note. because of the kind of signal given by such requests. Nonetheless, it is highly likely that some waiver requests would be made if they were seen as valid. Note in this regard that there is evidence that some of the discrimination laws do have an adverse effect on hiring members of the protected class, precisely because of a fear of a lawsuit; an employee in that class represents a lawsuit waiting to happen.137 Perhaps some of the disemployment effect could be removed with waivers. Should these waivers be upheld? 
It might be tempting to see, in the employer’s proposal, a kind of coercive offer: An employee is asked to waive his rights in return for a job, and she may seem to have “no choice” but to waive. On this view, the law should provide protection, and enhance freedom, by banning the coercive deal. But this account is much too simple. In these cases, the employee is not in a position of having “no choice”; the question is whether the offer is worthwhile for the employee in light of the options, perhaps most of them bad, that are available. Unless there is an informational problem of some kind, the fact that the employee accepts the deal is strong evidence that it is. 
It is also possible to think that for some classes of workers, the sheer number of job applicants, and the relatively small number of jobs, will mean that employees will be “forced” to waive; those who do not waive will not end up with jobs. This is certainly imaginable. But in a market that is so unfavorable to workers, all employment terms will be pushed in unfavorable directions, including wages. Unless there is some kind of information problem, employees stand to gain if they can waive the right to be free from discrimination, because those who waive that right will (by hypothesis) gain more than they lose. The best solution, in a market with this degree of harshness for employees, is to improve the background conditions faced by those workers, not to block the best available deal. 
fully be waivable. But might individual waivers have adverse effects on other workers? Begin with the context of sexual harassment, where it is easy to imagine that they would. If one woman waive her right, and is subject to harassment, other women may well be harmed; the effect will not be easy to cabin. At least this is so if the waiver and the harassment lead would-be harassers to believe that harassment is not entirely objectionable or unacceptable, or that reasonable women are willing to subject themselves to a risk of it for a wage premium. 
The example is easily generalized to the case of sex and race discrimination in general. An African-American who is willing to waive the right to be free from racially-motivated adverse employment action might well be affecting other African-Americans, by signaling the legitimacy of discrimination, and by indicating that discrimination is merely a “cost,” to be purchased and sold like other goods on the market. If discrimination is so regarded, there may well be more of it than if the signal is different – as, for example, where a flat ban suggests that discrimination is illicit, the sort of practice to be eliminated, rather than to find some optimal point.138 137 See Richard A. Posner, Aging and Old Age (1997). 138 Compare the area of pollution. Some people have objected to emissions trading – a kind of waivable nonpollution right – on the same ground. See Steven Kelman, What Price Incentives? (1981) The best response is that there is an antidiscrimination law is an attempt to produce norm change. The point of the law is to alter prevailing norms, and if rights are waivable, that enterprise might be defeated. If workers are living in accordance with a norm that they abhor but that they wish to change, they are unlikely to be able to accomplish the change on their own. By its very nature norm change requires collective action. The waiver is forbidden in order to ensure that certain norms are delegitimated. A closely related possibility is that the purpose of the relevant right is to produce preference change. If preferences are not being taken as given, but are being treated as endogenous and flexible, an argument for preventing waiver might be defended as a method for ensuring that preferences are in fact changed. 
With respect to the validity of discrimination waivers, these arguments are not decisive in the abstract. In a period in which race and sex discrimination are widely stigmatized, it is reasonable to believe that permitting waivers would have few significant effects on workers not parties to the deal, or at the least, that waivers would not have a material effect in entrenching objectionable norms and preferences. If an employer asks employees to waiver the right to be free from race or sex discrimination, it is signaling that it is a possible discriminator, and that is not the most attractive signal to send out to prospective employees. On the other hand, some employees – white and male? – might welcome that signal, and in these circumstances the ban on waiver is understandable as an effort to prevent inevitable effects on third parties, who are likely to be affected by the legitimization of the underlying practice. When the law is engaged in a self-conscious effort at changing norms and preferences, allowing waivers is too likely to defeat the enterprise at hand.139 
The discussion thus far has involved individual waivers; but a frequent issue in employment law is whether labor unions are themselves entitled to waive workers’ rights. The general answer is that union waivers are legally acceptable,140 though in some contexts there is a self-conscious effort to ensure that any waiver is knowing and voluntary, in a kind of procedural constraint on enforceable waivers.141 Is it possible to explain the law’s receptivity to union waivers? 
There are two points here, sharply distinguishing union waivers from individual waivers. First, informational problems are highly likely to have been overcome in the union setting. When a union is waiving, it would be surprising, in the ordinary case, if it did so without really knowing what it is doing. In all probability, the problem of myopia will also have been reduced; note in this regard that unions are not solely concerned with wages, and that various fringe optimal level of pollution, and polluting activity – so long as it is part of a legitimate business, and not an intentional tort -- is not the kind of thing that it is appropriate to delegitimate. 139 On the other hand, it is clear that victims of discrimination can settle, and at least if they do not “tender back” the money, a financial settlement appears to preclude a suit for reinstatement.Fleming v. US Postal Service, 27 F3d 259 (7th Cir 1994); see also Rangel v. El Paso, 996b F Supp 1093 (D NM 1998). 140 See IAM v. United, 534 F2d 422 (2d Cir 1975) (upholding waiver of reinstatement rights after settlement of a strike); Metropolitan Edison v. NLRb, 460 US 693 1983). 141 Se Metropolitan Edison v. NLRB, 460 US 693 (1983). benefits, likely to be favored by those interested in the long term, are a special focus of union bargaining.142 Second, unions overcome the collective action problem faced by individual workers, and this point lessens the danger that employers will be able to “force” individual workers to waive by ensuring that they compete to their collective detriment. It should be no wonder that serious concerns about union waivers seem to arise only when the union has a conflict of interest, and hence is not in a position to be a good representative of workers. Thus unions are permitted, in the most noteworthy case, to waive workers’ right to strike.143 With respect to the rights guaranteed by the National Labor Relations Act, the situation is largely one of waivable workers’ rights—with the rights being waivable collectively only, and emphatically not individually. 
Consider in this regard cases in which the union cannot be trusted to be a fair representative of workers’ interested, exemplified by NLRB v. Magnovox Co. of Tennessee.144 In that case, the union agreed to a collective bargaining agreement that banned employees from distributing literature on any of the employer’s property, including nonworking areas during nonworking time. It is clear that this rule would violate the law if imposed unilaterally by the employer; but the union had agreed to it. Nonetheless, the Supreme Court held that the waiver was not binding, for a collective bargaining agreement could not eliminate these rights. The Court said that waiver would not be permitted “where the rights of the employees to exercise their choice of a bargaining representative is involved – whether to have no bargaining representative, or to retain the present one, or to obtain a new one. The key problem was one of agency – with respect to continuing debates about self-representation, the union could not be trusted to be the faithful agent of workers. Here is a distinctive reason to disallow union waivers. Magnavox is followed by a series of cases that are generally receptive to waivers by unions, but not when the waiving union is likely to have divergent interests from those of the individuals whose rights are waived. 
One final wrinkle is important here. In many contexts, union waivers must be explicit and unambiguous. A general “no-strike” clause will not be taken to bar an unfair labor practice strike,145 and it will also not be taken to create an affirmative obligation on union leaders, to avert strikes on pain of discipline or discharge.146 If employers are going to obtain rights beyond those minimally contained in a no strike pledge, they must do so explicitly. Here is a procedural constraint on the waiver of workers’ rights; and it has proved crucial in the cases. 
The discussion thus far has neglected an important and highly relevant point from behavioral economics. I do not discuss it in detail here, because it raises many complexities and depends on empirical issues on which unambiguous evidence is lacking. But because the point is significant, and has been neglected in the context of employment and labor law, it requires some discussion. 142 See Richard Freedom and James Medoff, What Do Unions Do? (1984). 143 See Mastro Plastics Corp. v. NLRB, 350 US 270, 281 (1956). 144 415 US 322 (1974). 145 Mastro Plastics Corp. v. NLRB, 350 US 270, 281 (1956). 146 Metropolitan Edison Co. v. NLRB, 460 US693 (1983). 
Let us acknowledge the that the cost of workers’ rights, when they are not waived, might be borne in whole or in part by workers, in the sense that the legal grant of a right, to workers, will result in a lower paycheck. Is the argument against the relevant right therefore established, on the ground that workers will be net losers? We have seen that one problem with an affirmative answer is that workers might not be net losers. But a more fundamental problem is that with respect to income, what workers seem to care about is relative economic position rather than absolute economic position.147 In other words, what matters to workers is partly how they compare to others, not how much money they are making in the abstract; and if all workers lose the same amount, each worker will lose very little, because relative position will not be affected. If what workers care about is relative position, nonwaivable rights might, in principle, make workers better off on the dimension along which they are helped (by giving them something important) while also not making them worse off along the dimension along which they are apparently helped (by decreasing their income while also decreasing that of everyone else). 
Relative position is found by comparing the worker’s income with that of (salient) other workers; absolute position by looking simply at the number of dollars that the worker makes. The question is whether workers are significantly worse off in a system in which all (salient) workers lose, say, .5% of their salary; if this loss has no significant adverse effect, than any initiative that produces that loss will not, by virtue of that consequence, harm workers at all. And if this is so, it is because income is, above a certain floor, a positional good, that is, a good whose value depends on comparison with the holdings of others. The noteworthy possibility here is that legal initiatives might, in theory, produce real gains of one or another kind (for example, leisure time, health care, job security, which are, by hypothesis, nonpositional goods), without producing real losses (because the only loss is to relative position in terms of income). 
There is considerable evidence that relative position is in fact what people care about, at least with respect to income.148 Many people would prefer to work in a place where they earned (say) $60,000 and the average worker earns $50,000, to working in place where they earn (say) $70,000 and the average worker earns $90,000. This preference holds where everything else is equal, that is, where the cost of living is the same in the two places. Why are people prepared to sacrifice income to ensure certain place in the hierarchy? Undoubtedly envy and status-seeking play a large role. Some people would like to have a high status and are willing to lose money to ensure that they do. Perhaps more people would like not to have a low status and are willing to lose absolute income in order to ensure that they do. But the most important point is more fundamental. The economic position of other people sets the “frame of reference” within which we evaluate various goods. If you now had the same computer that you used ten years ago, you would likely be dissatisfied and frustrated, simply because the frame of reference for evaluation of the computer has changed so dramatically. But if everyone had the same computers that they had ten years ago, your decade-old computer would not seem so bad, indeed it might not seem 147 See Robert Frank, Choosing the Right Pond (1985). 148 See id; see also Robert Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2001). bad at all. And if everyone had the same computer that will be in use ten years from now, your current computer might seem very slow and inefficient. 
What is true for computers is no less true for a vast array of goods and services, including cars, radios, televisions, homes, and even artistic and literary work. People care about relative position not only because they care about their status, but also because they are aware that the frame of reference for evaluation is set not individually but socially, and indeed that this is inevitably the case. 
For the moment let us simply assume that relative rather than absolute economic position is what most workers care about – that worker well-being would not be decreased by (say) a decrease in annual wages of $25, $50, or $100, so long as all workers face the same decrease. In that event, some nonwaivable terms, such as a right to job security, might be justified on the following ground: The consequence of the new term is to decrease absolute income but to hold relative income constant. From this shift, there is little or no welfare loss to workers. At the same time, workers receive a substantial benefit, e.g., job security, vacation time, or health care. As far as the worker is concerned, the substantial benefit is given essentially for free, because relative position is held constant. If relative position is in fact what workers care about, this appears to be a powerful argument for a wide range of nonwaivable workers’ rights. 
I believe that this argument is largely correct; but it cannot be shown to be convincing in the abstract. It raises three questions in particular. 
Perhaps relative position is also what workers carry about with respect to the new, legally granted benefit; perhaps this too is a positional good. Many goods have a mixture of positional and nonpositional features. It does seem reasonable to say that such goods as job security, health care benefits, and leisure time have strong nonpositional features. It is important to have these things regardless of what other people have; an increase in any of them, far more than an increase in money, is an independent good. But job security, leisure time, and the like also have positional features; to lack (say) job security when everyone else lacks job security is probably better than to lack job security when everyone else has it. For the argument on behalf of the nonwaivable term to be made convincing, it must be true (a) that relative position is what matters with respect to income -- or to whatever else is lost as a result of the nonwaivable term -- but (b) that what matters for the good in question, such as job security, is not relative but absolute position. Perhaps we can conclude that the nonpositional features of job security, health care benefits, and leisure time are enough to give the argument a kind of presumptive validity. 
It is possible that a nonwaivable right to a certain largely nonpositional good, such as job security, will led not only to reductions in income (by hypothesis a positional good) but also to reductions in nonpositional goods (vacation leave, sick leave, health care, parental leave). If the grant of one nonpositional good leads to a decrease in others, there will be nothing to celebrate. There is an empirical agenda here: When government creates a mandatory benefit, to what extent is the result to increase not income, but other, less positional benefits associated with employment? To what extent is income actually a positional good? . There is considerable evidence that for most people, what matters to perceived well-being is their position in the relevant hierarchy, above a certain minimum level.149 Of course for quite poor workers, absolute income may be what matters. In poor nations, absolute increases in wealth affect self-reported happiness levels, not relative position; and absolute increases affect self-reported happiness levels among the very poor. To the extent that a mandatory term is reducing the income of people with little to live on, they are not likely to be justifiable on the ground that I have offered. Of course few mandatory terms will have this effect. 
The nonwaivable right may impose ancillary social costs. It might, for example, force prices to rise, and the resulting inefficiencies may argue against the nonwaivable term. Even when workers are benefited as a result, the term might not be justified on balance; an increase in prices is hardly good news for workers (especially poor ones) and if unemployment increase as well, the nonwaivable term may not be worthwhile. 
In light of these points, an understanding of the importance of relative position does not create a decisive argument for nonwaivable terms in employment law. But it does raise a possibility, overlooked in conventional discussions of these problems: even if such terms create a dollar-for-dollar reduction in wages, workers may benefit as a result. 
My basic goal in this Article has been to bring a better understanding of human behavior to bear on the three principal options for employment law: waivable employers’ rights, waivable workers’ rights, and nonwaivable rights. Contrary to the Coase theorem, the default rule is likely to matter a great deal. Contrary to the standard view in law and economics, workers are loss averse. They will be reluctant to give up rights and goods that have been initially allocated to them – a point confirmed by employers’ reluctance to decrease wages, even during a recession.150 Contrary to the conventional wisdom, workers do not understand that the current system is “at will,” even though the law to this effect is well established. Contrary to the reflexive antipaternalism of many lawyers and economists, workers are likely to have difficulty in deciding whether to waive their rights, and hence the case for nonwaivable terms, defended in behavioral terms, is far more plausible than it appears, defended in terms of simple redistribution. Contrary to the standard economic wisdom, workers often care about relative position, not absolute position. Contrary to standard legal practice, waivable workers’ rights represent an attractive alternative in many contexts, responsive in particular to workers’ lack of information. Contrary to a standard legal view, the difference between legal hostility to individual waivers and legal receptivity to union waivers is defensible on the ground that unions are less likely to suffer from myopia and other forms of bounded rationality. 
More particularly, we have seen that the initial allocation of the legal right may well matter, both because of the endowment effect and because of the transactions costs of changing it. The question whether to allow waivers by individual workers turns largely on questions about 149 See id; see also Robert Frank, Luxury Fever (1999). 150 See Bewley, supra note. information; some of these questions are complex and subtle. We have also seen significant differences between individual and collective waivers. Many of the concerns about individual waivers are weakened when workers are waiving as a group. In both the individual and collective contexts, objections to allowing waiver might be met, not by banning waivers entirely, but via procedural or substantive constraints. 
We have seen more particularly that waivable workers’ rights represent a distinctive, promising, and insufficiently explored approach to the law of labor relations. A system of this kind will often be preferable to the more standard alternatives of waivable employers’ rights and nonwaivable workers’ rights. To the extent that workers might undervalue the rights initially allocated to them, and sell them for a price that is too low, it is sensible to consider, as an alternative to a ban on waiver, a system of constrained waiver, ranging from requirements of disclosure, to a cooling-off period, to legal floors on what employees will receive through the relevant trades. 
In the area of the contract at will, I have suggested that legislatures should experiment with waivable for cause rules, and also that courts should move in this direction by penalizing employers who lead employees to believe that they have protection against at will discharge (as, for example, through promises of “permanent” employment and through statements of “policy” to retain all good employees). If progress is to be made in improving worker well-being without introducing excessive rigidity into the labor market, the best route for the future will consist of more creative experiments with waivable workers’ rights. 
For many problems, it would make sense to combine a system of nonwaivable statutory minima, consisting of safeguards that no worker should lack, alongside an ample set of waivable workers’ rights, subject to bargaining. There is room for disagreement about what should count as the nonwaivable minima and what should count as the waivable workers’ rights; it is in identifying the content of the categories, rather than in settling on the basic approach, that reasonable disputes will arise. An approach of this kind is no blueprint, but it suggests a general orientation that could provide the foundation for a new system of employment law in a wide range of areas. Equally important, an understanding of the nature of workers’ judgments and motivations, and the possible grounds for choosing among the legal options, could provide the basis for orienting future inquiry, and for making progress on the issues, many of them empirical in nature, that remain. Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
(September 1991). 
Contract (February 1992). 
Common Pools (February 1992). 
of AIDS (April 1992). 
1992). 
Economic Analysis (July 1992). 
Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
(November 1992). 
(January 1993). 
Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
(April 1993). 
(The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Law (September 1993). 
(October 1993). 
(March 1994). 
Law (June 1994). 
(June 1994). 
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
(August 1994). 
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cimino (December 1994). 
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Damages (February 1995). 
Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
and Biotechnology (November 1995). 
1996). 
in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other 
Collectibles (July 1996). 
Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
1997). 
Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 
Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative 
Races (May 1997). 
Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). 
Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and 
Valuation in Law) (December 1997). 
Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal 
Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). 
Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting 
Bigger (February 1998). 
to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). 
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). 
Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Decisions (June 1998). 
Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
1998). 
Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
the Tax Law (November 1998) 
International Law (November 1998) 
Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) 
Evidence (February 1999) 
Information Goods (February 1999) 
Enterprise (February 1999) and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
A few years ago, I attended an interdisciplinary conference on the subject of incommensurability. The economists and the philosophers seemed quite hostile to one another, and to be disagreeing very sharply; but it was unclear what they were disagreeing about. The high-point, or low-point, came when the distinguished game theorist Kenneth Binmore asked the distinguished legal philosopher Joseph Raz, with utter exasperation, what Raz meant by the term "the will." Was RazBinmore wanted to know-referring to a physical entity? If not, what in the world (literally) did Raz mean? Raz responded, quietly, that he was building on ordinary usage. Binmore made it clear that he did not consider this an answer. It should not be surprising that no economist is represented in the volume that grew out of the conference.' 
Many philosophers are critical of economics, on the theory that "efficiency" is not an appropriate social ideal and that the economic conception of human motivation is extremely crude. And much of Martha Nussbaum's recent work has consisted of a philosophical critique of economics, or, more precisely, that form of economics that has been especially influential in the economic analysis of law (hereinafter EAL). Nussbaum thinks, as do many philosophers, that economists work with hopelessly crude foundations, rooted in assumptions that philosophers have long shown to be misguided. I believe that Nussbaum has made a number of convincing arguments, but 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Martha Nussbaum, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for helpful comments on a previous draft. 
Chang ed., 1998). 
(a ParticularType of) Economics, 64 U. CHI. L. REv 1197 (1997) [hereinafter Flawed Foundations];see also MARTHA NUSSBAUM, POETIC JUSTICE (1996); Martha Nussbaum, "Only Grey Matter?" Richard Posner's Cost-Benefit Analysis of Sex, 59 U. CHI. L. REv. 1689 (1992). that that these arguments are not nearly as damaging as she thinks to conventional EAL, most charitably read. Part of the problem, it seems to me, is that she reads EAL as if it were, or aspired to be, a branch of political philosophy, where in fact EAL is mostly an effort to predict the consequences of law and to understand the forces that bring law about. EAL is concerned with testable hypotheses, a topic of little concern to philosophers. One way to put the point is that while philosophers often complicate ordinary understandings, by introducing further distinctions and refinements, economists often simplify ordinary understandings in the interest of parsimony. Nussbaum makes a number of good criticisms of EAL insofar as it is normative or insofar as it attempts to set forth an accurate descriptive account of practical reason; but only a small amount of EAL is normative in the sense that she is complaining about, and economists need not be read to claim to have a good descriptive account of practical reason. 
There is a broader lesson, involving the relationship between philosophy and economics, and about the possibility of productive collaboration between philosophers and economists. To the extent that they are speaking about law, economists are especially good at exploring the consequences, many of them apparently unintended, of legal rules. Within the social sciences, they are especially good at developing testable hypotheses and then testing them. Economists are also helpful in giving accounts of how law comes into being and in showing the best way to achieve specified ends. At the more normative level, they are most helpful in showing that if some X is the goal, some instrument Y will or will not achieve it. It follows that philosophical critiques of the "foundations" of EAL-including Nussbaum's-do not, by and large, undermine the most common and important uses of economics in law. Economists and philosophers are generally engaged in different tasks. With respect to productive collaborations, philosophers can, among other things, clarify concepts that economists leave murky; posit ingredients in individual utility functions that economic analysts of law might otherwise overlook; raise questions about how to conceive "rationality"; and show difficulties in fullfledged normative work in EAL. I suggest that an especially promising domain for productive collaborations is behavioral law and economics. II. ECONOMICS, EXTENDED UTILITY FUNCTIONS, BEHAVIORAL 
ECONOMICS 
Let us begin with some distinctions. Economic analysts usually distinguish between positive and normative work. Positive work is concerned with explaining why law is as it is and with predicting the consequences of law. Why do we have maximum hour laws? What will happen when the minimum wage is increased? What will be the effects of a law forbidding discrimination on the basis of sex? If the Federal Aviation Administration requires children to have their own seats on airplanes, how many lives will be saved as a result? What will minimum prices accomplish? Positive work might say, for example, that a law nominally designed to protect against air pollution was actually an effort to help eastern coal; or that maximum hour legislation owes its existence to the lobbying efforts of labor unions; or that the consequence of an environmental statute, or of maximum hour legislation, will be to help certain industries at the expense of others; or that mandatory seats for children will actually cost lives, by leading people to drive rather than fly, even though driving is more dangerous. I believe that most EAL is positive rather than normative. 
Normative work is concerned not with "is" but with "should," or more particularly with what the law should do. This variety of work in turn should be divided into two quite different subcategories: fullfledged normative work and work that might be called "prescriptive." Sometimes economic analysts assume that some specified goal is desired-less pollution, higher employment of women, fewer workplace injuries, increased income for the working poor, or (more controversially) greater aggregate social wealth (or "efficiency"). Some normative work does not evaluate the specified goal, but simply says how to get there; it is purely instrumental. If the goal is less pollution, a gas tax may be better than technological requirements imposed on new cars. This important kind of work is what I am describing as prescriptive. 
Much more ambitiously, some (actually only a little) normative work in EAL argues on behalf of a contested social maximand, such as utility maximization or wealth maximization, or urges that the law should take a certain course because it will promote that contested maximand. Thus it might be said that the law should do X because X is efficient in the sense that it will maximize wealth. To take a vivid example, consider a recent and somewhat hilarious article in the Journal of Legal Studies, defending a ban on flag-burning on the ground that people may well be willing to pay a good deal to prevent flag-burning; the upshot of the article is that a ban on flag-burning may be justified because such a ban might be efficient.3 
The idea that "wealth maximization" is the appropriate goal of a social order is not very plausible, and its leading defender, Judge Posner, no longer defends it. To be sure, some work in EAL, and even more casual talk within EAL, urges, or even takes it for granted, that "efficiency," or "wealth maximization," is what the legal system should pursue. But this work is best taken more modestly as prescriptive-as suggesting that to the extent that efficiency is sought, some strategy X or Y will or will not achieve it. There is no good defense of the idea that efficiency is the only thing that should concern a good social order, and most people in EAL are aware of this fact. Very little of economic analysis of law amounts to full-fledged normative work. EAL is dominated by positive and prescriptive analysis. 
B. Parsimony,Testable Hypotheses, and Puzzles About Preferences 
Prescriptive and positive work in EAL often attempts to propose hypotheses and then to test them. The minimum wage will increase unemployment; the implied warranty of habitability will result in increased rents or a diminished housing stock for poor people; a right to be protected against arbitrary discharge will make employers more reluctant to hire people in the first instance. To have a testable hypothesis, the analyst must make parsimonious assumptions. With a "full" or "rich" account, we might be able to capture the nature of practical reason; but it is unlikely that we will be able to generate and then to test hypotheses. I will simply assert, without defending the point, that with respect to positive and prescriptive work, EAL has produced extremely important advances, and it is the best (indeed the only) game in town. At the same time, the predictions are often quite crude, involving the direction of effects rather than their magnitudes, and the bare notion of "rationality" is often too thin and formal to produce robust predictions.4 
Whether positive or normative, economics tend to work from a simple foundation, involving the idea of "preferences." People-it is assumed-"have" preferences, and they seek to satisfy them. This idea plays a central role in EAL. The best defense of the assumption involves the goal of parsimony. But there is ambiguity in the very notion of a "preference." Sometimes the term preference refers to "choices"; sometimes it refers to the motivations that lie behind and help explain choices. Thus, it might be said, John prefers chocolate to vanilla, because (and to the extent that) John chose a chocolate cone over a vanilla cone; or it might be said that the reason for this choice is that John likes chocolate best.5 
All this raises an obvious question: What are people's preferences? To get either prescriptive or positive work (or for that matter normative work) off the ground, this question has to be answered. Some economic analysts of law seem to say or to assume that people are rational, selfinterested profit maximizers-or simply to say or assume that people want more money rather than less. For many purposes, an assumption of this sort is sufficient to produce progress; consider the question whether compulsory seats for children on airplanes will increase safety, or whether doubling the minimum wage will increase unemployment. But three issues arise at this stage, and in at least some contexts, these issues appear important. First, the term "rational" has to be specified, and it might be understood in many different ways. Sometimes people do not seem rational in the sense assumed. They rely on heuristics, or rules of thumb, that lead to errors; they show biases and confusions of multiple sorts.7 Second, sometimes people seem concerned with things other than self-interest, narrowly construed; they are sometimes willing to sacrifice material self-interest for the sake of other goals, including reputation, status, and fairness.' Third, sometimes people show bounded willpower; they can be myopic or impulsive, and they may even take steps to counteract these tendencies. 
STAN. L. REv. 1471, 1485-89 (1998). 
JUSTICE ch. 2 (1997). 

Economics, 83 AM. ECON. REv. 1281, 1282 (1993). 
These various issues-relating to questions of rationality, willpower, and utility function-have received considerable and growing attention within economics and EAL. For example, Gary Becker-a founder of and an inspiration for EAL-has worked with the idea of an "extended utility function" that includes people's concern for things other than self-interest, narrowly defined.9 Becker and his followers are well-aware that people are not solely concerned with material goods. 
In addition, those interested in behavioral law and economics have argued that bounded rationality and bounded self-interest raise serious problems for some aspects of conventional law and economics.' Thus it can be shown that people often care about being perceived as fair, and they will sacrifice their material self-interest, in some circumstances, to achieve this goal. Work on prospect theory and on heuristics and biases has raised questions about conventional assumptions about rationality." It is generally agreed that the future task is to go back and forth between hypothesis and data, to see what understanding is falsified or confirmed by evidence. At this stage it should be clear that philosophical questions about what people really care about are receiving considerable attention; the problem is understood as an empirical one to be resolved by exploring actual behavior. Behavioral economists, like conventional economists, are interested in producing testable hypotheses. Sometimes the simple assumptions of conventional EAL may be enough for positive and prescriptive work; sometimes behavioral work provides a necessary corrective. A great deal of additional thinking and research would be helpful in sorting out the resulting questions. 
III. NUSSBAUM'S PHILOSOPHICAL CRITIQUE 
With this as background, let us examine some philosophical issues. Nussbaum offers a number of challenges to what she sees as economic analysis of law. The challenges can be organized into three categories, involving human motivation; incommensurability and plural utility; and deliberation about ends and agency. Obviously these criticisms raise important issues about how to achieve an adequate descriptive account of practical reason, and they are also significant from the normative point of view. But the question is how much they touch the positive and prescriptive tasks of economic analysis of law, and-since most economic analysis is both positive and prescriptive-to what extent they work as convincing criticisms of most of economic analysis of law in its current form. How do these points work as objections to conventional economic analysis? How might they be made into a basis for better prescriptive and positive work? To what extent can they help in the creation of testable hypotheses? A. Human Motivation 
Nussbaum complains of the "reduced number of explanatory entities behind human action. Indeed, the capacious category of 'preference' seems to cover all of the psychological underpinnings of action, both cognitive and conative."' 2 By contrast, philosophers "have agreed that the explanation of human action requires quite a few distinct concepts," including "belief, desire, perception, appetite, and emotionat the very least."'' 3 Similarly, Nussbaum objects that homo economicus "is a self-interested maximizer of his own satisfactions"; that under EAL, altruism is "reduced to a type of egoism, in which people get reputational or psychic goods for themselves"; and that it is necessary at a minimum to recognize "sympathy and commitment as independent sources of motivation." 
It should be granted that in order to have a good descriptive account of people's self-understandings, the various ingredients of motivation must be disentangled from one another. But the degree of refinement depends on the author's particular task; a novelist (Henry James is an obvious example) may be concerned to offer an especially fine-grained account, while a philosopher may reject the coarsest accounts while offering a manageable number of distinctions. An economically oriented analyst of the law has a different task, and should not be taken as a philosopher manqu6. 
The question is what account of motivation is helpful for the particular tasks that economists set for themselves. Perhaps a parsimonious account will do and be especially useful by virtue of its simplicity. For example, how much must be posited about motivation in order to know the effects of a law increasing the minimum wage, or imposing a warranty of habitability, or allowing workers to cartelize, or increasing cigarette taxes? If economists offer a simple account of 
FlawedFoundations,supra note 2, at 1208. 
Id. at 1209. motivation-that people want, in these contexts, to increase their profits-why and how will they go wrong? It is not clear how a richer understanding of motivation will lead to better predictions and prescriptions, at least in areas of this kind. At least the philosophercritic might want to go through such areas to see what account of motivation will lead to better predictions. 
Nussbaum can be understood to be making several different points here; they should be addressed independently. 
complex subdivisions of people's motivations. This may or may not be true; the economist may say, plausibly enough, that she is working with a simple account to see where it leads (in terms of predictions or prescriptions). Whether the simple account does well depends on what the evidence shows. A complex account-involving "belief, desire, perception, appetite, and emotion-at the very least"-is not likely to do better and may well do worse, simply by virtue of its complexity. (Are the distinctions among desire, appetite, and emotion, for example, important for the positive and prescriptive work of economic analysts of law? Exactly where do they go wrong when they ignore those distinctions? Do these distinctions matter for purposes of understanding the effects of a regulation requiring parents to purchase seats for their children on airplanes?) 
they care about the well-being of others. This is sometimes true, and as noted it is a chief inquiry of behavioral economics and in the recent work of Gary Becker. Perhaps some economic analysis goes wrong because it disregards the existence of altruism; 4 but this does not seem to be a challenge to economic analysis of law as such. It is instead a point about the actual contents of people's utility functions. The point may be important; perhaps people will not behave in the predicted ways precisely because they care about others. But then the natural question arises: Where, concretely, does Nussbaum think that economic analysts have gone wrong because of their failure to understand altruism or other motivational forces? To answer this question, undoubtedly it will be necessary to be highly particular and concrete, and undoubtedly to distinguish among different areas. In family law, there is probably more altruism than in commercial transactions. A casual survey of articles in the Journal of Legal Studies and the Journal of Law and Economics suggests that very few, if any, of the articles are vulnerable to this kind of critique. 
Sen 5) that sympathy (a regard for the well-being of others) and commitment (a belief in certain principles) can motivate human action. Sympathy and commitment are qualitatively different from "tastes" or "desires." For some purposes this is both true and important. But for purposes of predicting behavior, when is it necessary to emphasize this point? Is this important to understand the effects of a change in the Clean Air Act or an increase in the minimum wage or of a rent control law? This is an empirical question, and perhaps the answer is not straightforward. The question, for those pressing this challenge, is whether it can be turned into testable hypotheses that perform better than conventional economic hypotheses. This is in a sense exactly what behavioral economics, and those interested in behavioral law and economics, are trying to do. 
Nussbaum is right to argue that people sometimes behave in accordance with nonmaterial incentives. Perhaps they do not breach contracts, even though it is efficient to do so, because of their commitment to certain principles, or because of reputational incentives. If this is a philosophical point, it is also a way of starting to frame a hypothesis, which might actually be tested. Someone interested in EAL would ask: To what extent is this true? And if it is true, how is economic analysis impaired? 
Suppose, for example, that we think of an extended utility function, including not only material self-interest but also a taste for fairness. As noted, much of behavioral economics has been concerned with this issue. How, if at all, does the extension of the utility function adversely affect EAL? Nussbaum gives few examples. I conclude that Nussbaum's discussion of human motivation makes some valuable points; that those points work against some cruder hypotheses in EAL; but that they do not amount to a general or fundamental criticism of EAL, because Nussbaum's concerns have been taken up both by Becker and his followers and by those interested in behavioral economics. A lurking question is whether a fine-grained philosophical account of motivation is by itself too fine-grained to be a basis for predictive social science. The question for the future is whether philosophical challenges Foundationsof Economic Theory, 6 PHIL. & PUB. AlT. 317, 317-44 (1977). of this kind can be used in that way. What can philosophers add to the economic picture of motivation, in such a way as to produce hypotheses that might be tested and shown to be correct? 
Nussbaum believes that a "commitment to the commensurability of all an agent's ends runs very deep" in EAL. She links this commitment with the project shared by Plato and Sidgwick, a project that is, in her view, "radically revisionary," rather than merely reportorial of how people are. 16 It follows that what EAL does is to envision a "a world remade, not the world we live in." Thus EAL adopts "a perspective of lofty detachment" that "has flattened and simplified things that are usually messy and real."' 7 In support of her challenge to EAL, she claims that this criticism "is by now a common point in mainstream economics," and invokes Amartya Sen's work on "plural utility," which sees utility "primarily as a vector (with several distinct components), and only secondarily as some homogenous magnitude."' 8 
Here too we need to make some distinctions. There need be no quarrel with Nussbaum's claim that an adequate view of people's selfunderstandings, or of practical reason, will raise doubts about the view that all human goods are commensurable. 9 And I agree with Nussbaum's argument that a world of genuine commensurability would represent a revision (for the worse) of our actual experience, a revision that would make much of that experience unrecognizable.2 But it is not clear that EAL is really committed to denying this point; recall that it is working with parsimonious assumptions in order to make predictions. Thus the question is this: In what sense and to what extent is an emphasis on incommensurability and plural utility a criticism of EAL, especially insofar as it is engaged in positive and prescriptive tasks? This is less clear. Nussbaum contends that an assumption of commensurability is "too simple to lead to illuminating and pertinent prediction." This is plausible in some settings; perhaps a claim of the commensurability of all outlets for sexual gratification will make predictive mistakes.2' (It is not clear that these mistakes are a result of a commitment to commensurability or instead a misspecification of what is included within most agents' utility functions.) But when? And when is the daily work of EAL undermined by its assumption of commensurability? 
Let us assume, for example, that observers are trying to predict the effects of the English Rule (requiring losers to pay attorney's fees and costs) on plaintiffs who have a low probability of prevailing, or that we are interested in knowing the consequences of final-offer arbitration, or that we want to know what will happen to marriage rates when contraception is readily available, or that we are trying to figure out why central banks are independent, or that the government seeks to understand the consequences of a mandatory paid-leave program. (These examples are chosen from a random sampling of recent papers in EAL.) In these contexts, does an emphasis on incommensurability and plural utility undermine in any way EAL? Does such an emphasis help to produce testable hypotheses that compete with those of EAL? 
I do not mean to suggest that this question has no answer-only that philosophers, including Nussbaum, have not provided one. Her discussion of incommensurability and plural utility operate at a high level of abstraction and seem to engage mostly descriptive questions about practical reason, and also normative issues. But here is a possible place where Nussbaum might look for support. In some contexts, people seem to think certain reasons for action are entirely inadmissible; they are blocked, not outweighed.2 People may think, for example, that they will not gossip about a friend's misfortune simply because it is fun to do so, or that they will steal a book from a friend's office simply because they know that they would love that book (while the friend doesn't much enjoy owning it). Their refusal to make all goods and options commensurable is accompanied by, or helps generate, a series of excluded reasonsfor action2.3 
exclusionary reasons). 

I am not sure that whether and to what extent this phenomenon makes trouble for the conventional uses of EAL, but it is possible that it does so in some important settings. At the very least, it raises some difficulties with the (normative) claim that cost-benefit analysis should be the foundation for policy. Some things for which people are willing to pay ought not to count as reasons for action; consider a desire not to see flag-burning,24 or racial intermarriage. In addition, the metric of dollars elides important qualitative differences among social goods, and people ought to see those good for themselves. 2' These points do raise questions about cost-benefit analysis as a normative foundation for policy. But as I have emphasized, most uses of EAL do not involve that normative foundation; they involve instead positive and prescriptive issues. It remains to be seen how economic analysis of these issues is adversely affected by ignoring problems of incommensurability and the possibility of "plural utility." 
Nussbaum believes that economists and rational choice theorists share a "dogma" to the effect "that we can deliberate rationally only about the instrumental means to ends, and not about the content of ends themselves." She says that the dogma "relies on the idea that our ends are hard-wired by exogenously given tastes." She believes that philosophers like David Wiggins and Henry Richardson have shown that people "do deliberate in life, in [a] holistic manner that seeks broad coherence and fit among our ends considered as a group. 26 In her view, EAL "cannot afford to proceed as though all these arguments do not exist." In a similar vein she thinks that people are not merely concerned with end-states but also with their own agency, which they "value and pursue." The key problem here is that EAL focuses "on well-being to the exclusion of agency," something that Nussbaum thinks produces predictive, explanatory, and normative problems. 
From these points, I am not sure exactly what Nussbaum thinks that economic analysts of law are doing wrong. She appears to think that those analysts think that all tastes are "hard-wired." But few economic analysts make this (utterly implausible) claim. Some tastes are of course hard-wired; there is much room to debate how many, and 
See Rasmusen, supra note 3, at 245. 
See Sunstein, supra note 5, ch. 4. 
FlawedFoundations,supra note 2, at 1208. which, have biological roots. But for purposes of most EAL, the answer to that debate does not seem to matter much (except to the extent that it is being assumed that tastes, because hard-wired, cannot be changed; of course government can affect choices even with respect to hard-wired tastes, by raising the price of some choices and decreasing the price of others). 
A second possibility is that Nussbaum is urging that tastes are not "fixed." This complaint seems right, in the sense that sometimes neither choices nor motivations are unmalleable; and the complaint is a reasonable criticism of some conventional EAL. Consider, for example, the fact that the initial allocation of an entitlement may affect both choices and tastes, and the possibility that laws forbidding employers from firing workers without cause, or requiring recycling, may affect both preferences and decisions. Thus prescriptive and positive work may go wrong if it disregards the preference-shifting effects of law. The efficiency consequences of legal rules-even the consequences themselves-may be hard to assess, or may have to be assessed differently, if legal rules will actually change tastes and values. It is possible that laws against discrimination will have preference-shaping effects; 27 so too with laws forbidding sexual harassment; so too with laws regulating the content of television. Behavioral work has even questioned the idea of stable, context-independent preferences.2 
But here we have an empirical question, not a philosophical question: Under what circumstances, and why, do tastes change? This question might well be turned into testable hypotheses. Both ordinary and behavioral economists have been grappling with aspects of that issue and in particular with the preference-changing effects of entitlement allocations. In any case, what is important to know is when preferences are not fixed, and why, and what changes them, and how this is relevant to the predictive tasks of EAL. In some contexts, the phenomenon of shifting tastes may not matter at all to EAL. The fact that preferences are malleable does not seem to matter much to analysis of farm subsidies or milk price supports, for example. 
A third possibility-and the one most consistent with the flavor of Nussbaum's text-is that Nussbaum is objecting most of all to the fact Behavior, 101 J. POL. EcON. 385, 386 (1993). 
(1995). 
that EAL ignores the human capacity to choose ends, rather than simply to pursue them. It is true that people are sometimes self-conscious about their ends; but we need to know exactly what kind of criticism this is. To be sure, some economists appear to write as if ends are simply "there" and are not products of deliberation and choice. Here too a descriptive account of practical reason will fail if it does not see how this process occurs. 
It is important to make some distinctions here. Consider Nussbaum's claim that "this is how we really do deliberate in life, in this holistic manner that seeks broad coherence and fit among out ends considered as a group." This appears to be an empirical claim; is it true? What evidence is there on its behalf? Undoubtedly some people, some of the time, do deliberate in this way; but the picture seems to ignore both the (qualitatively diverse) costs of deliberation and simple self-interest, which can make people unwilling to be holistic. Often people do not attempt to seek "holism." For present purposes the more important question is this: How, exactly, is the economic analysis of law undermined by the fact that people deliberate about ends? The basic method of EAL is to use a utility function of some kind; it does not much matter whether the ends emerge from deliberation, from biology, from government propaganda, or from Mars. Most of the positive work of EAL seems unaffected by this fact; so too with prescriptive work. What remains to be seen is whether some positive and prescriptive work would look different if it took on board the fact that people deliberate about ends. 
Nussbaum is surely right to say that agency is an important and separable part of well-being. People care not merely about end-states but also about their ability to choose. But it is not clear how and to what extent this is a criticism of EAL. The first point is that the incorporation of agency as a part of well-being creates no special problems for the vast bulk of work on EAL. The second point is that, to the extent that economic analysts refer solely to end-states, and place no special premium on choice as such, there is certainly a problem at the normative level. But there is no reason not to include agency as part of the set of things that people care about, as certainly they do. (How much do they? This is an interesting empirical issue.) The typical economic approach would be to value agency, like everything else, in terms of private willingness to pay. Now this idea does raise serious normative problems. Not all goods should be valued from the standpoint of private willingness to pay. But that is a very different question. 
A question for the future is how EAL might incorporate people's agency, and their protectiveness of their own agency, into positive or prescriptive analysis. An interesting aspect of cost-benefit analysis, especially in the context of environmental amenities, attempts to do this. People value not simply beaches and parks as experiences, but also the option to visit beaches and parks. Hence "option value" is a distinct component of value, studied by those interested in contingent valuation studies. Those studies raise many problems, but here at least is an area in which economists have been studying how much people value options. Perhaps this incipient work could be used by EAL to obtain valuation of agency as well as end-states. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
The most serious problems with EAL are normative, above all in the suggestion that all preferences deserve support, regardless of their origins or of the reasons brought forward on their behalf. Some reasons for action are properly blocked, even if they are based on private willingness to pay. Sometimes the genesis of wants can help "impeach" them.30 There are positive and prescriptive problems with EAL as well, with its conception of rationality and its understanding of what people seek to maximize; some of these are receiving attention with behavioral economics and with the idea of an extended utility function. Sometimes the idea of "preferences" is far too crude for normative or even positive work, as where it is not disaggregated into intrinsic value and reputational value. Further disaggregations may sometimes prove useful. 
Nussbaum's criticisms of EAL therefore contain some important points, especially (not only) in terms of capturing people's reflective self-understandings and from the normative point of view. But the criticisms seem to me overstated, above all because they operate at a high level of abstraction, do not engage the day-to-day work in EAL, and fail to show that the criticisms are well-taken from the standpoint of positive analysis and predictions, where parsimony is crucial. To return to my basic themes: What testable hypotheses are suggested by the philosophical critique? How does a more fine-grained understanding of human motivation falsify concrete work in economic analysis? Why is it a problem, for predictions about the effects of law, if values are (1983); AMARTYA SEN, COMMODITIES AND CAPABILITIES (1985). 
QLR incommensurable, or if people deliberate about ends, or if people do, and should, care about their agency? Nussbaum tends to read economic analysts of law as if they were badly educated philosophers, and to see EAL as if it were making a set of philosophical claims and arguments. But this is not its point. 
For the future, I believe that a suitably advanced version of behavioral economics may well meet most of Nussbaum's complaints on both the positive and the prescriptive sides. Whether those complaints are correct, on those sides, depends on going back and forth between hypotheses and evidence; philosophical abstractions will not by themselves provide much help. With respect to prescriptive work, EAL makes important advances by showing that certain means of achieving agreed-upon ends will not accomplish that goal. Insofar as EAL attempt to posit a single goal (economic efficiency) for a well-functioning society, it is not worth taking seriously, for reasons that Nussbaum (and others) have shown; but very little work in EAL depends on accepting that goal, or even urges that it should be accepted. 
There are some lessons here for both economists and philosophers, and for the appropriate division of labor, as well as for constructive engagements, among them. Economists tend to be simplifiers; philosophers tend to be complicators. EAL should be taken to be arguing about the effects of legal rules; if simple assumptions lead to false assessments, then by all means let us see if better assumptions would do better. Philosophers are in a good position to produce a clearer understanding of the concepts at work, and of the normative goals that the legal system does, or might, attempt to pursue. What I have attempted to do here is to suggest that many of the apparent disagreements between economists and philosophers are not disagreements at all, but misunderstandings about one another's tasks and goals. To the extent that there are disagreements, they might be made the basis for a research program in which alternative hypotheses might be generated and tested. Productive collaborations between EAL and philosophers-long overdue-might involve the generation of those alternative hypotheses and an exploration of how they might be tested. I have not described such a research program here, but I hope to have indicated a few places where those interested in such a program might start. 
Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable Recommended Citation 
See next page for additional authors weight, and therefore any weight at all, if they are supported by a moral theory behind it all-a theory like autonomy or more generally a theory that would come out of human agency, which could not be denied by any rational actor. Such a theory I think would say that you have to afford certain kinds of interpretations and within a range. And then more particular interpretations within that range will still be possible on various needs that a society has, as well as individuals, with relevant statistical and empirical evidence. 
NUSSBAUM: Okay I think we are going to need a break, because there's another panel at four. 
MADIGAN: Yes, I want to say just a couple of things. The second panel is going to deal primarily with law, so this might be a good transition point. 
I also wanted to say in defense of Dwight Duncan-who I am so thankful for, who stood here and took a sociological beating for studies which aren't his-it really demonstrates why interdisciplinary studies, as the Roundtable advocates, are so important. Lawyers on the side for same-sex marriage put these studies forward. Mr. Duncan is pointing out the various problems with them. Maybe if we as lawyers are better able to really dig through these things, we won't make those sort of blunders, and we won't take this sort of blind reliance on "well, same-sex couples will be the same vis-t-vis parenting." It seems that a much more creative approach would be to say, "we admit that differences may exist, and we're going to try to create a proactive constitutional theory to account for those." In some ways, Mr. Duncan's role keeps the advocates honest, and I appreciate that. 
I also want to thank all of the panelists, especially Hannah, who has had the wherewithal to stand in front of people and really put forward what I think is a challenging point of view. She put forth a perspective that we in the ivory tower don't get, and that's for people not old enough to get into the ivory tower. [laughter] I thank you very much. I think you will see in the second panel, that the burden of proof shifts, and that the strong arm may be coming from opponents of same-sex marriage and maybe it will be time to beat up on the other side a little more. 
SESSION TWO: 
LEGAL, EQUITABLE, AND POLITICAL ISSUES 
MADIGAN: This panel will focus on legal issues. I'll go down our list of esteemed speakers in alphabetical order. 
First, Teresa Stanton Collett from South Texas College of Law, who I found out today, shares a tide with me. She was also in charge of Moot Court back in law school. So she understands the hectic stuff I've been doing lately, so I appreciated her words of comfort. 
David Orgon Coolidge from Columbus School of Law and Catholic University of America. I want to say a special thanks to Dave, because he and Professor Nussbaum were the two people who really helped me the most in finding other speakers and offering suggestions and thoughts about structuring the panels. It turned out to be a great help. He has sort of done his part before he even opens his mouth today. He has really done a great service for all of us. 
George Dent from Case Western Reserve University School of Law. That happens to be my undergraduate alma mater. I have a good friend who was my teacher there, and I found out today was his student. So I kind of feel a little generational bond with George. 
Andrew Koppelman from Northwestern University, who I have just gotten to know through the Law and Philosophy Workshop. I know his work. I actually have friends who are students of his who are also big fans of his work. 
Mark Strasser from Capitol University School of Law, who holds the honor of being the first person to tell me "yes," [laughter] that he would do this. We had to string him along for details for the longest time. 
Our own professor, Cass Sunstein, who has graciously offered to help us by moderating. I appreciate your willingness to do that. So we'll turn it over to the panel. 
CASS SUNSTEIN: Thank you all for being here, and thanks to the panelists who come from some place other than Hyde Park. We're going to start with Teresa Stanton Collett. 
TERESA STANTON COLLETT: Thank you. I'd like to thank the journal for inviting us and the university for providing the support to have such a forum. When I was telling my colleagues back at South Texas that I would be coming to the University of Chicago to speak on this topic, they all suggested that this topic at this particular point in history more often than not generates a lot of heat and very little light. I think that the first panel illustrated some of that but more importantly illustrated that there is in fact the potential for light here. It is a wonderful opportunity to have the chance to meet and talk with people whose work I've read. In fact, I was telling Professor Koppelman-who it will become apparent fairly quickly that we're on different sides of this particular issue-how much I admired one of his recent books, and in fact, assigned the first chapter of it in one of my classes. So it is a marvelous chance to be with people's whose work is very thoughtful, and hopefully this dialogue will follow suit. 
Let me begin by saying that I think that the Roundtable symposium is appropriately entitled, but it makes some assumptions that no one at this moment yet has really focused on as far as their public remarks. The question that is posed is "Should the Government Recognize Same Sex Marriage?" And embedded in that tide is an assumption about the reality of marriage. It is that the state recognizes marriage, rather than creates marriage. And I found it very interesting that Reverend Dell opened with his statement saying that the point of the wedding where the clergy is involved is where there is a creation of a legal relationship. I think that part of the difficulty that Americans are having when we talk about this topic is the competing understandings of what marriage is and how it is created. 
So let me begin by laying out my fundamental assumption. Assumption number one is that marriage is not created by the state, but in fact, is merely recognized by the state. It is my operating assumption that marriage is a lived reality that reflects a metaphysical existence, an ontological reality, if you will. And that marriage by its nature has four characteristics. The first is that it is mutually supportive-that individuals who are in a marriage relationship are mutually supportive. Now that's an ill-defined term, as you can imagine, because it can be economic support solely. It can be the commitment of the husband to be the breadwinner and the wife to be the domestic homemaker. It can be the agreement of the husband to provide the place and the wife to provide the labor, as we have seen in some cultures. It can be any number of forms of mutual support. But when you look throughout history, and when you look at the various arrangements that have been called marriage, you see at least some reciprocal support that flows from the two partners. 
The second assumption is that it is permanent. Now that assumption clearly is belied by the current experience in America. And many of you can say, in light of the current divorce rate and what some authors have called serial polygamy, "How on earth, Professor, can you suggest that marriage in its ontological reality, in its metaphysical ideal, if you will, could be permanent?" But I will suggest to you that human flourishing occurs when an individual can engage in self-realization and self-giving, with another individual for an extended period of time. Although I will grant you that historically the requirement has not been permanence but merely of extended duration, it must exist beyond the one-night stand in all cultures to be called a marriageunless of course he dies that night. [laughter] There are of course those cases where the very wealthy millionaire has married the trophy wife and then drops dead immediately upon saying, "I do." Those of you who anticipate marrying for money, this should be your ideal. 
The third characteristic that I would suggest to you is that it is self-giving. Notice the difference in the characterization of marriage as self-giving rather than self-satisfying, because it is a supposition of mine that human nature is such that we flourish best not when we seek our own self-satisfaction, but when we seek mutual self-giving 
Then the final characteristic that I believe characterizes marriage throughout history and in all cultures is that it calls for procreative potential. Procreative potential. Now that can be challenged certainly in contemporary America today where you could suggest, "But Professor, is it not true that the majority of Americans, who are heterosexual who enter into a marriage relationship use contraception and in fact intentionally thwart the procreative potential within that union?" In response to that, I could give you the statistics from the Gudmacher Institute that were published just this summer, while good intentions are only half done because in fact fifty percent of all pregnancies in America are unintended. I can suggest to you that the pill, which is often suggested to be three percent error rate, when actually measured against user effectiveness, has a twenty percent failure rate. In fact, the desire not to have a procreative union certainly does not define the biological potential of that union. And it is that biological potential that I believe has led to the status recognition of marriage. 
In the United States, when we look at the historical existence of marriage, what we find is that marriage was in large part about licensing sexual intercourse. It was about licensing sexual intercourse because that is the only human activity that can give rise to the creation of children-something that people continued to be surprised by, independent of the human experience. Because that potential resulted in the vulnerability of the mother and the creation of new vulnerable human beings, the state has set up a series of rules that govern that relationship-rules that require things like male support for their offspring, rules that require some considered reflection before the dissolution of marriage. And while contemporary marriage laws have altered some of these rules, they have not totally done away with them. The requirement that males support their offspring continues independent of a woman's right to discharge the ability to have that offspring through termination of pregnancy. And the period of waiting to dissolve the marriage continues in all of the fifty states independent of autonomy-based arguments that might well suggest that marriage should be terminable at will as if it were some sort of leasehold upon each other's bodies. 
Given that, I would suggest that the state's interest in assuring the protection of women's economic vulnerability during periods of childbearing and the assurance that vulnerable children are provided for by marriage is a rational and defensible reason for the state's concerning itself only with heterosexual unions involving sexual intercourse. And for that reason, I believe that same-sex unions-while clearly entitled to some ability of private ordering 
so that their will and their autonomy can be made manifest-do not require state sanction, recognition, or protection as a form of marriage. 
ANDREW KOPPELMAN: Okay. The question was asked in the last panel whether the Constitution of the United States has anything to say about the same-sex marriage issue. In response to that question, Martha promised that I would answer it. I will try to do that. 
There are basically three main arguments that get made, and two of them are so familiar, at least to an audience of law students, that I will just gesture towards them. 
One is substantive due process. There are certain important personal decisions not enumerated in the Constitution that are nonetheless protected by the court under the rubric of substantive due process. It is sometimes argued that the right to marry-the right of same-sex couples to marry-is one of those. The problem with this argument is that either you buy it or you don't. There doesn't seem to be much intermediate work for argument to do. Nobody has come up with an argument persuasive to me as to how one discerns what is or is not protected by substantive due process, even if such things exist. 
Another is the suspect classification argument-the argument that gay people are a discrete and insular minority, like blacks, who are entitled to protection from legislation that is the product of prejudice. The problem for me with this argument is that the question whether discrimination against gays is prejudice or not goes to the heart of the very moral disagreements that we have been talking about. The law does in fact makes lots of discriminations lots of times, and when those discriminations have an intelligent basis, then they are not the products of prejudice. So what one would like is a constitutional argument that doesn't go through the very substantive disagreements that make us ask, "well, we've reached this impasse about the normative questions, does the Constitution have anything to say about this?" The suspect classification argument takes us right back into the impasse. And it hasn't been much help. 
This is to be one of the attractions of the third argument, which is the sex discrimination argument. The basic sex discrimination argument is simple. Any action that singles out homosexuals per se facially classifies on the basis of sex. If a business fires Ricky, or the state prosecutes him because of his sexual activities with Fred, while these actions are not being taken against Lucy if she did exactly the same things with Fred, then Ricky is being discriminated against on the basis of sex. You can run the same argument with marriage, obviously. Lucy is allowed to marry Fred, and Ricky is not allowed to marry Fred; we have a sex-based classification. Sex-based classifications are problematic in the law. The court has held that the parties seeking to uphold a statute that classifies individuals on the basis of their gender must carry the burden of showing an "exceedingly persuasive justification" for the classification. "The burden of justification is demanding and it rests entirely on the state." There was a lot of talk about burden of proof in the last panel. I'm not sure how far we get in the argument. But the law gives you precise answers for those questions. 
The state can't justify a sex-based classification on the basis of generalizations that are only statistically accurate, such as the generalization that many heterosexual couples produce children, and same-sex couples tend to be childless. As soon as you start getting into statistics, I think you need generalizations of that sort to make the claim that Teresa was just making about the purpose of the marriage laws as protecting vulnerable women and children. It is just not the case that there are no vulnerable women and children in same-sex relationships, no women or children who are in danger of being abandoned by the more financially prosperous partner or rendered destitute. So if that's a reason for the law to intervene, that reason obtains for same-sex couples. 
Again, quoting the court, "generalizations about the way women are, estimates as to what is appropriate for most women, no longer justifies denying opportunities to women whose talents and capacities lie outside of the average description." You can't rely upon overbroad generalizations about different talents and capacities of males and females. So it seems to me the problem for advocates of the status quo in this area is to try and find some way of responding to the sex discrimination argument. 
I've been wondering all day what to do with my ten minutes. I've now decided that one thing I can do is to take on a response to the argument that might be made by someone like, say, Teresa Collett. [laughter] One real, exceptionless difference between men and women that could be cited is what Teresa has called the "metaphysical reality of marriage." And this doctrine holds that marriage is inherently heterosexual, as some writers put it, because only a heterosexual couple can achieve the "two-in-one flesh union that comes from being an organic unit of a procreative kind." This is a somewhat mysterious doctrine. It is rooted in a certain variety of natural law theory. If the argument were accepted, it would be able to provide two kinds of answers to the sex-discrimination argument 
One might say laws that don't allow same-sex couples to marry classify on the basis of marriage and not on the basis of gender. Now the most supportive precedent for this would be Geduldig v Aiello" in which the Supreme Court 2000] Same-Sex Marriage 39 held that discrimination against pregnant women is not sex-based. The court noticed that the insurance scheme that the state provided that didn't cover pregnancy "divides recipients into two groups, pregnant women, and nonpregnant persons. The first is exclusively female, the second includes members of both sexes."" The trouble with this argument is that the persuasive authority of Geduldigis weak. The decision hasn't been overruled, but similar reasoning in the Title VII context has been rejected by Congress. And Geduldig's reasoning has been almost universally condemned by scholars. 
That suggests a second strategy. One might conceive that the marriage laws classify on the basis of sex, but say that this discrimination is necessary for the compelling interest of promoting the realization of one of the highest goods that human beings can achieve, the good of marriage, as Teresa has described it. And you could say that a law that maps that good in a misleading way by calling same-sex relationships, marriages, when it is not in fact what they ultimately metaphysically are, would miseducate the public about the goods that are really worth pursuing. The trouble with this argument-and I think this is the deepest problem with the kind of argument that Teresa has been offering--is that it relies upon a highly contestable set of ontological claims that probably no make sense at all outside of the context of a certain flavor of conservative Christianity. Now the court has held that to be constitutional, a law has to have a secular, legislative purpose. The promotion of the metaphysical reality of one-flesh unity doesn't seem to me to be capable of being plausibly characterized as such a purpose. Remember that when a sexbased classification must be defended, the burden of justification is demanding and rests entirely on the state. That's the doctrine. It is hard to imagine how a state could meet its burden by invoking this peculiar philosophical theory of marriage. It is hard to image a court endorsing these metaphysical claims. 
At least I can't imagine what the opinion would look like. 
COLLET: Do I get to respond now? [laughter]No, that's okay. 
SUNSTEIN: And now Mr. Coolidge. 
DAVID ORGON COOLIDGE: Thank you very much to Jim and to the Roundtable for the invitation to participate in today's conversation. I have to tell you that I have the distinction of being the only person on this panel who is not a professor. You might consider that a liability or a benefit, but it's the truth. 
Although we're in a debate format today, and although the stakes are high, I want to say that I do see this as an opportunity to learn. I say this because the question of marriage, or same sex marriage-however you want to formulate it-is in many ways the question of how we are to live together in peace when we deeply disagree about matters, which all sides hold dear. Is our goal to eliminate all differences? Or is it to insist that differences must not matter? Or is it to learn to live with differences even though none involved will be satisfied with the results? If I were to state this in more religious-sounding language, I would say that the goal of the struggle over marriage is not to annihilate one's opponents, or to pretend that they don't exist, but in fact to learn to love them. And I don't mean that as a statement of pure sentimentality. I think that's at the heart of civic tolerance. It's based on my conviction that every person is a child of God, and that every person, however they identify themselves, has a contribution to make to American society. 
Now, since I only have ten minutes too, I want to talk about three things briefly. First, marriage; second, democracy; and finally, in proper order, constitutional law. The core of my argument I suppose, is that I don't think we can discuss the third question without addressing the first two. So the first: it seems to me that the fundamental question if I can put it that way, is whether one believes that there is a there there, and if so, what it is. In that regard, I can think of at least four possible ways of defining marriage. 
One is that marriage is simply an artifact of power relations over time. It may be benign, it may be malevolent, but it has no core to it, no lasting purpose to which it corresponds. It exists in society and law, but it is nothing more than we make of it. In such a case, the question of legalizing same sex marriage becomes merely a question of public policy. 
Another view would be that marriage at its core-first of all that it has a core-is a contract between consenting adults who choose to live their lives together. Only the individuals are the "really real." In such a case, there is no principled base that I can think of for limiting marriage to male-female couples, or to intimate relationships, or for limiting marriage to couples. And this is not just a point that was made in the first panel to be nasty or to talk about polygamy. I've heard this argument made by people on both sides of this issue. In fact, under this first view, it's not clear to me that there's even a basis for having marriage licenses as such, but perhaps just the enforcement of contracts. 
A third approach is that marriage is, at its core, a legal means of enhancing social stability. In this more communitarian approach, people are viewed as genuinely relational beings who flourish in intimate relationships which benefit from an added degree of protection. In such an approach, state regulation is permissible and, again, there is no reason that marriage should not be extended to same sex couples. The real question then becomes why should marriage be limited to sexual relationships or relationships of only two? It's the same 
conundrum, I think. After all, intimacy flourishes in many settings, and it's generally only Americans who always confuse sex and intimacy. 
Fourth, last but not least, marriage may be viewed as a social institution built around the reality that we are embodied as male or female and that together as male and female, form unique communities of difference which extend community across the generations. According to this view, same sex couples cannot marry. They cannot marry because, lacking a sexual difference, they cannot simultaneously offer themselves to one another, form a community of difference, and potentially offer the world the gift of new life. Any of these particular functions-pleasure, partnership, procreation, parenting--can be done in a variety of contexts, as has been pointed out already, and I do not know anyone who would disagree with that. But, no other community does all of these simultaneously regardless of any state regulation. The role of the state then becomes not one of enforcing purely private contracts, or of creating marriage as a useful social policy, or redefining it when it chooses to, but of recognizing it, and here I sound like Teresa. In fact, I'm repeating Teresa. Recognizing marital status, protecting it through rights and responsibilities and, as seems prudent, offering it benefits-three different areas all of which could be talked about, and be disaggregated and discussed in ways that Professor Nussbaum brought up. 
So it strikes me that these are the four predominant views of marriage in play and it's hard to dialogue with the first view because it assumes that there is no there there and so it's hard to know what to talk about. There's a lot to talk about between the other three. 
The second question is the question of democracy. At the present time, the official law of marriage in every country of the world is based on the fourth view. But clearly this is in flux and we are seeing experiments based on other views. The recent law passed by France is a good example. No state or country has yet legalized same sex marriage, but it may happen and it may happen very soon. In situations such as ours in the United States, public opinion is still roughly two to one in favor of the fourth view, for what that is worth, but a significant minority of Americans appear to be changing their minds. The question is whether and, if so, how these conflicts should be resolved. Among many supporters of same sex marriage I hear a rhetoric-and I'd be happy for my colleagues here to tell me that it's not their rhetoric-that suggests that the American people are not qualified to deliberate and decide this question. Somehow this very important question, which has always been and still is primarily the province of legislatures, cannot be entrusted to the authors of our state and federal constitutions or their elected representatives. In fact, the whole idea of doing so is repulsive. If we ask where this view comes from, the only answer I can come up with is the tendency to view all contentious issues, including this one, through the paradigm of race. According to this narrative, there is the victimizing majority represented by the legislatures and the people, and the victimized minority whose defenders are the courts. In such a case, the only way to vindicate the victims is to remove the issue from the people. Would that the issue were so simple. 
By that logic, the first three views of marriage I described above are entirely defensible and the fourth is nothing but bigotry. By that logic, there seems to be no recognition that we have here not a clash between victims and victimizers, but a clash between viewpoints about the definition of marriage. It could actually be that all sides are sincerely putting forth viewpoints that have every right to be evaluated in the rough and tumble of American political clash and compromise. It could be that this way of addressing the issue is much more conducive to a lasting civic peace. 
Finally, a couple of brief thoughts on constitutional law-briefer than the subject merits. Based on the above, you might think that I would be dubious about using privacy or equality or autonomy to evaluate this issue in such a general way and you're right. It's not like our federal jurisprudence is crystal clear. It's a hodgepodge. You can spin it in a variety of directions, I think we all know that. We can debate Loving," we can debate Zablockij' we can debate Turner,5 we can debate Romer, ' we can debate VM1.Y How the right to marry relates to rights of privacy or rights of association doesn't seem clear to me in the current case law. How questions of discrimination addressed in Romer and VMI apply to questions surrounding marriage is a cottage industry. I have nothing profound to add to that discussion. It just seems to me, from the perspective of one who has the view of marriage that I do, that if one is, for better or worse, going to litigate these matters, attempts to resolve them solely by reference to individual rights are non-starters. If we take the constitution to be at heart, a means to advance individual autonomy over and against social institutions and the state, we are just peddling politics in the guise of law. We should get out of the courts and make our arguments before the court of public opinion and the people's representatives, not just as part of a litigation strategy-which is always done anyway-but because we believe that all men and women are created equal and that all deserve an equal opportunity to decide these issues. If the people and their representatives decide that marriage 
is merely an individual contract or just a means of social stability and choose to redefine it, so be it. Others will disagree, but we will have followed the rule of law. On the other, hand it might turn out differently. Either way, we might be able to live better together in peace. Thank you. 
MARK STRASSER. Good afternoon. In Baehr v Lewin, " a plurality of the Hawaii Supreme Court held that the state's same sex marriage ban implicated equal protection guarantees. That statute discriminated on the basis of sex, both facially and as applied. To talk about discrimination might mean merely classified, and that's basically what the plurality suggested, or perhaps, in addition, that it involved some kind of invidious distinction. That was left for the trial court to determine. Now the lower court's task in Hawaii was to examine the statute to see whether it was narrowly tailored to promote compelling state interests. That was just because of a particular aspect of the Hawaii Constitution imposing strict scrutiny on gender classifications. Something that wasn't unusual about the Hawaii Constitution was when gender would be viewed as implicated. So, this might have interesting implications for other courts, either when they are examining their own state statutes in light of their own state constitutions which perhaps explicitly mention gender, perhaps then making this a strict scrutiny analysis or, as well, whether federal equal protection guarantees will be implicated. 
Most states, however, will use-even if they find gender discriminationthe lower standard, as you know. The challenged classification must serve important government objectives and be substantially related. Now it's clear that there are important differences between men and women. Nonetheless, they must be related to the interests asserted in so far as we're going to talk about the statute at issue as being constitutional. I'd argue they don't play the requisite role. Clearly the state has several interests in marriage, and they've been discussed: provide the setting for the production and raising of children, promote security and stability for the individuals themselves, leading to happier and more productive lives, which is a benefit for society. These, of course, are reasons to allow same sex marriage. Whether through adoption, surrogacy, artificial insemination, or perhaps just having had a child through a previous marriage, same sex couples are having and raising children. This has importance here and, had we been talking about substantive due process, I argue has importance there. 
In Zablocki,the Court said "I[I]t would make little sense to recognize a right of privacy with respect to other matters of family life and not with respect to the decision to enter the relationship that is the foundation of the family in our society."" Now same sex parents do have rights-rights to privacy with respect to their children. Following Zablocki, at least there's a suggestion that maybe the right to enter this relationship ought to be recognized. Nonetheless, courts and commentators are suggesting that procreation is a reason not to allow same sex unions, so let's look at the argument. Commentators and panelists here have suggested that only a man and a woman can have a child through their union yet the state's interest in the next generation is not only in children produced through the union of the different members of a married couple else our adoption laws would be much different. It's unlikely, for example, that adoptive parents and biological parents would be treated the same in the eyes of the law. It's unlikely that Congress would be trying to push adoption. It's unlikely that legislatures would have created a step-parent exception to make it easier for adults not biologically related to the children to adopt them. 
Suppose things were otherwise. Suppose the state had no interest in children raised either in single parent homes, in homes where there's a stepparent or in homes where there's an adoptive parent. Even so, more would need to be established to show why same sex marriage should not be recognized. The question would be how recognizing this would somehow harm important state interests. Would it harm existing marriages? It seems unlikely people would divorce because same sex couples were allowed to marry. It seems unlikely that people would refuse to marry because they could. Suppose I'm wrong: suppose people would refuse to enter into the relationship then. It might seem that then the state would have a compelling interest, yet this argument would clearly have surprising results. Analogously, if only in Loving people had thought to say "If they can marry, I won't," that would have been enough. You'd get a heckler's veto for marriage. Perhaps it would be thought that if same sex marriage was allowed, marriage would crumble. Yet, as Justice Blackmun suggested in Bowers, there's ample reason for believing that people would not think better of murder, cruelty or dishonesty." Obviously, that's a different but related context. 
Some commentators believe it important to establish that different sex unions are better than same sex unions. First, I suspect that this tack is wrongheaded. It seems likely that some kinds of marriages are better for some, others for others. Even were the project not wrong-headed, it might be difficult to develop the objective criteria: children versus no children, handicapped children versus non-handicapped children. How do you compare marriages with lots of money and no children, children and less money. Even if we could 
2000] 
agree-suppose we had the criteria-it's pretty clear the state does not say that only those who will have the optimal marriage will be allowed to marry. Perhaps the question to ask, as has been suggested here, is not better or worse but what is essential to marriage? My interest, at least, is what's essential for the civil institution. So, merely, for example, because it would not meet some religious definition should not suffice. For example, a religion might say, "A marriage with someone not of this religion is not a marriage in our eyes" or "A marriage with someone not of the right race is not a marriage in our eyes." This might be essential for the religion but that's presumably not what's at issue here. If Vermont, for example, comes to recognize same sex marriages then at least for the state, and for purposes here, I believe that suffices. 
To determine whether same sex couples can fulfill the essential purposes of marriage, we should look at what the state has implicitly or explicitly stated are its purposes. If we do that, the procreation argument at best sounds a little hollow. Consider the claim, as has been offered, that marriage is for the purpose of providing a setting for the raising of the next generation. That would be one purpose rather than the only purpose. Even if it were the only purpose, that would preclude some from marrying but not same sex couples. In the previous panel, we were talking about how individuals are doing in parenting, not whether but how. Now it might be thought that there's no reason to have to figure out what the state says. Suppose you have a state that says the following: "There is a compelling interest in protecting the essential nature of marriage which involves a man and a woman." Yet at least one of the lessons of Loving is presumably that the state cannot merely announce its perceived interests and have that upheld. 
Let me talk for a moment about equal protection and orientation discrimination. It might be argued that really what's going on is discrimination on the basis of orientation and not sex. To determine this is an empirical question. One question would be what would a state say if two heterosexuals of the same sex wanted to get some of the benefits that we were talking about earlier. Would the state say yes? Would the state say no? If the state allows this then presumably we have orientation discrimination although there will be some ironies in so far as procreation is so important then you're going to say no to some people who may in fact be raising children but yes to some who in fact may have no interest in raising children. It's difficult to see what purpose such a statute would promote that was legitimate but that clearly would be orientation discrimination. Were it to establish full inferior status then there will be the Romer questions alluded to and we're putting aside even the individual interests in marriage-these are the state interests. The state might be argued to have a compelling interest in morality. Arguably that would be a reason to promote stable, long-standing same sex relationships. Perhaps it should be thought "no, let's just let the state decide what its own vision of morality is and enforce that." Presumably both Loving and McLaughlin6' would show why that is not an acceptable option. 
As to whether in fact same sex marriage bans involve sex discrimination or orientation discrimination, this is an empirical question. We can see how laws will be applied. If in fact it's sex discrimination, then we can see whether there are important purposes served. I would suggest the following: if the reason that this is offered, that same sex marriages should not be allowed, is that the state has a compelling interest or even an important interest in precluding individuals who cannot reproduce through their union, but that same interest is not recognized when, for example, the elderly or those either incapable of reproducing or who simply don't want to have children-won't be applied there-and further, if it's also the case, as is the case in several states, only certain people who cannot reproduce will be allowed to marry-if you look at some of the first cousin statutes-then I would suggest that that reason is not the real reason. If it's argued that the reason is to provide a setting for the raising of children but nonetheless those who are raising them will not be allowed to marry, it seems that really can't be the reason. One of the benefits, at least, of imposing heightened scrutiny will be that either real reasons will be offered or it will be clear that there aren't such reasons. Thanks. 
GEORGE DENT: Let's begin by asking why society, through government, should single out for honor this relationship called marriage. It is important to remember that gay marriage is not singled out for disfavor. There are many sexual and/or loving relationships, including relatives, marriage to animals, and polygamy, that are not eligible for this honor. One valid reason to revere traditional marriage is that it is intrinsically good. We value life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness as intrinsically good but these are also mysteries, as Andy Koppelman said, or as some others would say, metaphysical mumbojumbo. That is you can't show empirically that life is better than death, but since we can't prove the intrinsic goodness of this claim, I don't think there's much point in dwelling on it and in any case Professor Collett has already talked about it. 
There are, though, two reasons for honoring traditional marriage that are accessible to most people. First, traditional marriage is the best milieu for nurturing children. Gay couples can adopt children, but adoption is different from bearing children and any person or group of people could adopt, so this is no reason to honor gay marriages above any other group. Second, traditional 
2000] Same-Sex Marriage 47 marriage focuses human energies in socially productive ways. Men are especially prone to be disruptive and self-destructive. Marriage to a woman and fatherhood tend to point men in the right direction. Many arguments for gay marriage discuss gender stereotyping and taboos against homosexuality. Those issues are interesting, but they're not relevant to the marriage issue that we're discussing here. We're not discussing criminal sodomy statutes and no law forbids, for example, an effeminate man to marry a masculine woman. 
The analogy of gay marriage to interracial marriage is a textbook example of the errors that can result from formalistic thinking divorced from reasoned reality and common sense. Anti-miscegenation laws had the purpose and effect of racial subordination. Traditional marriage has the purpose and effect of providing for children and maximizing human potential, not of subordinating either sex. Andy Koppelman says sex discrimination should prevent not only subordination of women, but any imposition of gender classifications on people's free choices. He also says we can't rely on gender classifications if any individual might prove an exception to it. This is wrong. A college legally may, and I think should, separate women's and men's basketball teams because of the physical differences between men and women even though some women are bigger, stronger, and better basketball players than some men. The argument is interesting because one area in which we agree that gender differences are important is marriage. That's one thing on which we all agree, otherwise there would be no reason to argue for rights to same sex marriage any more than the right to have the same sex teller when you go to the bank. Nobody would care about that. This is one area where we agree: gender differences are important. This example also shows that gender distinctions aren't always wrong, but I agree that we shouldn't make such distinctions without good reason. 
I've already said that the main reason for honoring traditional marriage is to provide the best shelter for children. Proponents of gay marriage sometimes say that even their apparent defeats, like adoption of the Defense of Marriage Act, are really victories because they provoke discussion, and inevitably discussion will lead intelligent people of good will to support gay marriage. I agree that this discussion can be beneficial, but that's because I think it can help society to recall the social importance of marriage, a fact that we seem to have forgotten. By the way, on this point I would agree with what Martha Nussbaum said earlier this afternoon: it's heterosexuals who have made a mess of marriage. The answer is not to throw in the towel. The answer is to straighten things up. 
Social support for marriage is actually becoming more important for two reasons. First, the needs of children are greater. In an agricultural society, children don't need much education or socialization to learn their roles. Today, children need lots of attention and the best source of attention is caring parents. But, and this is the second point, the modern world often undermines good parenting. The anonymity and mobility of modern life enable parents, especially fathers, to neglect or abandon their families without incurring community condemnation. Our resources for encouraging good parenting are limited. No one wants to throw unwed parents in jail. Perhaps our best weapon, then, is to exalt traditional marriage as the most fertile ground for good parenting. 
Advocates of gay marriage focus on material benefits of legal marriage. The issue of material benefits is a legitimate one, but why tie it to the definition of marriage? Maybe a widower should be able to give medical benefits to his mother who quits her job to care for his young children. But why would we say that he must marry his mother in order to get these benefits? The answer clearly is that this is primarily a debate about honor and respect. The material benefits of marriage are generally paltry and often outweighed by the detriments, like the marriage penalty tax. Gay activists know that the real point is that the validation of gay marriage would be the most significant possible acceptance of homosexuality as equal to heterosexuality. But why not condone homosexuality if it makes gays happy and does no harm? Recognizing gay marriage would cause harm by discrediting the institution. Most people consider gay marriage a caricature of the real thing. The concern is not that approving gay marriage would cause people to become homosexuals. The problem, rather, is that validating gay marriage would make marriage seem less honorable, less respectable, and thereby make it less likely that people would marry or stay married. Social attitudes influence the stability of marriage. If marriage becomes a less honored institution, it will also become less stable. 
Some say that conservatives, whatever that means, should favor gay marriage as good for gays. How would I know if marriage is good for gays? Some gays praise promiscuity and ridicule gays who want to imitate a heterosexual marriage. Others say they don't personally want marriage, but if it's legally available for straights, they want it available for them too. Of course, they would then reject it, so it's questionable whether many gays would marry or stay married. At least the burden of proof should be on those who demand approval. This was something that was raised in the first group session-who bears the burden of proof? I think the burden of proof should be on those who demand approval of something that no society in history has ever legitimized and that concerns an institution for the raising of children, the most important job that any society does. In other contexts, some people have asked whether a compromise would be possible. For me, it is, on the basis that homosexual 
relationships be tolerated but not honored to the same degree that traditional marriage is honored. However, I suspect that the loud forces on both sides of the debate will reject this, or any compromise. 
SUNSTEIN: Those were really excellent presentations, and they were all so amazingly on time. I feel a little bad that, as the last speaker, so much has been said that has to be processed. These remarks are going to be about two puzzles. One has to do with the source of the distinction between domestic partnership and marriage-a distinction that such diverse people as Judge Posner and President Clinton believe is very important to insist upon and a question on which the last remarks were illuminating. What is that distinction about? The second puzzle, which I think is a linked puzzle, has to do with Andy Koppelman's argument that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in the context of marriage is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. I must say I've been convinced by this argument, and I'm going to try to say why, at the same time, I don't believe that the Supreme Court should accept the argument, largely for reasons of institutional role, about which one of the speakers offered some remarks. So, this is about the difference between domestic partnerships and marriage and about the view that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. 
There has been a reference to Loving v Virginia5,7 probably the best-named case in the history of American law. You knew who was going to win. There's a welfare rights case called King v Smith and, in America, Smith was found to win. Lovingwas going to win this one. But we take it for granted that that case was right, but let's puzzle a little bit about the difficulty of it at the time. The argument made by the Lovings was that this was a form of race discrimination. I can't marry someone of an opposite race, but if I was of the other race I could, so this is a form of race discrimination. The response that was made to the Lovings' claim had two parts. First, the district court insisted-with explicit theological reference, by the way-on the naturalness of racial differences, saying that these are God-made differences that legitimately drive policy. More interestingly, there was a claim that this was actually equal because whites were no more prohibited from marrying blacks than blacks were prohibited from marrying whites, so if there was any inequality it was discrimination against people who wanted to marry people of different races. It wasn't discrimination against African-Americans at all. That was the argument that the legal culture and the Supreme Court had an extremely hard time responding to: that this law isn't a form of race discrimination at all. The way 
the Supreme Court ultimately responded to it was, for the first and only time in it's history, to use the words "white supremacy." What the Court tried to do was to get in back of the formally discriminatory at first glance classification, at second glance not really formally discriminatory and to say that the discrimination that we see before us stands or falls as a commitment to white supremacy. 
Now the question to be asked, then, is whether discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation reflects a commitment to male supremacy. I confess that I believe that it does and the reason that it does is it embodies a judgment that there are two kinds of people, men and women, and it reflects a concern that the institution of male-male relationships and female-female relationships disrupts, though in quite different ways, the sexual stereotypes that accompany the distinction of humanity into two kinds. I don't think the Supreme Court should accept that argument. It's too early. It's a democratic argument, not a judicial argument though it is a constitutional argument. That's the basic claim. 
Now let's shift a bit to the distinction between domestic partnership and marriage and see what might underlie the distinction. There is a very eloquent suggestion that procreation is for marriage and other things are for domestic partnerships. The difficulty for me at least with that argument is that too many marriages involve people who are old and infertile or young and infertile, or just not interested in children. It's not that interesting that my mother got remarried after my father died but she did. She was in her sixties and I'm pretty sure she wasn't fertile. Her procreative potential I think, technologically speaking, was, if anything, less than that of many gay couples. In any case, there are too many counter examples. 
What I think socially speaking-this is not a comment about any individual-but socially speaking what underlies the distinction is the expressive character of recognizing marriage and the debate is one about nothing material but about the expressive character of law. The last speaker put his finger on it with the thought that to allow homosexual marriages is to legitimate same sex relationships, or to approve them in ways that domestic partnerships don't threaten to do. I do believe that's right and, socially speaking, that that's the core of the difference. What is the statement that is being made by same sex marriages and why is there such contestation about that when the material consequences are so low? We might just isolate the fact that it's a statement we're concerned about and nothing material, or very little material, if the compromise suggested would go through. I think the underlying expression is that gay people ought not to be excluded by virtue of their homosexuality and there's no sense in which they're second-class citizens Same-Sex Marriage 51 in the United States. This is not a suggestion that everyone who opposes same sex marriages believes that gay people count as second-class citizens. It's a more general statement about the dynamic of the debate and the social meaning of the exclusion to heterosexuals and homosexuals alike. Martha Nussbaum reflected an interesting concern that marriage isn't the greatest thing in the world always and that the mere availability of marriage to same sex couples might actually undermine freedom because it would put them in the position of choosing an option which they would rather not have available because it would pressure-the word was "push" I think, offered by the philosopher Claudia Card-her into marriage when she really didn't want to be there. There's an interesting suggestion there about the extent to which an option might deny freedom because a social norm might act on the option so as to push people toward it and they might rather not have it there, but I don't think that's sufficient justification for denying same sex marriages because of the asymmetry between heterosexual and homosexual couples and because of the expression of exclusion and, socially speaking again, "contempt" I think is the right word, that the exclusion imposes on gay couples. 
I've talked a bit about second-class citizenship and exclusion, but I think that's not the only expression that the content of our law currently makes. This will link the two parts of my remarks, the one about Loving v Virginia, the other about the expressive function of law. I think the deeper expression, and the sense in which we're all implicated in this, not just gay couples who want to get married, is the insistence that our marriage law as generally conceived offers: that there are two kinds of people, men and women, with accompanying social roles. That's an insistence that's damaging not only to homosexuals. It's damaging to gay men, to lesbian couples, to heterosexual women and to heterosexual men, though in quite different ways. 
I think we'll go down, just like the first time, and have comments that anyone would like to make about anyone's remarks-each person gets to talk about one person's remarks! Self-criticism is perfectly appropriate. 
STRASSER.L I'm starting here as well. Oh good. How about I say a little bit and put it in the form of a question at the end but it won't be too long, I promise. This is for Professor Dent. 
We talked a little bit about Loving and there are lots of cases in which interracial marriage has been challenged. It's just that Loving was the first that said you can't do that. Of course, this was coming up in the state courts because it was believed the federal government didn't have a role in this. After the Civil War, various courts addressed this and said, "If we allow interracial marriage, we're going to have people bringing all of their wives-we can't prevent polygamy and we can't prevent incest. That's what is going to happen as soon as you open up the door." It seems to me analogous. The same arguments have been used traditionally to say we don't want to take an extra step. I'm not saying it's a good argument, I'm just saying it might sound familiar. I believe the Loving Court suggested, although it talked about white supremacy, that even if that had not been at issue, they nonetheless would have held that way, so I guess that's my question for Professor Dent. If this hadn't involved racial subordination and if really it could be credited that the state was just doing what it said, keeping the races separate and allegedly there were legitimate reasons, I'm wondering what you think. Would that do it? 
COOLIDGE: This is sort of an awkward question because I want to ask Mark, and it's going to be awkward for him and I to wait until the end. 
STRASSER: And I don't get another chance! 
COOLIDGE: I'm chewing a lot on what Professor Sunstein was saying and I'm trying to understand if the core of the argument that he's making-but I'm asking you, not him-is that if one does not believe that the sexual dimension of a same sex relationship is a good thing, does that mean therefore that I hold you in contempt? Because I heard that as the implication of his question and I want to know that. I'm very willing to hear whatever your answer might be. 
SUNSTEIN: I can answer that because I don't have any question for anybody. I did not mean that at all about any particular person. This is really a question about the socially understood meaning of the act on the part of, let's say, broad segments of the population confronted with laws that they support or despise. So just like you could have supported a literacy test just because you want people to be literate, the social meaning of a literacy test for our culture might be that you want to exclude African-Americans, as it was. So it's very much a contextual argument, not an a priori argument. Not an argument about any particular person. 
COLLETT: I am intrigued by the clear indication from the last comments that there is some sort of disrespect of those who agree with what Professor Nussbaum suggested earlier, which is that we should truly look at how we aggregate benefits in this society and how we allocate benefits. My practice base is elder law, and I represent a number of elderly people who have no familial relations surviving. The reciprocal beneficiary law of Hawaii struck me as a very sensible way to accommodate people with whom I had had significant conversations about how you engage in this private ordering of your life to ensure that you achieve the objectives that you have. It also accommodates the material benefits that you say, and I think is largely true, are really not the subject of this debate. The material benefits include ensuring that the intestate succession laws reflect the desires when you don't have to go through the process of writing a will or a power of attorney or all of those sorts of things. 
It strikes me that Professor Koppelman has mistaken me for John Finnis. I'm deeply honored, but I am not John Finnis, and my argument is different from John's although I have tremendous respect and wish that I had the intellectual horsepower that that man does. 
My argument is more that the state has a purpose in recognizing and regulating sexual intercourse because of its procreative potential. Regardless of the intentions of the parties who engage in it, the fact is, if we accept Gudmacher's study that we're wrong fifty percent of the time. The fact that the line is a line that is overinclusive doesn't illegitimate the state's interest in regulating sexual intercourse because of that procreative capacity which is different from the argument that John makes. 
KOPPELMAN: I'll segue right in. First of all, as a matter of what actually goes on in American society, I offer the generalization that sexual intercourse is massively unregulated! Now it's not clear to me that more regulation of sexual intercourse would be a good thing. I'm not sure that I want the law to be more active in this area than it is. There is another issue about vulnerable people, and protecting vulnerable people, where again I think that we are in agreement that there are people who form relations of economic dependency, people who are called into existence in a condition of massive dependency. We want to structure the law in such a way as to be able to accommodate that. 
A problem that a few of the speakers have alluded to is whether it is possible for us to arrive at some common ground given massive disagreement about whether, at the core, it is the case that the sexual relationship between a man and a woman is per se good in a way that no sexual relationship between persons of the same sex can be. I think this is why the law discriminates between the two pairs of eighty year-old people and allows the heterosexual eighty year-old couple to marry and not the homosexual eighty year-old couple to marry. It ain't procreation. It's got to be something about the nature of the relationship itself. The reason why I perhaps mistakenly conflated you with Professor John Finnis-of Oxford University, who has made an extremely philosophically sophisticated defense of the heterosexuality requirement in marriage and we published a debate about this-it seems to me that since the law discriminates between relationships on the basis of nothing else than the heterosexual relationship, you have to find some quality about just that and not just children that's a basis for this distinction. The reason that this issue is so emotionally fraught is that some people see something wonderful about heterosexual coupling that is just not possible, not evincible, not capable of being realized by homosexual coupling and then the puzzle is, after we finish glaring at each other, can we agree on any set of legal rules? This is the attraction of domestic partnership. The debate is open about honor and respect and about material benefits. The material benefits are not completely inconsequential given the way that health insurance is structured in the United States. Part of what is driving the domestic partnership debate is that people want health insurance. They want some basis for getting it. 
George was skeptical about whether any proponent of same sex marriage would be able to live with that sort of compromise. I can, for the time being. And since in the long run we're all dead, perhaps that's good enough. 
DENT: I'll answer Mark Strasser's question in a roundabout way, beginning with a confession that I am a recovering libertarian. There's no mystery what caused me to change my mind. My wife and I had children and a libertarian vision of the world works very well if everyone in the world is a competent adult who can make his own decisions and fend for himself. When you throw children into the equation, it starts to break down. Good parenting requires tremendous sacrifices and many people are going to make those sacrifices no matter what the state says. Unfortunately as we know, we don't have to look far to see many parents do not. The question is how do we get parents-how do we encourage parents-to make those tremendous sacrifices? 
To put it another way, if tomorrow morning we read in the paper that some scientist has created a robot that does a great job at raising children, then to my mind this whole debate has changed. Maybe then I'm back to my libertarian position-that is to say, why should the state care if you're married or not? Gay and traditional marriages are treated equally and then the state does not care about either of them. That brings me around to Mark's question about anti-miscegenation laws: if the Court had been persuaded that this was not a matter of white supremacy would the result have been different? That's a hard question for me to answer because it's like an extension of a world in which there are robots who can do outstanding parenting. Maybe the best answer I can come up with is to think of the rule against intermarriage in Jewish law. What is the purpose for that? Some people say that it is a way Jews have of saying we're better than everybody else. But many Jews at the same time accept the argument that for thousand of years we have been an embattled tribe and intermarriage is a threat to the survival of the tribe-certainly to survival in America today. So that's at least one circumstance where I could at least see an argument against intermarriage. Of course, it's not a legal matter, it's a matter of Jewish law. I guess I have a hard time answering Mark's question, but I guess I could possibly imagine some circumstances somewhere where a law against, or a principle against, intermarriage might make some sense, as possibly it does in the case of Jewish law. 
SUNSTEIN: Questions? Comments? 
AUDIENCE: I have a question for Professor Collett about procreation. That obviously has become an issue for many people on both sides of this issue. In light of the fact that there is a distinction that-I think you tried to bring out-potential procreation matters, not necessarily actual procreation. I wondered if you could illuminate why that is one of the necessary-one of the essential-characteristics of marriage? From my perspective in the Divinity School-so all that metaphysical mumbo-jumbo actually is what I work withI want to know where that comes from and whether or not that is changing because of the other demographic realities of today such as overpopulation and undercare for the children who are already being born. 
COLLETT: Let me peel your questions off in reverse order. The birth of the seven billionth person is a cause of celebration in that-I believe this is accurate-if you were to take the entire world population and place them in the state of Texas, my home state, at a density that we find in metropolitan New York, that is all it would take geographically. Malthus would have had us believe that we would be so overpopulated that we would be engaging in cannibalism to survive at this point. Quite the contrary has been proven and there are many economists, primarily in South America, who suggest that you can't develop an industrial economy, a technologically based economy, without a certain population base. A big problem that has faced a lot of the developing nations is that they have not reached the population base yet to support or sustain an industrial or technological economy. I am not persuaded by Malthusian arguments that we are in fact overpopulated. 
That's a very different argument than the argument about the abandonment or neglect of children. In that respect, I would share with you a comment that I received from the principal of the very nice suburban middle school that one of my daughters goes to, when she and I were visiting. I said "You have to excuse me, I have to leave because I have a Supreme Court committee meeting and I have to get to it." She said "It's so refreshing to find a family where both parents are engaged outside of the home and yet your children are not simply being pet sat." I said "I'm not sure I know what that means," and she said "It's the sort of parenting style that says while you're a baby you're cute and cuddly and we'll play with you like a puppy but once you achieve a certain age and difficulty, we're going to put you in the backyard with your food and water and leave you to mature on your own." I'm not sure that there is not a real problem with neglect of children, and I do not think it's confined to the inner city as so often it is mischaracterized in the press. That leads to sort of a critique of what has been the underlying assumption of much of the feminist critique of the existing social order, which is that women were not fulfilled in the home. Some of the most interesting work being done in feminism today is work that suggests that in fact there are some underlying values of those norms that are not being well served and that the task is to get them served in a way that is fair and allows for the full development of both individuals in that marriage. 
That's a very long way of then heading to the procreation question, which is I truly believe that the fulfillment of the human person lies in self-giving. It is not simply an exercise of satiation that can come from consuming. Parenting, although tremendously challenging-I have a teenager right now and a preadolescent and a husband who is wonderful thankfully-is something I would not forego for all the money in the world, although there are nights like the other one when our son brought home grades based on zeros that I would have foregone. I think procreation is the essence of self-giving and contraception is saying "I give you everything but my reproductive capacity." That may be legitimate in certain limited instances but I don't think it's legitimate through the entire existence of the marriage. It's got to be a full giving: "I give you myself, my hopes, my dreams, and the procreative potential of our marriage." 
STRASSER: Is it o.k. to just add something? One of my interests is what the state laws actually are and how marriages are treated. There is no requirement, not only that you have children, but that you have to have sex. You can have a marriage voided because one of the parties said, "That's what I thought we were going to be doing and we're not," but if there's an agreement beforehand, the state recognizes the marriage. It's unusual, at least, to say "not only no children, but no sex is fine," but here the difficulty that you can't have children through your union ought to suffice. 
COLLETT: But Mark, the mirror has two faces is a rather contemporary development in the law and in fact, certainly there are still states where, as you say, you can get the marriage annulled from lack of sexual consummation. Separate and independent of that, to my knowledge there is no case law that would enforce the agreement that we not have sex although we have the benefit of marriage. 
STRASSER: Yes. All I was saying is that it allows for it and the idea of getting it voided is that one of the parties says ... 
COLLETT: Complains? STRASSER: That's right. 
AUDIENCE: Something that all of the speakers who have spoken in favor have mentioned to a certain extent is this notion of procreation, particularly with respect to the elderly or those for whom it is simply not possible-the procreative potential does not exist even though there may be a heterosexual relationship. Those of you who have spoken against have not addressed that. I 
am curious why it is in the state's compelling interest for me to be able to marry an eighty-two year old woman where there is no procreative interest whatsoever, but I cannot marry the man I consider to be my husband when the relationship might have the first three of Professor Collett's important ontological features of the marriage but neither situation can have the last. 
DENT: I would give you a couple of answers to that. One is that, in many cases, to make such a determination would require invasion of privacy of the kind that our government, fortunately I think, has never undertaken. All we ask is, "Is it a man and a woman?" We're not going to require you to undergo physical examination... 
AUDIENCE: I'm sorry. I don't think that there's any invasion of privacy in assuming that a woman who is eighty-two years old can't have a baby... 
DENT: You get into line drawing questions especially with modern technology allowing older women to have children, where this is becoming possible. Why get into that? And the second is, if a man and a woman really can't have children and they nonetheless want to marry, they are doing they're best to follow the traditional pattern. That is an inspiration to other people. That is to say to the young man "Look, even this older couple who can't have children wants to marry because it's an honorable relationship. It is something that you should respect and something that is good for you." 
AUDIENCE: And the relationship that I have with another man is thus dishonorable? Am I correct in inferring that from what you have just stated? 
DENT: Certainly that is the attitude that has been traditional in most societies throughout history, yes. 
AUDIENCE: And that's a reason for legislation-tradition? If people of the same race, to bring up Loving again, couldn't marry basically based on traditional reasons, there really are no logical arguments for it then. 
DENT: If there's another planet with red and green-I'm dealing with human beings as they are. If human beings were other than as they are, what would we do then? I frankly don't find pursuing that type of question very fruitful. 
MADIGAN: One last question... 
AUDIENCE: If what's important about marriage is providing for children, why not just have really strong laws about recognizing parents or families with children as opposed to laws recognizing marriage whether or not there are any children? 
COLLETT: I think in the social ordering that that's one of the sort of arrangements that Professor Nussbaum suggested might in fact be something we should consider. Then the question becomes is it going to be a matter of democratic process where you and I come together with our representatives and dialogue and say it's not that there's not a compelling interest in the protection of children but it's not narrowly tailored enough, the idea of marriage, and so let's rethink it. If we're going to accommodate all of these benefits, we're going to attach them to those whose sexual intercourse, whether intentional or not, results in children. My argument would be, I'm willing to entertain that at the legislative table and talk about that. I think my concern is I would want more of a commitment than a "Whoops, now I'm caught into the thralls of law and I'm now required to be in union with this woman and help her raise this baby." We've seen that work with welfare reform, and it hasn't worked real well. But it's certainly something that I find within the realm of imagination and not an illegitimate way of structuring society. 
DENT: I tend to disagree with you Teresa. What are you going to do? Shoot people for not reading to their children? 
COLLETT: No, I just beat my husband for that! [laughter] COOLIDGE: Now there's a reason for marriage! 
MADIGAN: I know we have one in the back corner. This is going to be the last question. 
AUDIENCE: Why is this debate not really couched in terms of separating marriage into an instrument of the state and an instrument of the church? Because I think, really, it kind of helps us define what this debate really is about, because marriage as an instrument of the church really is about following biblical law or rabbinic law. But as an instrument of the state, it really is about equal rights. 
DENT: Because I think society has an important interest in the raising of children. 
KOPPELMAN: One of the points about separating out the honor with respect to material benefits, one of the odd things about the law of marriage, is that the state seems to be perceived as honoring, as sanctifying, certain relationships. I think that one thing that gets lost in the same-sex marriage debate is that even if you get state recognition, you don't necessarily get everything. And so, this means, I think, that if you lose on same-sex marriage, you don't lose everything, because there's such a variety of perspectives in society. 
One thing that there continues to be deep moral disagreement about is the status of the marriages of people who are divorced from previous marriages who have still living spouses. And the people in those marriages are recognized in the law, but that's not taken to be legal repudiation of the moral and theological beliefs of, for example, Catholics who hold the position of the Church. The state just doesn't take a position on the theological views. I think state recognition of same sex marriage could be understood in the same way. 
COOLIDGE: One other quick thought on your question. It's a good question, and maybe it was confusing having the rabbi and the pastor talking just to the extent that it sort of felt like it conflated the two, but I would just say that to formulate it the way that you did is to answer the question the way that you did. And, the question that remains open is: what do equal rights mean? I mean, rephrasing it in those terms doesn't solve the question. And, the other question that it doesn't solve is: what is the proper relationship, if any, between folks who are religious or folks who aren't, who are both advocates in areas of public policy, and what legitimate role they have, you know, when we're making decisions together as a society, and I certainly, I agree that whatever the United Methodist Church does with marriage is not what the state of Illinois will do with marriage necessarily, but I certainly would not deny or argue that Greg Dell doesn't have the right to not only argue his point as a pastor, but to go down and argue his point in Springfield, which he may well have done under other circumstances. 
COLLETT: And one of the interesting systems that we find when we study the issue from an international perspective, is that there are in fact legal systems where the regulation of the marriage is conducted in a secular court in accordance with the religious community of which the martial partners are members. So that a secular court will allocate the rights and duties of a Roman Catholic couple in accordance with Cannonical Law, a Jewish couple in accordance with Rabbincal Law, a Calvinist couple in accordance with Calvinist Law. One of the problems, of course, with such a system is that not all people are members of religious communities, and so you'd have to have some body of secular law for the agnostics or for those who are not, and not all religious bodies, most of the ones that we are familiar with in the United States, but not all religious bodies have any clear sort of guidance about property division and the appropriate allocation of custody and those sorts of things. But there are some interesting alternatives when you start thinking in terms across the world, that address the question very differently about integration of religious beliefs in the political sphere on this topic. 
MADIGAN: I have to say I'd like to thank this panel in particular. It was great. Although I have to say that the funniest thing that I've heard, and I know it wasn't meant to be funny, is when David said that there's no community of difference in the same-sex couple. And what's funny to me about that is that every time I am with friends who are straight and we see two women walking by hand in hand, the first thing they ask is, "Which one's the guy?" [laughter] I guess there are other heterosexuals who don't share the presumption that there is no community of difference. 
COOLIDGE: There are. 
MADIGAN: I would really like to thank Ellen Fulton and the members of the Roundtable board who worked very hard to make this all happen. I want to thank the panelists, especially those who traveled to be with us. I would leave with a thought of why these sort of talks are so important. We're not just talking and preaching to the various choirs. If you look in the past two years, someone walked into a Baptist church and shot eight people dead, screaming anti-Baptist rhetoric. A year later, a young man named Matthew Shepard was beaten to death after being identified as gay, and hung out on a fence, effectively crucified, you know, two millennia after the crucifixion we know of best in our tradition. What's sad about all this is that people don't always choose the best way of communicating rationally about subjects on which they disagree. That's what makes my admiration for our panelists so great, because they come to this discussion whole-hearted, and really listen to one another. It means a lot. 
I will close by responding to something Dwight Duncan said, that was echoed in this panel, and that is: no society in history has ever recognized same-sex marriage. I would say, given that nobody disputes that in every one of those societies, some same-sex sexuality was going on (I mean, that's why it's in the Bible, because it was going on), there may have always been people who had those inclinations, yet marriage was never open to them. And so my response to Mr. Duncan's claim is that that should make us ask what humanity has lost in never having had a normative union between people with those inclinations. Maybe those people would be something entirely different. What we think of as homosexuality may really be something shaped by social ostracism. We don't know what gay people would even be like without this ostracism. Unfortunately, we'll all die never having known what they might have been like with the normative ideal of marriage to which they could aspire, the ideal that every person who is heterosexual has. I would encourage you not to take it for granted. I think the panelists, though, have made us think carefully about what the costs and benefits of an institution of same-sex marriage would be, and I appreciate that. 
Thank you very much. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 98 (2D SERIES) 
Solidarity in Consumption Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
Contrary to a common picture of relationships in a market economy, people often express communal and membership-seeking impulses via consumption choices, purchasing goods and services because other people are doing so as well. Shared identities are maintained and created in this way. Solidarity goods are goods whose value increases as the number of people enjoying them increases. Exclusivity goods are goods whose value decreases as the number of people enjoying them increases. Distinctions can be drawn among diverse value functions, capturing diverse relationships between the value of goods and the value of shared or unshared consumption. Though markets spontaneously produce solidarity goods, individuals sometimes have difficulty in producing such goods on their own, or in coordinating on choosing them. Here law has a potential role. There are implications for trend setting, clubs, partnerships, national events, social cascades, and compliance without enforcement. 
In the history of political thought, many people have objected to the pervasiveness of cash exchanges in capitalist economies.1 The fundamental concern often involves the potential effect of money in “flattening” social experiences and eliminating important qualitative distinctions among social goods. Perhaps the concern has been vindicated in practice; but there is another side of the picture. In many ways, social norms and practices, far from having been flattened by money, have worked to “unflatten” money. As a prominent sociological study finds, “There is no single, uniform, generalized money, but multiple monies: people earmark different currencies for many or perhaps all types of social interactions . . . . [P]eople will in fact will respond with anger, shock, or ridicule to the ‘misuse’ of monies for the wrong circumstances or social relations.”2 
One of our major goals here is to describe some related phenomena – to offer an account of important, but insufficiently noticed, features of the relationship between economic markets and social practices. Many critics of market relationships have emphasized their apparently atomistic and alienating nature, and the asocial, highly * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. ** Department of Philosophy, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 
Special thanks to Avishai Margalit for helpful discussions and suggestions. We are also grateful to Jill Hasday, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Randy Picker and Gil Kalai for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 1 See, eg, Georg Simmel, The Philosophy of Money (Tom Bottomore and David Frisby trans., 1978, originally published 1900). 2 See Viviana Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money 18-19 (1994). individualistic attitudes that markets seem to express and to inculcate.3 Undoubtedly this account contains truth; but here too there is another side. Daily consumption patterns reflect a range of highly social, even communal impulses. They demonstrate that in their consumption choices, consumers relate not just to products but to other customers too. For many goods, the principal motivation for consumption is to share an experience of one sort or another, with friends, acquaintances, or complete strangers. In consuming massproduced goods people often seek, and find, a sense of solidarity and belonging. The impulse toward shared experiences and toward multiple forms of solidarity – sometimes toward simultaneous inclusion and exclusion – persistently reasserts itself. 
In these respects, the decisions of ordinary consumers are anything but atomistic. They are enmeshed in efforts of sellers and buyers alike to build networks of common experiences and identifications. Advertisers of goods are well aware of this point and sometimes attempt to exploit it for economic gain.4 But even when they do not, an emphatically social impulse plays a large role in consumption choices and in the practices that emerge from them. These phenomena help explain the undeniable pleasure that sometimes accompanies mass consumption. Consumers’ enjoyment in finding solidarity thus offers another perspective on mass consumption, one very different from that offered by those who emphasize the risks of alienation and fragmentation. 
We shall start by distinguishing among three types of goods and investigating some implications of the resulting distinctions for analyzing behavior. After refining the distinctions along several dimensions, we shall explore the potential role of law and government in creating some of the relevant goods. We paint with a broad analytical brush, in the hope of elaborating categories that may be useful for general understanding and ultimately for more detailed work, both empirical and normative. 
Many goods have the value they do independently of whether other people are enjoying or consuming them. Call these solitary goods. The value of a cup of coffee in the morning, or of exercising on the treadmill, may be unaffected by whether others are drinking coffee of exercising (fig. 1). The value of other goods depends, at least in part, on whether or not other people are enjoying or consuming them too. Call these social goods. Social goods divide into solidarity goods and exclusivity goods. Solidarity goods have more value to the extent that other people are enjoying them; they reflect something like a communal impulse. The value of a magazine or television program focussing on a current topic (genetic engineering of food, for example) may increase significantly if many other people watch or read them (figs. 2, 3). Exclusivity goods, in contrast, diminish in value to the extent that other people are enjoying them. The value of owning an art lithograph, or of vacationing in a holiday resort, may go down, perhaps dramatically, if many others have the same lithograph or access to the same resort (fig. 4). 
Both producers and consumers attempt to generate a wide range of solidarity goods and exclusivity goods. These are pervasive features of modern societies; market economies are pervaded by both kinds of goods.5 Acting on their own, however, people sometimes face collective action problems in generating social goods. Rational choices by individuals 3 See Jon Elster’s illuminating discussion of the themes of commodity fetishism and alienation, in Making Sense of Marx 100-07 (1985). 4 For examples, see Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2000). 5 Compare the discussion of the search for better relative position in Robert H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond (1985); the point is related mostly to our treatment of exclusivity goods, as discussed in more detail below. can result in sub-optimal production or coordination, and here law sometimes plays a constructive role. The analysis bears on the protection of pristine areas, on environmental and communications policy, on creation of national holidays and promotion of cultural symbols, the right of privacy, and more. 
When markets fail in the production of solidarity goods, the role of government will often be to encourage people to find their way to the optimal point. Once they are there, the situation may well be self-sustaining; it is a stable equilibrium. A complication comes from the fact that some solidarity goods are bad -- consider the use of unlawful drugs -- and in such circumstances the role of law is to discourage their production. Our principal emphasis is on solidarity goods, as we think they received insufficient attention, especially as regards the role that their consumption plays in providing a form of social glue 
The value of many goods is a function of how many people are enjoying or consuming them. In many cases, goods become more valuable because and to the extent that they are being widely enjoyed. Consider a popular movie, the Super Bowl, a presidential debate, or a millennium celebration. These are goods that are worth less, and possibly worthless, if many others are not enjoying or “purchasing” them too. Part of what people are willing to pay for, when they enjoy or buy the good, stems from the range of benefits coming from the fact that other people are also enjoying or buying it. Some goods would not be worth consuming, or even having for free, if others did not consume them too. Sometimes the good, taken as a solitary good, has negative value. For spouses of the sports-obsessed, the Super Bowl and the World Cup probably fall in this category. Producers of goods and services are well aware of this fact; they know that the number of viewers and users will increase, sometimes exponentially, once popularity is known to exceed a certain threshold. 
What we are calling solidarity goods are those goods whose value derives, in whole or in part, from joint consumption. The very fact that many other people are enjoying them creates positive solidarity externalities. In such cases, part of what is good about the experience, for many people, is precisely the fact that many other people have it too. Sometimes the value of the good stems not just from joint consumption but actually from simultaneous consumption. In that case, what is good about the experience is the fact that many other people are having it at the same time. 
Note that when it is said of a solidarity good that many people are enjoying it, the it may be taken in two ways. It may refer to the very same token of the good, e.g. the broadcast of the Super Bowl or a presidential debate. In other cases the solidarity good in question is thought of as a type, and each person enjoys a different token of this type, e.g., a drink at the end of a conference. 
The value associated with a solidarity good may be intrinsic, instrumental, or both. People may find it intrinsically pleasurable to enjoy something that others are enjoying too, like a best-selling novel or songs on the car radio. Or they may think that if many people enjoy the good, this will lead to valuable social interactions, even to shared policy initiatives, business associations, or friendships. 
To qualify as solidarity goods, it is not necessary that the relevant goods be enjoyed by people who are literally in each other’s company. Some goods are public solidarity goods, whereas others are private solidarity goods. Public solidarity goods are those that people like to enjoy in the company of others. Private solidarity goods are those that people like to enjoy by themselves, but in the knowledge that others are enjoying them too. Movies in the theatre have, for many, the quality of public solidarity goods; movies rented for use on the VCR have, for many, the quality of private solidarity goods. 
To enjoy solidarity goods, people need not be conformists. A conformist is someone who has a desire to narrow the distance between his or her actions and the actions of average others, or, more simply, a desire to do what others do. For a conformist, all or part of the value of action consists of its similarity to what other people are doing. Being a conformist thus presupposes a certain kind of personality. But even avowed nonconformists can enjoy many kinds of goods, say the NBA playoffs, qua solidarity goods. 
A special case concerns trend-setting goods. If you are a trend- setter, you enjoy a good more if, as a result of your consuming it (i.e. owning, using, displaying, or subscribing to it), many others do so too. The point is especially pertinent for teen-age culture and teen-age consumer goods like fashion items, CDs, magazines, and so on. Trend-setting goods may be subsumed under solidarity goods, with a special causal twist: not only does the trend-setter enjoy the good more if many other people are consuming it too, but she enjoys it more if others consume it because she is consuming it. If I am known to have set the trend, part of my pleasure may have to do with fame; but even if it is not generally known that I set the trend, I may still derive pleasure from the numbers. Those who like to follow trend-setters think similarly. For them, what is important is not only the fact that many other people are consuming the good in question, but that particular, noteworthy people have started the process of widespread consumption. 
When something is known to be a solidarity good, those who consume or enjoy it might well encourage others to do so as well. Such people might be trend-setters or at least trend-accelerators. Frequently their efforts are benign; sometimes they produce many individual and social gains. Consider, for example, people who are both sellers and users of desirable goods (a common selling tactic). Or consider neighborhood associations, providing voluntary agreements to enjoy certain goods together. It is easy, however, to imagine quite coercive efforts by those whose enjoyment is increased by the simultaneous activity of others. These coercive efforts may be purely private, sometimes through psychological pressure, sometimes through intimidation and even physical force. Consider efforts, within peer groups of various sorts, to require everyone to join in some activity. Prevailing social norms might develop to ensure the provision of solidarity goods; they can have coercive force. Sometimes the relevant efforts operate through the state. 
Religious practices are sometimes solidarity goods, and this fact can spur both private and public action. “[M]any of the emotional and psychic rewards of religion are greater to the degree that they are socially generated and experienced. One can, of course, enjoy singing hymns alone. But that experience falls far short of singing along with hundreds of others.”6 For members of some religious organizations, the value of participation is very much a function of the number of participants, both for congregation 6 Roger Finke and Rodney Stark, The Churching of America, 1776-1990: Winners and Losers in Our Religious Economy 252 (1992). Note, however, that the pleasure of singing along with hundreds of others is not restricted to religious hymns. activities and for more private and intimate experiences.7 This point does not hold for all religions or religious organizations. But it raises many issues, taken up below, about private and public behavior designed to encourage or to force others to join in the enjoyment of what is, for many, a solidarity good. 
Solidarity goods have interesting relationships to club goods and network effects, both of which have received extensive recent investigation. We offer some notations here. 
goods,” created when a group of people band together and benefit from sharing a public good from which they exclude others.8 Examples include athletic associations, exercise facilities, health maintenance organizations, and political groups with common activities. The fact that the good is shared may be attractive because per-person costs are thereby reduced, or (in a point closer to what we are emphasizing here) because people like the social interactions or feelings of membership that come from sharing. When this is the case, a club good has a central characteristic of a solidarity good – increasing benefits from increasing numbers of users. As the number of people who participate in the club increases, each person’s cost may correspondingly decrease and enjoyment correspondingly increase. 
But there are differences between club goods and solidarity goods as described thus far. Club goods typically suffer from crowding, which leads to a reduction in the quality or experience of the relevant services.9 Thus the value of a club good stops increasing, or starts to decrease, once the number of participants increases beyond a certain point (fig. 5). It is partly for this reason that clubs erect certain barriers to participation through, for example, membership and initiation fees, ceremonies of various sorts,10 or selection procedures. These barriers operate to reduce the risk of congestion, and also to solve the free rider problem among insiders, by ensuring that members are actually going to contribute to the collective goals of the club.11 For the typical solidarity good, by contrast, the value of consumption increases (perhaps up to a point) with the number of users; but there is no need to exclude or to overcome free rider problems of any sort. 
For many clubs, moreover, members enjoy not only the provision of some shared service but also certain common characteristics with other members12; this enjoyment has an exclusionary aspect. The preferred characteristics may include gender, geography, education, wealth, religion, or race. Thus clubs often form not only or not mostly to reduce the per-person costs of desirable goods but instead to form bonds of inclusion, based on the common characteristics. Here the sharing of club goods may well produce increasing benefits as the number of desired members increases (subject to the risk of crowding), but the benefits decline, for many or for all, if undesired members join. Thus many clubs depend on exclusion as well as inclusion; what members like is not only a set of common experiences, but the fact that other people, not defined in the same way, cannot enjoy those experiences. We generalize this phenomenon below; 7 See Laurence Iannaccone, Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes, and Other Collectives, 100 J Polit Econ 271, 274 (1992). 8 See Richard Cornes and Todd Sandler, The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods, and Club Goods 347 (1986). 9 Icomes and Sandler, supra, at 348. 10 Cornes and Sandler, supra, at ? 11 See Iannaccone, supra, at 276-89, for a discussion, in this vein, of religious organizations as clubs. 12 Cornes and Sanlder, supra, at 385. it bears on many social experiences, and is hardly limited to groups that have selfconsciously created clubs. 
technologies, much attention has also been paid to the existence of network effects and network externalities.13 The standard definition of network externalities is closely related to our understanding here of solidarity goods – increases, in the value of some goods, that come from the fact that many people are using those goods. Thus “a network effect exists where purchasers find a good more valuable as additional purchasers buy the same good.”14 For example, a fax machine, or a telephone, may be worth a great deal more by virtue of the fact that other users constitute a network; the value of the good often increases continuously, and sometimes exponentially, with the number of users. Network externalities can push people firmly in the direction of certain choices, even if these choices by themselves are inferior to some alternatives. If most of your acquaintances are using a certain word-processing program, and if you want to communicate with them, it makes sense for you to use the same software, even if an alternative seems better. 
The term “network effects” operates as an umbrella, capturing a number of different phenomena; but it is much narrower than the idea of solidarity goods. What we are emphasizing is not the magnified convenience and range of applications that come from numerous adoptions (as in the case of the fax machine or telephone), but the subjective benefits, hedonic and otherwise, that come from the very fact that many people are enjoying the relevant good or activity. For network goods, the paradigmatic case has to do with actual networks – goods whose purpose is to connect people to other people.15 Because of its function, a telephone or a fax machine is obviously more valuable if many people have them. A language is a “network” in this sense. But network effects are created also by products that are not used for communication at all. Think for example of a credit card: the more popular the brand, the more businesses will accept it and even offer deals to its carriers. Conventional network effects are further created by products that are not used for communication in the strict sense, but that permit information to be exchanged more readily among people who may seek to exchange information. The value of these products, like a popular word-processing program, increases when other people are using them. 
In this light, we can see that network effects turn some goods into solidarity goods of a specific kind. But the category of solidarity externalities, as we understand it here, is far larger than the category of network externalities, above all because we are emphasizing solidarity in consumption. The increase in value from a television situation comedy, stemming from the wide viewing audience for that show, is not what is meant by a network externality. As we shall see, moreover, many solidarity goods are not restricted to the causal connection that leads to the standard consequence of network effects, which is increasing returns to scale; solidarity goods come with a diverse range of value functions. But it is certainly possible to understand our analysis of solidarity goods as a large-scale 13 See Michael Katz and Carl Shapiro, Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility, 75 Am Econ Rev 424 (1985); Philip Dybvig and Chester Spatt, Adoption Extenalities as Public Goods, 20 J Pub con 231 (1983). Mark Lemley and David McGowan, Legal Implications of Network Economic Effects, 86 Cal. L. Re. 479 (1998). On the distinction between network effects and network externalities – terms often used interchangeably – see S.J. Liebowitz and Stephen Margolis, Network Externality: An Uncommon Tragedy, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 133, 135 (1994) (suggesting that “network effects” apply to markets with increasing returns to scale and “network externalities” should be restricted to markets in which increasing returns create suboptimal conditions). 14 Id. at 483. 15 See Katz and Shapiro, supra, at 424; Lemley and McGowan, supra, at 488. expansion of the category of network effects, with the suggestion that similar effects stem from a wide range of goods and services. 
Many goods are solitary goods. Their value is quite independent of whether other people enjoy them. For such goods, it does not matter whether many, few, or none are involved. Some people have this attitude toward sporting events and television programs; drinking a glass of orange juice in the morning, driving a Toyota Camry, or exercising on your treadmill are typical examples for many people. 
The value of solitary goods, like that of solidarity goods, may be intrinsic, instrumental, or both. People may enjoy a presidential debate simply because it is fun to watch it; or they may enjoy it because they learn from the debate how to think, or not to think, about political issues. What matters is not whether the value of the good is intrinsic or instrumental, but whether value is affected by the fact that others are consuming or enjoying it. 
Exclusivity goods are valued to the extent that can be enjoyed in small groups or alone. The fact that others are enjoying them makes them worth less and perhaps much less. This is true for certain status-related goods, sometimes described as positional goods,16 and it is also true for goods that allow or create solitude -- a beach house, for example, in a remote area. Often exclusive or near-exclusive enjoyment is a large part of value. In the extreme case, an exclusivity good has the value it has because only one person is able to enjoy it. (Consider: you are a Hollywood actress, and the good in question is a dress for the Oscar night. Small disasters have been known to occur when two actresses turned up with the very same dress.) Of course producers exploit this property of some goods, by emphasizing their rare or unique character; scarcity may be intentionally manufactured for this purpose, as in the case of the “rare commemorative coin,” printed in limited editions. 
Sole ownership, made possible by the institution of private property, does not mean that everything that is privately owned should count as an exclusivity good. While I have a right to sole ownership of my own Toyota Camry, I may be indifferent to the question how many others own a Toyota Camry as well. Indeed, my Toyota Camry may be a solidarity good for me: I may enjoy the fact that this is a popular car and that there are many others who also own a token of this type. My enjoyment of this fact, moreover, may be both intrinsic and instrumental. By contrast, a highly expensive Mercedes may, for its owners, count as an exclusivity good. If many others come to own a similar car, some people will predictably switch to a Porche.17 
There is an interesting class of goods that do not quite fit any of the three categories; call these demi-solidarity goods. For such goods, it is undesirable to see either increases in use above a certain point or decreases below a certain point. You might choose to attend a seminar only if it is neither very large nor very small. You may want to go to a restaurant, but you will not go either if it is very crowded or if you will be almost alone there. 16 The term was coined in Fred Hirsch, Social Limits to Growth (1976). See Robert Frank, Choosing the Right Pond (1985); Robert Frank, Luxury Fever (1999), for general discussion. 17 See id. Something similar is often true for decisions about clothing. Many people do not want simply to follow the crowd, but they also do not want to stand out too much. The goods should be popular, but not too popular. For demi-solidarity goods the number of users matters and may be crucial to choice. But value neither increases nor decreases continuously as a function of that number (fig. 6). 
In a related process, people may want to create organizations that represent an ideal combination of solidarity and exclusivity. Many clubs thus provide a special set of demisolidarity goods. Such clubs are valued partly because they allow a certain group, defined in specified terms, to enjoy goods and activities in common, while at the same time excluding others, also defined in specified terms. Here the solidarity good depends on a degree of exclusivity, and vice versa. In fact group identity often depends on the right mix of solidarity and exclusivity. 
Thus far we have been writing as if goods qualify or fail to qualify as one of the various types because of what they “are.” But this is an oversimplification. The nature of a good, for any particular person, depends not only on its innate qualities but also on how particular people relate to it. Here people differ from one another, often dramatically. It is not possible to “read” the nature of the good, along the dimension that we are discussing, off the good itself; it is necessary to know how people react to it, and people, groups, and even cultures typically vary along relevant dimensions. 
A faculty lounge may be a solidarity good for some people, who like it best when it is crowded. But it may be a solitary good for others, who go for the coffee, and who do not care how many people are there. And it may be an exclusivity good for others, who like it best or perhaps only when it is empty. A Super Bowl may be a solidarity good for many people, who organize parties around the event, but a solitary good for others, who most like to watch it alone. A Jane Austen novel may be a solitary good for some, but for the members of a Jane Austen Society, it may be a solidarity (or a demi-solidarity) good instead. Those who market a certain good – sneakers, for example – might try to convert it into a solidarity good for many or most; they may or may not succeed. 
Strictly speaking, then, the notion of a solidarity good is a relational one: a given good may be a solidarity good to me, or to you, but not a solidarity good as such. Still, in spite of possible idiosyncrasies, many goods are solidarity goods to many or to most people. These are typical cases, and we may talk of the typical cases as solidarity goods tout court. If a good is said to be a solidarity good, the understanding is that there exist many to whom the value of this good increases to the extent that others are consuming it too. 
It is also possible to obtain some understanding of different types of people by exploring how they conceive of those goods that they most or least enjoy. Those who especially prize exclusivity goods, or who tend to think of the best goods as exclusivity goods, can often be understood as status-seekers. Or they may be loners or misanthropes. Interestingly, status seekers are social types while loners and misanthropes are asocial types, but all have in common the appreciation of exclusivity goods. Those who especially prize solidarity goods, and who tend to think of the best goods as such, obviously enjoy the comfort of belonging, in one sense or another, to a group or a crowd. Those who think of the best goods as solitary goods are to that extent independent of general opinions and social conventions. Groups and cultures as well as individuals can differ along these dimensions. These are of course brief remarks on a wider subject. 
There can also be complex value functions with respect to both solidarity goods and exclusivity goods. These functions include both discontinuities and sudden shifts in direction. We can imagine solidarity goods for which value steadily increases with the number of people who consume or enjoy them (fig. 2). We can imagine goods for which value increases up to a certain number of consumers, but does not increase after that point (fig. 3). Perhaps those who watch a presidential debate need to know that millions of people are watching, but the number of millions is not important. We can imagine an exclusivity good for which value decreases with the increase in the number of consumers, but from a certain point it stays constant (fig.7). Perhaps a beach is an example: once it is crowded, it does not much matter, to the privacy lover, how much more crowded it gets. As we have noted, it is possible to imagine goods whose value decreases when the number of consumers increases above a certain point, and also when the number falls below a certain point (fig. 6). What matters with these demi-solidarity goods is that the number of participants remains between the two points. There are many possible variations here. 
Sometimes people care not only about the sheer number of consumers but also and perhaps more importantly about their identity. Six relevant people may be the critical ones for you; the fact that those people, in particular, are enjoying the relevant good (or not enjoying it) is what makes you especially like it. A (pro tanto) solidarity good may increase in value to you as the six relevant people simultaneously enjoy it; but others are irrelevant. Call these partnership goods. In the limiting case, consider a close friendship or a marriage, where the fact of joint consumption may be crucial to the underlying choice (of restaurants, or movies, or vacation resorts). In such relationships, value can be greatly increased by virtue of the fact that the two people involved are enjoying the good, which has in that respect the features of a partnership good. Indeed, the fact that two particular people are enjoying it may be what gives it all or almost all of its value. If more than the two people are also enjoying it, consumption by others may be irrelevant and value may stay constant. 
But what if the value decreases? What if part of what makes the partnership good valuable is that it is restricted to a number of particular people? An important feature of some goods is that value increases when a certain number of relevant people enjoy them, but consumption by others reduces value. As we have seen, this is true for some clubs; it can also be true in friendships and fraternities, and also in neighborhoods, teams, clubs, ethnic groups, and nations. People may like a good more when it is enjoyed by a large number of people thought to be relevantly like them; advertisers often try to exploit this fact and consumers may react accordingly whether or not they do. But once people in another category start enjoying the good, value decreases, sometimes dramatically. 
In the case of solidarity goods, people care about the sheer number of consumers, and in the case of partnership goods people care about their particular identity. But now we recognize an additional class of goods, call them fraternity goods, where people care about fellow consumers falling under a certain description or belonging to a particular category (e.g. students, Catholics, athletes, gays). Fraternity goods have an excluding, discriminatory element: not only do you enjoy the party more to the extent that more Catholics come, but your enjoyment decreases if non-Catholics participate too. Here we are generalizing the idea of discriminatory clubs -- groups self-consciously formed to create club goods that include the local public good of exclusion. Ordinary consumer products can have the same feature, with more informal rules of inclusion and exclusion, as, for example, when people of a certain type wear certain clothing, perhaps displaying signals that outsiders do not understand. 
These points show that in some cases it is more precise to say not that goods “are” solidarity, solitary, or exclusivity goods, but that the value of a good is a function of its solidarity value, solitary value, and exclusivity value. These values can be combined in different ways, both for different people and in the social aggregate. For some people in relation to some goods, solidarity value may be real and thus positive, but it is the solitary value of the good that drives consumption. For some people and some goods, exclusivity value is crucial and makes consumption likely, while for others the exclusivity value of the good may be positive but of trivial importance. It is easy to imagine a continuum of values and many possible variations. 
• People may be able to participate in valuable social interactions, and other activities, because of their consumption of certain goods. Part of what they get from those goods is the relevant social interactions. For example, those who watch sports event or a popular situation comedy may be able to have a range of conversations by the water-cooler at work. Those who visit national parks may be able to talk about the visit with their friends (whether this creates or reduces value for the friends is another question). People who follow a presidential campaign may be able to understand and enjoy a range of newspaper articles and television programs that would otherwise be unintelligible. • The fact that a good is widely enjoyed may relieve people’s anxiety about whether it is reasonable or legitimate to enjoy that good. People may not know whether it is appropriate or proper to enjoy a football game or a situation comedy or a cigar; the fact that other people enjoy it removes a potential sense of shame. Or people may feel proud that they are enjoying something on which others have placed a kind of stamp of approval. Here the enjoyment of others creates an informational externality (see E below). • People care about their reputations, and if other people are doing something, it is often reasonable to infer that other people will think well of those who do the same thing, and possibly less well of those who do something different. The value of a certain activity or purchase may increase as its popularity increases, not because of the information provided by popularity, but because of the desirable reputational effects of joining the crowd (or the undesirable reputational effects of not joining the crowd). We can imagine cases in which reputational effects are the most important consideration in consumption choices. The phenomena of cascade effects and tipping points can sometimes be understood in the light of perceived reputational factors; when a critical mass is reached, a very large number of people may end up doing the same thing.18 A closely related point is that people may engage in certain activity in order to signal their “type,” and if large numbers of people will be listening, the signal might be amplified.19 • For some people in relation to some goods, enjoyment is heightened even if social interactions will not ensue, apparently because the social quality of the good is enjoyable for its own sake. This may seem less an explanation than a re-description; but the phenomenon is real. There is comfort in numbers. Many people would be happier to watch a sports event knowing that others are doing so, even if they do not plan to discuss it with others, and even if the fact that others are watching does not convey information about whether it is a good thing to watch. At a comedy club, holding the quality of the jokes 18 See, eg, Mark Granovetter, Threshold Models of Collective Behavior, 83 Am J Sociology 1420 (1978). 19 On signalling, see Eric Posner, Law and Social Norms (2000). constant, people are likely to laugh more, and thus to have a better time, when others are laughing too. 
Why do some goods decrease in value when others are enjoying them? Here too there are several possibilities. • Some goods, to some people, are status goods or, somewhat more broadly, positional goods.20 Their value comes precisely from the fact that they are not widely accessible, and people like them because ownership provides a signal about the owner’s status. Ownership or enjoyment of certain goods can impose “positional externalities”21 on those who do not have or enjoy them. Competition for status goods can create a kind of positional arms race,22 in which one-time exclusivity goods become popular and then less exclusive, and new and more expensive exclusivity goods are sought, and they too become popular and less exclusive, and so on, to the eventual detriment of all. • The preceding point emphasizes how the actor or owner wants to appear in the eyes of others; but sometimes more important is the person’s self conception. People may value sole possession even if the good in question is not a luxury item or particularly rare. Sole possession, say of a certain fashion item or of a kilim rug from Turkey, may heighten value in the eyes of the owner not because it is a signal about monetary value, but because it says something to the owner about the sort of person that the owner is. It may enable the owner to think of herself as original, or as a person of refined taste; mass consumption of the good will make it seem vulgar. • Sometimes people value solitude and often people hate crowds. Some exclusivity goods help to ensure solitude or relative solitude, and to prevent congestion or intrusion. This is true for a house in a secluded area, of course; but the point holds too in less dramatic and more mundane settings. People might enjoy going to a nature preserve, a museum, or a beach most when few others are there; and they might be willing to pay a premium to be able to do so. 
We have referred to the informational and reputational effects produced by the actions and statements of other people. It will be worthwhile to say a bit more about these effects, to see how they connect to the notion of solidarity goods. 
behavior of relevant others. If so many people are supporting candidate X, or concerned about global warning, or viewing a certain television show, shouldn’t we assume that they’re right? Whenever someone says or does something, she may well create an informational externality. 23 If a friend goes to a new restaurant, or invests in a new stock, or supports a particular political candidate, she provides you with a signal, carrying with it certain information, one that may turn out to be an important influence on behavior.24 Note, however, that informational externalities may lead people to choose certain goods, without converting those goods into solidarity goods. You may go to a certain restaurant because other people do, in the sense that the actions of others suggest that the restaurant is a good one; but you might hope that on the night that you chose to go, few others will be there. In any case informational effects are a crucial part of mass consumption; producers are well 20 See Frank, supra. 21 See Robert H. Frank, Positional Externalities, in Strategy and Choice 25 (Richard Zackhauser ed. 1991). 22 See id. 23 See Andrew Caplin & John Leahy, Miracle on Sixth Avenue: Information Externalities and Search, 108 Econ. J. 24 See Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (2000). aware of this fact, and they engage in pricing and other policies designed to increase the likelihood that people will learn from the apparent enthusiasm of others.25 
From certain actions, there is also a possibility of a reputational effect. If people who matter to you disapprove of those who oppose affirmative action, or of those who enjoy fast-food restaurants and Star Trek, you may be unlikely to oppose affirmative action or to speak favorably of fast-food restaurants and Star Trek. You may change your views and tastes or at least keep them to yourself. Some people may watch an opera on television, or visit the Vietnam War memorial, because other people will think less of them if they do not do so. Reputational effects may thus contribute to enjoyment or consumption of solitary or solidarity goods. 
Reputational effects may even convert solitary goods into solidarity goods. Your essentially solitary pleasure from watching the exhibition is enhanced when you are told that it got good reviews, and it will now have additional instrumental value for you if many people visit the exhibition, because of the social interactions that result. You may want other people to know that you saw the exhibition, because that will increase your reputation in their eyes. (This is how reputational influence differs from an informational influence: when reputation is the motivating force, you will want other people to know what you have done or refrained from doing.) 
Solidarity goods are defined as such because of the value that is created by joint or simultaneous enjoyment by many. Our emphasis here has been on the increase in subjective value that comes from a shared experience. But that increase in value can take many forms; it is not merely hedonic. To the extent that solidarity goods help unify diverse people around common symbols and experiences, they can be an ingredient in social peace. Often they provide a kind of social glue; consider national celebrations, which can help members of a heterogeneous nation create, and benefit from, a shared identity and shared experiences. In this way, solidarity goods can even help contribute to a situation in which people see the needs of others and assist in meeting them. An important possibility, therefore, is that the existence of a range of solidarity goods that are widely consumed helps to make for desirable social cohesion. When such solidarity goods are salient and numerous, people are more likely to exhibit solidarity: they can come to see one another more distinctly and more directly as fellow citizens with common interests and experiences, rather than as depersonalized others whose experiences and internal lives seem remote and obscure. 
The last point suggests an important distinction. Some goods will have desirable effects limited to those that enjoy them; consider partnership goods. Some solidarity goods will have effects on third parties, both positive and negative. Positive third party effects should be expected when, for example, people are motivated to engage in altruistic or other-regarding activities by virtue of shared experiences. Negative third party effects can be expected in the case of value functions that have a discriminatory feature, as with some fraternity goods, or that, in the extreme cases, embody or produce attitudes that lead to violence. 25 Gary Becker, Accounting for Tastes (1998). 
For those who believe that social states should be evaluated in something other than purely subjective terms, it will also be important to distinguish between subjective solidarity goods and objective solidarity goods. Suppose, for example, that we are not utilitarians, and that we believe that evaluation of social well-being does not depend solely on aggregated pains and pleasures. If so, we might think that there is objective solidarity value to programs on educational television, or to visits to pristine areas and cultural institutions, and that this objective value outruns their subjective solidarity value, especially if the latter is seen as hedonic only. If we think that the good effects of these experiences cannot be measured solely by reference to private preferences, objective solidarity value may be higher than the aggregate of subjective solidarity values. It may be lower as well; suppose that people derive subjective solidarity value from knowing that many people are enjoying a movie that is at once silly and very violent. 
In thinking about a possible role for the state in such matters, there are of course questions here about the extent to which government’s role is merely to satisfy existing preferences, and whether it is legitimate for government to take a stand on competing conceptions of the good.26 Some people’s enthusiasm for certain solidarity goods undoubtedly depends on a judgment that certain particular tastes and values are worth cultivating. 
It seems clear that a good society provides a wide range of solidarity goods, whether objectively or subjectively defined. A society that contains few such goods is likely to have a wide range of problems. Without the social glue that solidarity goods provide, a society might become fragmented; it might not even qualify as a society at all. Shared experiences and memories are not merely pleasant (they may in fact be traumatic) but they can be important to social stability and a range of important social values. 
Sometimes people can and will generate solidarity goods spontaneously, in the sense that government is not involved (except insofar as it creates rights of private property and freedom of contract). We have emphasized that in ordinary product markets, companies will greatly profit from selling products as solidarity goods. A sneaker company, for example, may emphasize the large number of people who are wearing its product; a television broadcaster might emphasize that its program is a kind of civic event, the kind of thing that “everyone will be talking about” on the next day. It is reasonable to speculate that a nontrivial amount of commercial success comes through this route. 
But there need be no self-conscious manipulation of this kind. Acting entirely on their own, groups of consumers sometimes turn certain products into solidarity goods. Sometimes producers are quite surprised by this process.27 Outside of the ordinary marketplace, associations and clubs form voluntarily, and one of their central functions is to generate solidarity, demi-solidarity, or fraternity goods. Indeed, associations can increase as a result of a kind of cascade, and an understanding of solidarity goods thus casts some new light on the phenomenon of social cascades.28 26 For varying views, see John Rawls, Political Liberalism (1993); Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1985); Ronald Dworkin, A Matter of Principle (1985). 27 See Gladwell, supra note. 28 Suppose, for example, that in a society of 3000, 400 would not consume a good unless at least 100 other people are consuming it; 1000 people would not consume it unless at least 500 people are consuming it; and 1500 people would not consume it unless 1500 people are consuming it. For those eager to start a cascade, the trick is to 
Of course cascades occur spontaneously without solidarity goods. If people are learning from the signals of others, a cascade can arise over a fully solitary good. People may like a Toyota Camry whether or not other people are driving Toyota Camrys; but they may have bought their Toyota Camrys because so many other people have done so. Especially interesting cascades occur when increasing numbers of people, with different thresholds for consuming the good, end up joining the process as the solidarity value continues to increase. Note that the value of the Camry qua solidarity good may be instrumental: the more popular the brand of car, the higher its value in the second-hand market, and it is also the cheaper and easier to find spare parts. 
The success of new religions can be understood in these terms.29 As we have noted, some religions construe their practices as solidarity goods. Assume, for example, that members of a church believe that an increase in membership greatly increases the value of membership. Perhaps this is so because such increases allow for more enjoyable activities, perhaps because such increases are important to the deity (and may therefore promote the wellbeing of members in this world or the next), perhaps because such increases fit with the ambition of prominent members of the church. These beliefs will create a large incentive to convert more people to the faith, and thus proselytizing is a product of the solidarity value of the religious practice.30 Along the same line and in much the same terms, it is possible to think of the political activity of an ideological political movement or party as a solidarity good. 
The effort to convert people to the faith, whether religious or political, may have its flip side too. The proselytizers will want not only to increase the number of members, but also to keep them from leaving the faith. For this purpose they may resort to a variety of coercive means, for example by creating psychological pressures for continued participation or by stigmatizing deserters and outside activities. On the other hand, a risk comes with increasing numbers of members: Many might attempt to receive the benefits of membership without helping to defray the costs. When this happens, the solidarity good becomes vulnerable to the free rider problem.31 The ultimate outcome can be coercive efforts, made privately or publicly; religious groups, or political parties, or labor unions may operate as quasi-governmental bodies, extracting taxes and otherwise imposing coercion. 
These are tales of the spontaneous production and consumption of solidarity goods. But for such goods to be generated and provided, people must become sufficiently organized to overcome some difficulties. 
create a collective action problem, which is a particular version of a problem of get 100 initial consumers (perhaps people who consider this a solitary good); once they are in place, the whole society will follow. 
See Sushil Biikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, J. Econ. 
Persp., Summer 1998, at 151; David Hirschleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in The New Economics of Human Behavior. 29 See Finke and Stark, supra, at 237-275. 30 See id. for discussion of this process in action. 31 See id. at 253-55; Iannaccone, supra, coordination.32 To see this, imagine a simple two-person society. On plausible assumptions, such a society will fail to produce a solidarity good – say, a shared viewing of a full moon – unless a collective action problem can be overcome. Assume that the benefit of individual viewing of the moon is 3; that the benefit of sleep, at the relevant time, is 4; and that the benefit of joint viewing of the moon is 5. The pay-off structure will look like this: 
Sleep 
Note that the best cell overall is obviously the upper left. It also provides a stable equilibrium, in the sense that once both parties are there, there is no incentive to deviate; this is not a prisoner’s dilemma. It may, however, be a problem for the participants to get to the right place in the first instance. Row-chooser, not knowing what column-chooser will choose, will think this: If I choose M, the worst I can get is 3 (when I’m a lone moonwatcher, while column-chooser sleeps). If I choose S, I get 4 no matter what columnchooser does. If row-chooser has no idea what column-chooser will do, and if he seeks to be on the safe side and to maximize his worst-case scenario, he will choose S. Since the situation is symmetrical, column-chooser thinks the same way. The result may well be that the two will end up at (4, 4), which is also a stable equilibrium. What they need is a method that will bring them to (5, 5) instead.33 
Two people, or small groups, can usually solve this kind of problem on their own. A brief discussion, providing mutual assurances, should be sufficient.34 The difficulty is more serious in larger groups, where rational and boundedly rational people may settle on inferior options simply because communication and mutual assurance can be costly and difficult. Suppose for example that many people seek a method to celebrate the memory of Martin Luther King or of Yitzhak Rabin. It is possible to make some progress simply through private efforts and educational campaigns, dedicating a certain period to their memory. Some successful efforts might eventually generate significant solidarity benefits. But it is easy to imagine circumstances in which this will not happen. Perhaps people have difficulty communicating with one another, or perhaps they lack the relevant information (involving the solidarity benefits that would follow from simultaneity). 
Under certain assumptions, the best approach will be a government advertising campaign or even the declaration of a national memorial event or holiday. Note that the main function of the advertising campaign or of the declaration in such circumstances is not coercive, but rather coordinating. The goal is to signal a solution that is preferred by all. Similarly, consider a situation in which a certain television program would have a great deal of value, both distributive and collective, if and only if large numbers of people watched it. In a period of numerous entertainment options, it might be difficult to coordinate on the best outcome, in which most or all watch. Government intervention in such cases is especially attractive because once the government provides the focal point, the desirable outcome is self-enforcing and does not require further monitoring and enforcement, as opposed to, say, paying taxes or maintaining clean air. In terms of our previous example, if the government announced moon watch, and people believe that others will do what the 32 See, e.g., Edna Ullmann-Margalit, The Emergence of Norms 77-133 (1977); Douglas Baird, Robert Gertner, and Randal Picker, Game Theory and the Law 191-95 (1994). 33 This is a version of the so-called assurance game. See A. Sen, Choice, Welfare and Measurement 78-79 (1982). 34 For evidence, see Robert Ellickson, Order Without Law (1994). government says (or people believe that the government accurately reveals people’s preferences), then everyone will moon watch. As a real world example, consider the widespread phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement” – private compliance with laws that are enforced rarely or not at all, compliance often reflecting a solution to a problem of coordination,35 and sometimes involving the production of solidarity goods. 
sometimes solidarity goods produce external benefits that are not adequately captured by individual choices. Assume, for example, that the benefits of educational programming, or public affairs television, are not captured by individual viewers; much of the benefit is obtained by others, who learn from those who watch. This is a conventional third-party benefit, and such benefits can come from solidarity goods as from all other kinds. But there are also distinctive externalities associated with solidarity goods - above all, the externalities that follow from various forms of social glue. 
If people are able to interact in productive and congenial ways in part because of the existence of solidarity goods, they themselves will certainly benefit; and third parties will benefit as well. The inculcation of group identity, or patriotism, and a general interest in public affairs, are cases in point. When people are generally interested in ensuring a wellfunctioning democracy, a range of benefits is likely to be received by the citizenry. (This is not to deny the potential bad effects of patriotism and citizen engagement.) The problem here is generating a sufficient number and density of solidarity goods of the socially desirable kind. 
If an unregulated market under-produces solidarity goods, government and law might help. Consider the following possibilities, simply for purposes of illustration: 1 . Media policy. As several of our examples suggest, much news and entertainment programming has the quality of a solidarity good. For many people, the value of such programming dramatically increases when many people are watching. There is a no mystery why this should be so. Part of the reason is undoubtedly the social benefits that come after the show has been watched; various interactions are made possible through this route. Sometimes such programming provides desirable third party effects; sometimes it generates objective solidarity goods, together with a range of external social benefits. In these circumstances, it makes sense for government to consider policies (for example, through public subsidies) that would ensure high-quality programming, and also to provide incentives (for example, through advertising) to let people know about it and to encourage them to watch. The point bears directly on communications policy, where a democratic government, responsive to citizen aspirations, might attempt not only to allow consumers to satisfy their preferences, but to develop preferences and values of a desirable kind.36 2 . Public celebrations and holidays. Much of the value of public celebrations come from the fact that the celebration becomes a public event, enjoyed by large numbers of people at the same time. A national holiday is emphatically a solidarity good in both the subjective and objective sense. When the government devotes a day to celebrate national independence, or to honor the memory of a person of significance, it is not fairly subject to 35 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking (Steven Sugarman ed. 1994). 36 This point raises many complexities. For discussion, see C. Edwin Baker, Giving the Audience What It Wants, 58 Ohio State LJ 311 (1997); Cass R. Sunstein, Television and the Public Interest, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 499 (2000). criticism on the ground that it is acting in an illegitimately paternalistic way. On plausible assumptions, it is ensuring a form of coordination that private persons cannot easily provide on their own. National holidays, so deemed by law and accompanied by taxpayer funds, can be justified on this ground. 
A particular point here has to do with the expressive function of official (as opposed to purely private) action.37 If the celebration does not have the imprimateur of the public as a whole, it is less likely to carry with it the signal that would produce the desired broad response. True, the public imprimateur may backfire when people do not trust the government, and it is also possible that some people will feel that the government has unjustifiably intruded on their freedom of action. But these adverse reactions are less likely to occur when the event in question is perceived to be a solidarity good both subjectively and objectively. 
3 . Culture and the environment. Environmental and cultural amenities often have the value they do because they have been enjoyed by many people over time, and will be enjoyed by many people in the future. When law protects a historic site, and immunizes it from development, part of the reason may be to ensure the solidarity value that comes from its continued existence. The same is true for protection of pristine areas, enjoyed by many people as such. Wildlife refuges, operating as focal points that are also solidarity goods, can be defended partly on this ground. 
We have been speaking thus far as if solidarity goods are desirable to provide and as if society has an interest in encouraging their existence. This is not exactly false, but things are more complicated. First, the existence of a wide range of solitary and even exclusivity goods has its value too. These help insure and protect pluralism, diversity and autonomy, and they may encourage a wide range of experiments, even experiments in living. Legal rights of privacy are reasonably defended on this ground. Second, the use of public power to increase the enjoyment of solidarity goods may well represent an illegitimate interference with freedom, properly conceived. For many people, religious practices are solidarity goods, and efforts to pressure or force people to participate in the preferred religious activity might well seem attractive to powerful social groups. In cases of this sort, a rights-based constraint should prohibit any governmental effort to increase the enjoyment of what is, for many, a solidarity good. It is necessary to develop an independent account of rights to see when this sort of prohibition should apply. 
Notwithstanding their status as such, many solidarity goods can cause serious problems. Consider the following possible solidarity goods: criminal conduct, including conspiracy; use of illegal drugs; use of guns; dangerous driving; smoking; discriminating on the basis of race and sex. Many people are more likely to engage in the relevant conduct, and to purchase the relevant goods, if other people are doing so, not simply because of informational and reputational effects, but also because the relevant experiences are genuine solidarity goods, providing increased enjoyment and reduced risk. There is safety in numbers. The individual interest in engaging in activity that is harmful, to self and to others, may well increase if other people are doing the same thing. If certain social bads are solidarity goods, preventive strategies immediately suggest themselves; the goal should be to reduce signals of large social involvement to the point where the numbers begin to “tip” in the opposite direction. Indeed, a whole approach to the problem of crime – the “fixing 37 See Cass R. Sunstein, On the Expressive Function of Law, 144 U Pa L Rev 2021 (1996). broken windows” idea – depends on the notion that crime is contagious, with epidemic-like qualities.38 
Solidarity goods might also cause undesirable conflict. Suppose two groups compete for new members in order to enhance the solidarity value of what they provide to existing members. One way to compete for members is to make the competing group less attractive, for example by slandering it or by discriminating in one’s own private business or social dealings against members of that group. Religion and ethnicity are often pretexts, or focal points, around which solidarity goods are created; they become the rallying cry when groups come into conflict. A strand of the liberal tradition is indeed suspicious of intermediary groups that come between citizen and state, and this may be part of the reason. Note, however, that the bad effects here are not strictly attributable to solidarity goods, but rather to what we have called fraternity goods, where people care about the goods’ being consumed only by people belonging to a particular category. 
It is important to discourage the production of solidarity goods that cause harm to others and (more controversially) to self. Interesting cases here involve a collective action problem of a distinctive kind. Suppose, for example, that people receive little solitary value from some activity X (smoking, using drugs, carrying a gun, driving dangerously). Suppose that the solidarity value is what makes them nonetheless engage in that activity. Thus far there is no problem; this is a standard case. But suppose the problem is that people wish to stop their practice.39 They wish to be discouraged from doing what they do, through a change in the prevailing social norms. They may want, for example, a norm against using drugs, or driving dangerously, so that the social meaning of either action is not “bravery” or “rejecting oppressive convention” but “stupidity” or “irredeemable recklessness.” The problem is that individuals cannot change that norm, and the resulting social meaning, on their own.40 Here too government and law might help, via education, incentives, or perhaps even coercion, producing a situation in which solidarity value comes from some other source, possibly through the altered meaning of the activities in question. 
We have sought to draw attention to an important characteristic of certain goods, or more precisely a characteristic of people’s relations to those goods: an increase or decrease in value as a result of the number of people who are consuming or enjoying them. Some goods significantly increase in value with the increase in the number of people consuming or enjoying them, whereas other goods decrease in value for exactly the same reason. This is a central feature of human relationships, in the marketplace as everywhere else. Frequently people make consumption choices precisely in order to signal or to ensure shared experiences of one sort or another. 
Contrary to a conventional concern about market relations, the communal impulse -in more or less diluted forms -- continually reasserts itself in ordinary consumption choices. Advertisers and producers are well-aware of this fact and sometimes attempt to exploit it for their own benefit. But sometimes consumers, operating on their own, make unexpected choices and linkages, and solidarity goods emerge even when producers do not attempt self-consciously to promote them.41 The increase or decrease in value might be limited to consumers or users, and indeed that is what most of our discussion has assumed. 38 For general discussion, see Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2000). 39 See the treatment of second-order desires in Harry Frankfurt, Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Preference, 68 J Phil 5 (1971). 40 See Lawrence Lessig, The Regulation of Social Meaning, 61 U Chi L Rev 1 (1997). 41 For examples, see Gladwell, supra note. But as we have noted, solidarity goods can produce positive or negative third-party effects. Some of them count as objective solidarity goods as well or instead; environmental and communications policies can be understood in this light. 
In many legal systems, the value of exclusivity goods is widely acknowledged; for example, rights of privacy tend to generate and to protect exclusivity goods. There is much less understanding of the value of solidarity goods and the occasional need for legal assistance in providing them. The bad news is that sometimes such goods, even if they have already been produced, will not become widely consumed on their own. The good news is that producers have strong incentives to overcome the resulting problems. The better news is that with relatively small encouragement, law and policy can help ensure the production of solidarity goods, and also that once produced, a large number of people will continue to consume them without much in the way of further assistance. The result will be optimal or near-optimal consumption with only a modest “push” from government and law. When this is not the case – because, for example, of an absence of information, bounded rationality, or third party effects – a more aggressive role for law may sometimes be justified in principle. 
Our main goal here, however, has not been to prescribe any particular role for law, but to provide some insights into the importance of both shared and exclusive experiences in the consumption and enjoyment of goods. A better understanding on that score casts light on a wide range of otherwise puzzling choices, both private and public, in market economies. It also helps explain the maintenance of group identifications, and the creation of new ones, in environments that might otherwise seem inhospitable to them. a v number of consumers e FIGURE4 lu a v number of consumers e u FIGURE5 l a v e FIGURE6 l u a v a v number of consumers 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
(September 1991). 
of AIDS (April 1992). 
1992). 
Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). (November 1992). (January 1993). 
(April 1993). (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
(August 1993). and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation 
of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Cost 
1999) 
Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 1999) 2000) 



2000) 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 109 (2D SERIES) STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=252824 Preliminary draft 11/20/00 all rights reserved 
The legal system should rely much more than it now does on statistical evidence. It should be cautious about the judgments of experts, who make predictable cognitive errors. Like everyone else, experts have a tendency to blunder about risk, a point that has been shown to hold for doctors, whose predictions significantly err in the direction of optimism. We present new evidence that individual doctors' judgments about the ordinary standard of care are incorrect and excessively optimistic. We also show how this evidence bears on legal determinations of negligence, by doctors and others. 
I. 
Trials frequently raise questions that call for expert intervention. Experts are asked to answer a range of questions about what people, or professionals, ordinarily do. If a doctor is accused of negligence, for example, it is necessary to know about the customary practice of doctors. Of course negligence judgments depend, at least in part, on an assessment of ordinary practice.1 But how is ordinary practice assessed? 
The basic answer is that the assessment comes via statements from expert witnesses, describing the ordinary practice.2 There can be no doubt that experts know a great deal about topics on which ordinary people lack information. But experts, no less than other people, are subject to predictable biases.3 Their judgments about probability are affected by the same heuristics and biases to which most people are subject, even if (and this is a disputed question) expertise tends to reduce the most serious errors. Our basic proposal here is that the legal system should rely, much more than it now does, on statistical data about doctors’ performance, rather than the opinions of experts about doctors’ performance. For the first time, it is becoming possible for law to rely on this evidence, precisely because such evidence is becoming * Associate Professor, Pediatrics; Associate Director, Neonatology, Assistant Director, MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics, The University of Chicago ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 1 There is a dispute about the extent to which ordinary practice is determinative. For the classic case, see The T.J. Hooper, 60 F.2d 737 (2d Cir. 1932). 2 We build on existing law here, without intending to enter into debates about the extent to which law should simply incorporate, or instead sometimes improve on, the existing standard of care. On any view, the customary practice is relevant, and that is sufficient for our purposes here. 3 See Jonathan Baron, Thinking and Deciding (2d ed 1994). increasingly available. If our argument is convincing in the medical context, it should apply in many other settings in which experts are asked to testify about negligence or deviations from ordinary practices. In many settings, the fallible opinions of isolated experts should be supplemented or replaced with statistical data. A step of this sort would dramatically increase the sense and rationality of tort law. 
Our proposal rests partly on the claim that the use of statistical data will greatly simplify litigation and reduce the role of strategic behavior in the litigation process.4 Battles of isolated experts should be easier to mediate when there is a large pool of evidence on which to draw. But our larger claim is that by using statistical data, the legal system will reach much more accurate results. If the law is seeking the standard of care, it should not depend on fallible memories and recollections of local experiences; it should draw instead on more global evidence of the kind that is now increasingly available for use in court. 
II. 
It is now well-known that most normal people tend to be risk optimists, in the sense that they believe themselves to be relatively immune from risks that are faced by similarly situated others.5 This is one of the most robust findings in social psychology. For example, 90% of drivers believe that they are safer than most drivers and less likely to be involved in a serious accident.6 Most people believe that they are distinctly unlikely to be subject to various risks, such as cancer, heart disease, and divorce.7 Smokers appear to know the statistical risk of smoking8; but they believe that they are less likely than most smokers to fall victim to the various risks. In one study, less than half of smokers believed that they have a higher-thanaverage risk of cancer or cardiovascular disease; indeed, most heavy smokers (over forty cigarettes per day) believe that they are not at any increased risk.9 
Only one group of people does not show a tendency to excessive optimism: the clinically depressed.10 It would be natural to infer that though unrealistic optimism makes for erroneous predictions about outcomes, it is on balance adaptive, especially insofar as an optimistic attitude increases the probability of a good outcome and otherwise creates hedonic benefits.11 4 Some of the data here is discussed, from a different angle, in William Meadow et al., Ought 'standard care' be the 'standard of care'? A study of the time to administration of antibiotics in children with meningitis, 147 Am J Dis Child 40 (1993). 5 Neil D. Weinstein, Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events, 39 J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 806 (1980). 
7 See Weinstein, supra note. 8 See W. Kip Viscusi, Smoking (1991). 9 John Ayanian and Paul Cleary, Perceived Risks of Cancer and Heart Disease Among Cigarette Smokers, 281 JAMA 1019 (1999). 10 See Taylor, supra note. 11 This is the thesis of id.; see also the discussion of the self-fulfilling prophecy in Nicholas Christakis, Death Foretold: Prophecy and Prognosis in Medical Care 135-62 (2000). Alternatively, it might be thought that some social settings would work against optimistic bias. In markets, for example, entrepreneurs might have an incentive toward realism, especially because market pressures, it might be expected, would punish, and drive out, those who are unrealistically optimistic. Perhaps markets do move people toward realism; but entrepreneurs, no less than anyone else, have been shown to suffer from unrealistic optimism.12 One might intuit that those with specialized knowledge are less prone to this effect. This appears not to be the case. It has almost universally been found that physicians, no less than others, have a substantial tendency to err in predicting outcomes. Most often the errors are in the direction of optimism. 
"Virtually all" of the existing studies of physicians "have documented frequent and large errors in predictions."13 No study finds a high level of accuracy. And the errors tend in a particular direction: "physicians are prone to an optimistic bias."14 As an example, a study in 1972 showed that in making predictions about length of survival for cancer patients, only 47% of the physicians provided prognoses that were even roughly accurate, and 80-90% of the mistakes were excessively optimistic.15 A subsequent study, conducted in 1987, found overestimates of survival time in 88% of the cases, by roughly a factor of three.16 A recent, large-scale study found inaccurate predictions in 80% of cases, with 63% of these showing overestimates.17 Interestingly, patient characteristics (age, race, sex, illness duration) were not correlated with inaccurate, optimistic estimates, but one factor was: "the better the doctor knew the patient - as measured, for example, by the length and intensity of their contact - the more likely the doctor was to err in the prognosis, most frequently by overestimating survival."18 The overall picture is that in cases involving cancer patients, physicians accurately predict survival only 10% to 30% of the time, and the rest of the time they overestimate survival by a factor of two to five.19 
All of this is highly suggestive, but not decisive, with respect to the particular point that we mean to investigate here: whether experts make erroneous judgments about the ordinary standard of medical care, and whether the errors go in a predictable direction. It would be plausible to think that the general tendency toward optimism would affect those judgments as well; but it would also be possible to imagine that (a) doctors’ predictions about their patients’ prospects are systematically overoptimistic, but (b) doctors have an accurate sense of what is ordinarily done by themselves and other doctors. If there is no systematic error with respect to (b), there would be little need to substitute data for experts. We now offer the first real evidence on that question. 12 See K. MacCrimmon and D. Wehrung, Taking Risks (1986); Daniel Kahneman and Dan Lovallo, Timid Choicers and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, 39 Management Science 17 (1993). 13 See Christakis, supra note, at 66. 14 Id. 15 Id. at 66. 16 Id. at 66-67. 17 Id. at 67. 18 Id. at 67-68. 19 Id. at 68. 
We now summarize some of our own evidence that doctors err with respect to ordinary conduct in their own fields. As expected, the apparent basis for the magnitude and direction of these errors is optimistic bias. 
Consider the problem of bacterial meningitis in children. For the purposes of the current discussion, it is necessary to know only three things about that problem. Bacterial meningitis is an infection of the brain; it can (usually) be treated with antibiotics; as a general rule, the sooner the antibiotics are started, the better the outcome will be. 
In medical malpractice cases, the question often arises whether treatment of a particular child was unduly "delayed." Of course a key issue is how a legal decision-maker would know what kind of delay counts as "undue." For obvious reasons, juries are assumed to be ignorant of the medical facts in such cases, and consequently are instructed to rely on the testimony of expert witnesses. The instruction that jurors should rely on expert opinions for their knowledge about the standard of medical care answers one question, but it raises another -- on what should the experts themselves rely? 
In the traditional formulation, experts themselves are instructed to rely on their personal "knowledge and training." But for reasons given above, such admonitions raise many problems. In the context at hand, it would be reasonable to predict that experts would tend to be excessively optimistic – that their recollections of the time that antibiotics are initiated in children with meningitis would be tilted toward shorter values than actually occurred. And if so, experts, relying on their "knowledge and training," will provide inaccurate accounts of behavior. 
We tested this hypothesis directly, by surveying two groups of pediatric experts about their estimates of timing of antibiotic administration in children who present with bacterial meningitis (ABTIME), and subsequently comparing these estimates to actual data obtained from real cases of meningitis. We began by identifying 54 experts in pediatric emergency medicine who were attending a national meeting of their subspecialty (most children with bacterial meningitis present to the emergency room, where they receive their initial medical care). We asked each of these experts to give us their estimate of the average time that would elapse from arrival of a child with meningitis in their emergency room to the start of antibiotic therapy for that child. The average estimate of these experts was 56 minutes -- 95% of these experts' opinions fell within the range between 20 - 120 minutes. 
We then posed precisely the same question to another group, consisting of 23 experts in the field of pediatric infectious diseases (the subspecialty with most experience in the care and treatment of meningitis for children after admission to the hospital). The average estimate of ABTIME offered by pediatric infectious disease experts was 87 minutes, slightly more than 50% longer than the intuitions of the experts in emergency medicine. 
Moreover, and most importantly, the opinions of both of these groups of potential expert witnesses were wrong, and wrong by a large margin. We compared both of these distributions of expert opinion to actual times, determined on the basis of a review of 93 cases of children with meningitis seen at two university medical centers in Chicago. The average value of ABTIME for these 93 children was 120 minutes, with 95% of cases falling in the interval between 30 to 240 minutes. When the medical literature was reviewed in an attempt to extend these observations of actual ABTIME, 200 reported cases of children with meningitis were found from hospitals in South Carolina and California, with an average time comparable to those observed at our Chicago hospitals (median 114-126 minutes). The following table captures the differences: 
56 minutes 
Whatever "expert" opinion means in this context, it does not mean an accurate opinion. Both groups of potential pediatric experts were simply wrong in their opinions about the time to begin antibiotics in children with meningitis. The 77 expert estimates of ABTIME were significantly shorter than the 293 actual determinations of ABTIME to a probability of less than 1 part in 1000. In addition, the inaccuracy noted in the estimates was consistent with our hypothesis: responses were biased toward the outcome perceived to be 'desired', that is, shorter waiting periods. 
Others, in varying contexts, have demonstrated a similar disconnect between physicians' description of their own practices and "objective" determinations of the same behavior. As examples, consider patient education by physicians in general practice. Physicians are committed to the value of patient education,20 and spend up to 25% of their office time counseling patients.21 Clearly, the desired practice is to spend this time explicitly informing patients about health-related behaviors, such as the uncontested virtues of smoking cessation and preventive oncology. Nevertheless, when physicians' reports of their office practices are compared with taped interviews of these same encounters, there is only a weak, insignificant correlation between the self-reported patient education activities and the actual performance .22 Not surprisingly, physician's recollection err in the predicted direction; that is more explicit counseling is recalled than actually occurred. 20 H Wechsler et al., The physician's role in health promotion -- a survey of primary-care practitioners., 308 N Engl J Med. 97 (1983); T.E. Kottke et al., Attributes of successful smoking cessation interventions in medical practice. A meta-analysis of 39 controlled trials, 259 JAMA 2883 (1988). 21 C.T. Orleans et al., Health promotion in primary care: a survey of US family practitioners, 14 Prev Med 636 (1985). 22 See id; see also J.E. Davis et al, Cancer prevention and screening activities in primary care practice, 16 Prev Med. 277 (1987). 
Once again, our fears are confirmed --- we expect anecdotal recall to be inaccurate, biased, and inevitably, systematically imperfect, and we find it to be so. If, as the psychological evidence suggests, our findings here are the rule and not the exception, it is hardly clear that the law should continue to base a system of medical-legal jurisprudence on such a shaky foundation. 
Of course the evidence that we have offered here is suggestive rather than exhaustive. Perhaps there are contexts in which doctors, or other experts, have an accurate sense of the ordinary standard of care. But we believe that general evidence of error, together with the particular evidence introduced here, is sufficient to show that both error and optimism are highly likely to infect a wide range of expert testimony.23 This point operates independently of the ordinary incentives, in an adversary system, to assist one’s own side, whatever it may be.24 It therefore makes sense to move toward greater reliance on data, and less reliance on the recollections of isolated experts, certainly in the context of malpractice suits, and probably more generally. Until recently, the legal system has been unable to rely on statistical data for the simple reason that it has not existed. But it is increasingly common to develop data sets about physician choices and behavior, and the legal system will have an increasingly large amount of information on which to draw. 
Our proposal would have two large advantages. First, it would simply the task of discerning the truth. It is now exceedingly difficult for juries to decide whether one or another expert has adequately captured general experience. This issue may well turn on unreliable judgments about credibility or on sympathy, not relevant to the standard of care issue, for one or another side. Second, and more important, use of statistical evidence would inevitably increase accuracy, reflecting the comparative advantage of pooled data over individual recollections. There is no good reason for courts to continue to rely on the latter when they have access to the former. 
III. 
Our proposal might be criticized on the ground that statistical analysis is itself subject to error. Of course there can be no assurance that any particular account of relevant data is correct. If this is so, it might be objected, the use of statistical evidence will merely be the beginning of a continuing battle among imperfectly reliable experts. How much would be gained by that? 
This objection has a degree of truth, but rather than impeaching our proposal, it suggests the need to develop good methods for evaluating any particular claim about what the data establishes. There is no escaping tests of the data in the ordinary way, through the presentation of conflicting views, including that of experts. Data might be met with data; it might also be met with a professional critique. And of course it is possible that an individual expert will be able to 23 See Kahneman and Lovallo, supra note. 24 See Linda Babcock, Self-Serving Bias, in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). show, persuasively, that data does not establish what it claims. These sorts of disputes can be handled in the standard fashion. What we are suggesting here is that because individual experts are distinctly prone to error, it would be far better to begin the process with reliable evidence rather than particular recollection. If individual experts can show that the statistical data are wrong, the legal system will be better off for the demonstration. But in the long run, we predict, these demonstrations will be the exception rather than the rule. 
Statistical data are not typically used in negligence cases. In fact the legal system is uncomfortable with the use of such data. They might be excluded, as inadmissible, on several grounds. 
It is possible to object that statistical data are not relevant, because they cannot determine the proper standard of care. In many states, there is a continuing dispute about the proper role of common practice in negligence cases. Where common practice is not determinative of the standard of care,25 the data cannot resolve the legal issue. Some courts have suggested that in such circumstances, the data should be inadmissible on grounds of irrelevance. But this is a mistake. Even when common practice is not determinative, it is pertinent, as reflected by the very fact that experts frequently are allowed to testify about what most doctors do. Statistical data should be found admissible for the same reason that expert testimony is admissible. 
It might also be thought that statistical data should be seen as hearsay. Perhaps the witness seeking to introduce hearsay evidence is attempting to say what others have said, and perhaps these violate the prohibition on admitting materials of that sort.26 But this is a misreading of the hearsay rules. Under federal law, experts are allowed to rely on “statements contained in published treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets on a subject of history, medicine, or other science or art, established by the testimony or admission of the witness or by other testimony or by judicial notice.”27 Federal rules also allow experts to base opinions on facts and data of the kind reasonably used by experts in the field when they form opinions or inferences.28 Statistical data, if published, should be permitted under the first rule just quoted; if unpublished, they should be admissible to the extent that they are of the sort reasonably relied on by experts. The conclusion is that data should not be treated as inadmissible hearsay. 
Perhaps there are alternatives, other than reliance on statistical data, to the problem of idiosyncratic recollections of individual experts. One possible view is that the opinions of 25 See, e.g., Advincula v. United Blood Services, 678 Need 1009 (1996); Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hosp., 211 NE2d 253 (1965); Roach v. Springfield Clinic, 1992 Ill. LEXIS 204 (1992). 26 See Schrag v. Chicago City, 265 Ill. 338 *1914); People v., Anderson, 113 Il 2d 1 (1986). 27 Fed. R. Evid. 803(18). 28 Fed. R. Evid. 703, 705. But see the puzzling ruling in Roach v. Springfield Clinic, 1992 Ill. LEXIS 204 (1992), refusing to allow references to treatises on the ground that their authors are not available for cross-examination. This seems to us an anachronistic and odd reading of the prohibition on hearsay. experts, as codified in textbooks or journal publications, should define the standard of care . By this view, when actual practices differ from the theoretical or recommended standards, it is the practitioners who are at fault. They may not know the standard, may disagree with it, or have misinterpreted it, but the burden of proof falls on the practitioners. 
We believe that this approach is oversimplified and misguided. Under the law, the ordinary practice is important for its own sake, whether or not it is decisive. Unless a textbook is actually based on ordinary practice, it will not report it reliably. If courts are going to consider the ordinary practice, they should have an accurate understanding of what it is. 
Perhaps the textbook or journal can state a recommendation, one that is worth considering even if it does not capture ordinary practice. This is not implausible. But interpretation of the recommended standards (as expressed, for example, for AB-TIME in authoritative texts) is not always straightforward, and one can rarely find authoritative interpretations of authoritative texts. In the particular case of bacterial meningitis, what, in the minds of a lay jury, is a reasonable interpretation of textbook recommendations that antibiotics should be administered “promptly,”29 “immediately,”30 or “at the earliest possible time”31 to children with suspected meningitis. In such a context is 30 minutes too long, - - is one hour, six hours? The recommendation in one text that antibiotics be administered “within 30 minutes after the diagnosis of meningitis is established”32 does little to resolve the question, as the issue promptly arises - - when exactly is the diagnosis of meningitis established? If the question is what do doctors do, it would be far better to rely on actual data about physician performance. 
We have suggested here that there is general reason to believe that expert judgments about the standard of medical care will be erroneous, and that the errors will run in a predictable direction. The usual reason is optimistic bias, as people tend to believe that things can be done more easily, more rapidly, and more successfully than the evidence suggests. To establish this claim, we have drawn on existing evidence, highly suggestive on this point, and more particular evidence, presented here, of mistaken reports with respect to standard of care. 
Our principal innovation has been to suggest that in light of the evident mismatch between expert recollections and empirical reality, the legal system should rely, wherever it can, not on the former but on statistical evidence of the latter. The best reason for reliance on individual recollections has been an absence of statistical evidence; but this is a gap that is rapidly being filled, and that is likely, in the next generation, to be replaced with a great deal of reliable information. Our emphasis has been on the question of medical malpractice, but the general implication is far broader: In any case in which a disputed question calls for expert testimony about ordinary practice, it is hazardous to rely on what particular experts recall, and far more sensible to make the outcome turn on statistical evidence, at least if the goal is accuracy in adjudication. 29 See R.D. Feign et al., Textbook on Pediatric Infectious Disease (Saunders 1981). 30 See W.E. Nelson et al., Textbook of Pediatrics (13d ed. 1987). 31 A.M. Rudolph, Pediatrics (1977). 32 See G.L. Mandell et al., Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases (1979). Readers with comments should address them to: 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000) Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000) Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes, The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 2000) Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System (November 2000) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Introduction ............................................5.0.1..................... 
History, Puzzles, Problems ................................................................ Copyright © 2000 California Law Review, Inc. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. From 1997 to 1998, the author served on the Advisory Committee on the Public Service Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, which produced a report in December 1998 on which this Article draws. See ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS, CHARTING THE DIGITAL BROADCASTING FUTURE: FINAL REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS (1998). Many of the arguments in this Article were framed through the opportunity to see, through work on the Advisory Committee, two groups close up. The first was a large number of broadcasters-most of them public-spirited, most of them extremely nervous about growing competition from cable and elsewhere, most of them sharply opposed to government mandates, few of them unwilling to accept governmental help. The second was the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB)-at the time an extraordinarily defensive, fearful, uncooperative, aggressive, and self-protective organization, consisting of many honorable people, but often unwilling to compromise or even to reflect. In this way, the NAB was reminiscent of the tobacco industry in, say, the 1960s, and was enthusiastic about using the First Amendment in the same way that the National Rifle Association uses the Second Amendment, that is, as an all-purpose shield against any action adverse to their interests. The author is grateful to other members of the Advisory Committee for many helpful discussions of these problems and, in particular, to the two co-chairs of the Committee, Norman Ornstein and Leslie Moonves. The Committee's final report has influenced the treatment here, not least when there are disagreements. He is also grateful, for helpful comments, to Douglas Lichtman, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner, and to participants in a conference held in honor ofJiirgen Habermas in Frankfurt, Germany in July 1999, especially Clause Offe, Bernhard Peters, and Jtlrgen Habermas. 
Strategies ............................................................................... 520 I. Principle, Policy, Technology ............................................................ 525 
A. Practice ........................................................................................ 525 B. Communications Past, Present, and Future: Planned 
Obsolescence and Beyond ........................................................... 526 IV. Disclosure........................................................................................... 531 
A. Precursors .................................................................................... 531 B. Rationale ...................................................................................... 533 C. The Minimal Proposal ................................................................. 535 
D. Of Realism and Ineffectiveness ................................................... 536 V. Economic Incentives .......................................................................... 538 
A. Of Nature and Coase ................................................................... 538 B. Taxes, Public Bads, Hot Potatoes, and Cold Spots ..................... 539 C. Economic Incentives and the Constitution .................................. 542 D. Expanding the Viewscreen: A Glance at the Cathedral ............. 543 E. A Brief Note on Cultural Policies and 
Cultural Subsidies ........................................................................ 549 VI. Voluntary Self-Regulation: Aspirations, Trustees, and "Winner-Take-Less" Codes ............................................................... 549 A. The Problem and a Recently Emerging Strategy ........................ 551 B. A Code: Sample Provisions ........................................................ 553 C. A Code: Problems and Prospects ............................................... 555 D. Notes on the First Amendment and Antitrust Law ...................... 557 
F. Less Puzzling Puzzles ................................................................. 558 VII. A Summary ..................................................................................... 559 Conclusion ................................................................................................ 563 Television and the Public Interest 
Cass R. Sunstein 
The communications revolution has thrown into question the value of imposing public interest obligationson television broadcasters.But the distinctive nature of this unusual market-with "winner-take-all"features, with viewers as a commodity, with pervasive externalitiesfrom private choices, and with market effects on preferences as well as the other way around-justifiesa continuing rolefor government regulationin the public interest.At the same time, regulationbest takes the form, not of anachronistic command-and-control regulation, but of (1) disclosure requirements, (2) economic incentives ("pay orplay"), and (3) voluntary selfregulation through a privately administered code. Some discussion is devoted to free speech and antitrustissues, and to the different possible shapes of liability andproperty rules in this context, treatingcertainprogramming as apublic "good" akin to pollution as apublic bad. 
INTRODUCTION 
There is a large difference between the public interest and what interests the public. This is so especially in light of the character and consequences of the communications market. One of the central goals of the system of broadcasting, private as well as public, should be to promote the American aspiration to deliberative democracy.' a system in which citizens are informed about public issues and able to make judgments on the basis of reasons. Both norms and law should be enlisted in this endeavor; if one fails, the other becomes all the more important. These are the claims that I attempt to bring to bear on the so-called communications revolution. 
This revolution has been driven by extraordinary technological change.2 The rise of cable television, the Internet, satellite television, direcTV, and digital television has confounded ordinary understandings of "television.' 3 Before long, digital television may enable viewers to choose 
(1996) (discussing ideals of deliberative democracy); Joshua Cohen, Democracy and Liberty, in DELIBERATIVE DEMOCRACY 185, 185-231 (Jon Elster ed., 1998) (discussing foundations of deliberative democracy). 
REVOLUTION (1999). 
with other dramatic technological developments). among over a thousand programs.4 The possible combination of television and the Internet, a combination now in its early stages, may prove an equally dramatic development; the fact that the Internet is a partial substitute for television has already introduced a measure of competition between the two.5 
Law has responded to these developments in fits and starts, largely by attempting to engraft legal requirements designed for the old environment onto an altogether new communications market. The result is a high degree of anachronism, misfit, and drift, and in the view of many observers, a series of constitutional violations.6 Most of the modem debate involves a vigorous but increasingly tired contest between those defending the old regulatory order7 and those urging rapid movement toward "simple rules" for government control of television, above all well-defined property rights and freedom of contract! Strikingly similar debates, about the value of "simple rules," the place of regulatory safeguards, and the role of television in a democracy, can be found in many nations. 9 
My aim in this Article is to discuss an important part of the intersection between the emerging communications market and law: public interest obligations imposed on television broadcasters." Since the initial rise of broadcasting in the United States, government has treated the license as a kind of "grant" that is legitimately accompanied by duties." Congress and the FCC have required broadcasters to follow a range of requirements-a form of old-style "command-and-control" regulation, growing out of an enforcement of property rights). 
Goldberg et al., supranote 5. 
will see, however, the distinction between the two seems increasingly (though not yet entirely) artificial, and much of the discussion will bear on the appropriate regulatory stance toward television in general. 
understanding that there would be three, and only, three, private broadcasting stations. Much, though far from all, of this regulation was eliminated in the 1980s. 12 A large question is the extent to which public interest requirements continue to make sense, or even to survive constitutional scrutiny, in an entirely different communications market where broadcasters occupy a decreasingly distinctive position. 
The question was posed starkly with the enactment of the Telecommunications Act of 1996,3 one of whose central concerns involved the rise of digital television. The Act had to deal with two issues. 
First, who would have the right to broadcast digital television? Should the licenses be sold, or auctioned, or given outright to existing broadcasters? Second, what public interest obligations, if any, should attach to the ownership of a right to broadcast digital television? The Act squarely answered the first question, 4 but was inconclusive on the second. In an extremely controversial step, Congress did not sell or auction the right to broadcast digital television, but basically gave the right to existing broadcasters for free.' This has been described, and reasonably so, as a "huge giveaway" of "a $70 billion national asset."'" At the same time, Congress refused to eliminate public interest obligations, delegating to the FCC the power to decide whether such obligations should be imposed on digital television broadcasters, and if so, in what form." The FCC has not yet made that decision or even commenced formal proceedings. 
In this Article, I offer two basic claims, one involving ends, the other involving means. The first is that in view of the character and consequences of television programming, any system for the regulation of television should be evaluated in democratic as well as economic terms. The economic ideal of "consumer sovereignty" is ill-suited to the communications market. It follows that, at least in the near term, the changes introduced by the emerging communications system do not justify abandoning the idea that broadcasters should be required to promote public interest goals. Educational programming and programming that deals with civic questions can promote the aspiration to deliberative democracy; reliance on an unregulated market may not. There are also legitimate grounds for encouraging broadcasters to make programming accessible to people with disabilities, above all the hearing impaired. I emphasize in this connection some special characteristics of the broadcasting market, characteristics that make it hazardous to rely on "consumer sovereignty" as the exclusive basis for regulatory policy. Instead communications policy should be assessed, at least in part, by reference to its effects on the public sphere." 
My second claim is that in order to promote the relevant goals, government should decreasingly rely on command-and-control regulation, 9 and should consider instead three less intrusive and more flexible instruments, each of which is well-adapted to a period of rapid technological change. The instruments are: (1) mandatory public disclosure of information about public interest broadcasting, unaccompanied by content regulation; (2) economic incentives, above all subsidies and "play or pay"; and (3) voluntary self-regulation, as through a "code" of appropriate conduct, to be created and operated by the industry itself. These instruments have played an increasing role in regulatory policy in general, especially in the environmental arena?° But they have rarely been discussed in the area of communications, where they have a natural place;2' and despite its growing importance, the general topic of industry self-regulation has received little academic attention.22 
By requiring broadcasters to disclose information about their public interest activities, the government might be able to enlist public pressure and social norms so as to create a kind of competition to do more and better. This is the simplest and least intrusive of regulatory instruments. By allowing broadcasters to buy their way out of certain public interest obligations, the government should be able to ensure that those with an 
TRANSFORMATION OF THE PUBLIC SPHERE (Thomas Burger trans., 1989) (offering an extended historical discussion). 
more flexible alternatives as the instruments of choice, without denying the need for some minima as a "backstop." In the current system, for example, it may well make sense to require a degree of children's programming and also free air time for candidates. See ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS, CHARTING THE DIGITAL BROADCASTING FUTURE: FINAL REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS 45-6 mandatory programming is beyond the scope ofthe present discussion, though I do refer to mandates at several points below. 
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY 422-48 (1999); NATIONAL ACAD. OF PUB. ADMIN., THE ENVIRONMENT GOES To MARKET 9-20 (1994); ANTHONY OGUS, REGULATION 121-49,245-56 (1998). 
FED. CoMM. LJ. 711 (1999). 
law review. See Symposium, Special Issue on Self-Regulation, 19 LAW & POL'Y 363 (1997) [hereinafter Special Issue on Self-Regulation]. incentive to produce good programming are actually doing so, while also producing the lowest-cost means of promoting public interest programming. And by encouraging (not mandating) voluntary self-regulation, the government can help overcome a kind of prisoner's dilemma faced by participants in a "winner-take-all" market,I a prisoner's dilemma that contributes to a range of social problems, often stemming from a kind of "race to the bottom" with respect to programming quality. 
It should be clear that this basic approach combines a recognition of the serious limits of unrestrained communications markets in promoting social goals with a plea for rejecting traditional regulation and for enlisting more flexible, market-oriented instruments in the service of those goals. 
This approach is consistent with some incipient but quite general trends in regulatory law. 4 If the approach is sound, it is well-suited to the emerging communications market; but it is easily adapted to other areas as well, including environmental degradation, occupational safety and health, and other social problems. It is much too soon to say whether there is a "third way" between traditional command-and-control regulation and reliance on free trade and well-defined property rights.'s But if there is indeed a "third way," it is likely to be found in proposals of this kind. 
A general theme of this Article is that disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation might displace government commandand-control in a variety of areas of regulatory law. Specific themes include requiring producers simply to disclose goods and bads; relaxing antitrust law so as to permit cooperation designed to reduce some of the problems associated with "races to the bottom"; and building on emerging developments in environmental protection so as to allow far more imaginative "trades" among producers. In short, it is time to move beyond the view that market ordering and content regulation are the only two possibilities for communications law. There are many alternatives, and real progress can come only from exploring the choices among them. 
The Article comes in seven parts. Part I sets the stage, outlining the history of regulation, identifying some relevant puzzles, and exploring some diverse problems with television in its current form. Part II, the theoretical heart of the Article, evaluates and rejects the claim that in the emerging media market there is no longer room for public interest regulation of any kind. I suggest that television is no ordinary commodity, partly 
(1995). The most important distinguishing feature of "winner-take-alr' markets is that rewards are based on "relative rather than (or in addition to) absolute performance." Id.at 24. In such markets, "rewards tend to be concentrated in the hands of a few top performers." Id. 
supra note 20; Cass R. Sunstein, Informational Regulation and InformationalStanding: Akins and Beyond, 147 U. PA. L.REv. 613, 618-33 (1999). 
because of the collective benefits of good programming, partly because of the link between television and democracy, and partly because viewers are more like products offered to advertisers than consumers paying for entertainment on their own. Part I discusses the relation between principle and practice; it traces likely stages of the emerging market, with broadcast programming becoming increasingly like general-interest magazines. 
Part IV deals with disclosure, exploring the possibility that relevant private groups, invoking widespread social norms, can interact to produce improvements in the broadcasting market without compulsory programming of any kind. Part V deals with economic incentives, beginning with the idea of "play or pay," and then adapting some ideas from the law of tort to the law of broadcasting. Part VI examines whether a code of broadcasting might operate as a kind of positional arms control agreement, helping to counteract a situation in which broadcasters compete to the detriment of collective goals. Part VII is a brief summary of regulatory options. 
I 
HISTORY, PUZZLES, PROBLEMS A. 
Broadcast licenses have never been treated like ordinary property rights, open for sale on the free market.27 Since the initial enactment of the Communications Act of 1934, the government has awarded licenses to broadcasters in accordance with "convenience, public interest, [and] necessity."' The Federal Radio Commission early described the system as one in which broadcasters "must be operated as if owned by the public.... It is as if a community should own a station and turn it over to the best man in sight with this injunction: 'Manage this station in our interest .... ",29 Under this "public trustee" standard, the FCC has imposed a range of obligations on broadcasters-an idea that perhaps made special sense when a small number of companies dominated the television market. 
In its initial set of guidelines, the FCC required stations to meet the "tastes, needs, and desires of all substantial groups among the listening public... ." This required "a well-rounded program, in which entertainment, consisting of music of both classical and lighter grades, religion, education and instruction, important public events, discussions of public questions, weather, market reports, and news, and matters of interest to all members of the family, find a place."31 
Often this kind of guidance operated as a general plea, with little systematic enforcement. In 1960, however, the FCC went so far as to outline fourteen of the "major elements usually necessary to meet the public interest."3 2 These included: religious programming, programs for children, political broadcasts, news programs, sports programs, weather and market services, and development and use of local talent.33 The FCC eventually specified its general guidelines, which were merely indicia of the types and areas of appropriate service. The specifications included minimum amounts for news, public affairs, and other nonentertainment programming, including the controversial "fairness doctrine"' and also access rules for prime-time. 5 
Substantial changes occurred in the 1980s, a period of significant deregulation. The head of the FCC, Mark Fowler, declared (in a kind of soundbite, or bumper-sticker, for the market approach to the topic) that television is "'just another appliance,' a "'toaster with pictures."'3 6 The fairness doctrine was largely eliminated, and many of the more particular public interest requirements were removed?' Nonetheless, a number of such requirements remain. For example, the FCC continues to say that if a broadcaster sells airtime to one candidate, it must sell similar time to opposing candidates as well. Congress itself has codified a right of this kind?8 A long-standing statutory provision, in the obvious self-interest of law makers, requires that if a broadcaster offers to sell time, it must do so at the "lowest unit rate of the station" during the forty-five days before a primary election and during the sixty days before a general or special election. 9 
In recent years Congress has devoted special attention to children's programming and to television access for the hearing impaired. In 1990, Congress enacted the Children's Television Act of 1990,' limiting the advertising on children's programming (twelve minutes per hour during weekdays and ten and a half minutes per hour on weekends).41 Under this statute, the FCC has further required broadcasters to provide three hours of children's programming per week.42 The Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990"3 requires new television sets to have special decoder chips, allowing them to display closed-captioned television transmissions for the hearing impaired. The Telecommunications Act of 1 9 9 6 44 requires use of "v-chip" technology, designed to facilitate parental control over what enters the home; it also contains ancillary requirements intended to ensure "ratings" of programming content.45 
Turn now to the present, or at least to the more recent past. From 1997 to 1998, a presidential advisory committee met to discuss the public interest obligation of television broadcasters.46 Several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of adopting some kind of broadcasting "code," akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) between 1928 and 1979. 41 The Committee eventually moved toward endorsing the notion of a code, and the idea received considerable attention in the trade press.4 
In its annual meeting, however, the NAB signaled skepticism about the idea and came very close to saying "no" and "never." A large part of the broadcasters' objection was that any "code" would violate the antitrust laws. This was very odd because in their discussions, members of the NAB treated the possibility of an antitrust violation as extremely good news. Take this as the first puzzle; it is not often that high-level corporate officials are smiling when they discuss the possibility that their own action would be found unlawful. 
Consider a second puzzle. During the committee's deliberations, some people argued on behalf of a "play or pay" system, in which broadcasters would be relieved of public interest obligations (to "play") if they agree instead to "pay" someone else-another broadcaster-to do so. But many of the broadcasters on the committee were quite skeptical of this approach, arguing that public interest obligations were part of the (sacred?) duty of every broadcaster, and that no one should be exempted for a price. This was also very odd. It is not often that high-level corporate officials prefer rigid government mandates to more flexible approaches. What explains these puzzles? The answers-offered in closing here4 9-- reveal a great deal about the emerging market. 
To evaluate particular proposals, it is necessary to have a concrete sense of why some people think that even well-functioning television markets are inadequate. Consider the following possibilities, each of which has produced public concern in the last decade:50 
The existing fare may be insufficient because there is too little simply in terms of amount (for example, for people who lack cable), or because children do not watch the stations on which it is available, or because the quality is too low. are hearing impaired; this may be a particular problem if citizens are unable to find out about emergencies, or if they are unable to understand programming that bears on central public issues." The exclusion may have practical consequences; it may even produce a form of humiliation. 2 homogenous, in a form of "blind-leading-the-blind" programming. Since a significant percentage of Americans do not receive 
45, at 3-50 (discussing television violence as a public policy issue); NEWTON N. MINOW & CRAIG L. LAMAY, ABANDONED IN THE WASTELAND: CHILDREN, TELEVISION, AND THE FIRST AMENDMENT 1045 (1995) (arguing that the system serves the best interests of advertisers rather than children); DANNY ScHwCnmpT, THm MORE You WATCH, THm LESS You KNOW (1997) (examining the content of news). 
Goldblum trans., 1996). cable television and depend on broadcasters, the result may be insufficient variety in programming." 
Some programming may be affirmatively bad for children if, for example, it contains excessive violence, or otherwise encourages behavior that is dangerous to self and others. The result of such programming may be to produce violent or otherwise dangerous behavior in the real world." There may be too much violent programming in general, with adverse consequences for adults, not only children! 5 The adverse consequences may include an increase in violence (because of changes in social norms or "copycat" effects56), general demoralization and fear, or a misperception of reality. 
News coverage may be a form of "infotainment," dealing not with real issues, but with gossip about celebrities and unsubstantiated charges of various kinds. 7 There may be too little coverage of serious questions, especially during political campaigns. The relevant coverage may involve sensationalism and "sound bites," or attention to who is ahead ("horse-race issues") rather than who thinks what and why. The result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry. 8 Stations too rarely cover international issues or developments in other nations. The result is that people are extremely ill-informed about the global background for national events, including proposed financial assistance and possibly even war, and also about practices other than their own. This ignorance makes it difficult See discussion infra Part U.A.2. 
See HAMILTON, supranote 45, at 20-30, for evidence. 
See id (providing a detailed discussion). 
For evidence, see ELLIOT ARONSON, THE SOCIAL ANIMAL 62-64, 263-67 (6th ed. 1992). See generallySCI-ECHTER, supranote 50. 
See KIKU ADATrO, SOUND-BITE DEMOCRACY (1990), for general discussion; and JOHN DE EY, THE PUBLIC AND ITS PROBLEMS: AN ESSAY IN POLITICAL INQUIRY 179-80 (Gateway Books 1946) (1927): 
A glance at the situation shows that the physical and external means of collecting information in regard to what is happening in the world have far outrun the intellectual phase of inquiry and organization of its results. Telegraph, telephone, and now the radio, cheap and quick mails ... have attained a remarkable development. But when we ask what sort of material is recorded and how it is organized, when we ask about the intellectual form in which the material is presented, the tale to be told is very different. "News" signifies something which has just happened, and which is new just because it deviates from the old and regular... [W]e have here an explanation of the triviality and "sensational" quality of so much of what passes as news. The catastrophic, namely, crime, accidents, family rows, personal clashes and conflicts, are the most obvious forms of breaches of continuity ... they are the new par excellence .... for people to deliberate well about important questions and evaluate purely national practices. 9 television. The result may be excessive competition to accumulate funds simply in order to have access to television; this competition may have corrosive effects on the electoral process. Free air time would be a possible response, perhaps qualified by an obligation, on the part of the candidate, to speak for at least fifty percent of the time or to refrain from negative campaigning. debate among people with genuinely different perspectives about issues of policy and fact. Here too, the result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry.' may result in a highly balkanized viewing public, in which many or most people lack shared viewing experiences, or in which people view programming that largely reinforces their own convictions and prejudices I The result can be extremism and fragmentation.62 
To be sure, some of these problems cannot be corrected through regulation that is either feasible or constitutional. Moreover, these various conceptions of the relevant problem point toward diverse solutions, some of which would raise serious First Amendment problems, as discussed below.63 A particular challenge is to develop approaches that would allow a high degree of flexibility, minimize government involvement in programming content, and also do some good. 
II 
PREFERENCES AND AUDIENCES 
It has increasingly been urged that any objections to existing television are elitist or outmoded. On one view, public interest obligations have no place in modem law, particularly because the "scarcity" rationale for regulation grows weaker every day;65 it has even been urged that the FCC no longer has any appropriate role.' Once the problem of scarcity has been eliminated, individual consumers can design their own preferred communications package, at least if the government permits them to do so. Consider this utopian picture of a system of unrestricted markets in communications: 
There will be room enough for every sight and sound, every thought and expression that any human mind will ever wish to convey. It will be a place where young minds can wander in adventurous, irresponsible, ungenteel ways. It will contain not innocence but a sort of native gaiety, a buoyant, carefree feeling, filled with confidence in the future and an unquenchable sense of freedom and opportunity. 
"deregulation," that route is not in fact an option, or at least not a reasonable one. What "deregulation" really means is a shift from the status quo to a system of different but emphatically legal regulation, more specifically one of property, tort, and contract rights, in which government does not impose specific public interest obligations but instead sets up initial endtlements and then permits trades among owners and producers. This is a regulatory system as much as any other. If it seems close to the current system for newspapers and magazines, it is no less a regulatory system for that reason; a great deal of law (inevitably) governs the rights and duties of newspapers and magazines. Such law imposes rights and duties, households continue to depend on free, over-the-air broadcasting. See U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES: 1998 at 573 (118th ed. 1998) Utilization of Selected Media: 1970 to 1996) scarcity, see R.H. Coase, The FederalCommunications Commission, 2J.L. & ECON. 1 (1959). The defect of Coase's analysis is his (remarkable) lack of self-consciousness about the idea that consumer sovereignty is the appropriate ideal for broadcasting; it is as if that idea is so self-evidently correct that it need not even be defended. 
OTHER LAWS OF CYBERSPACE 188-90 (1999) (arguing that a growing body of technical research suggests the FCC is unnecessary); Yochai Benkler & Lawrence Lessig, Net Gains, THE NEW REPUBLIC, Dec. 1 

different legal regimes. As a matter of fact, the difference seems to be a historical accident, associated with the particular form of regulation chosen for broadcasting. See id. at 4-9. As a matter of principle, the difference has been justified as a way of ensuring two competing regulatory regimes, each welldesigned to combat the vices associated with the other. See generally BOLLINGER, supranote 7. In my view, this justification is serious but not convincing, and some measures designed to promote a wellfunctioning democratic culture might well be justified as applied to newspapers too. See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, DEMOCRACY AND THE PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH 107-08 (1993). For example, it would not be unconstitutional, in my view, for government to require large metropolitan newspapers to have a "letters to the editor" page, or to require such newspapers to disclose their public service activities, or to require such newspapers to publish, on a nondiscriminatory basis, paid political advertising. For the permissions and prohibitions; among other things, it ensures, via the law of property, that some people, and not others, will have access to the public sphere. The issue is thus not whether to "deregulate," but whether one or another regulatory system is better than imaginable alternatives. 
Notice that this is a purely conceptual claim; it is not a normative argument of any kind. Any market system necessarily depends on regulatory controls, in the form of an assignment (by law) of property rights and (legal) rules of contract. 9 A system of television is hard to imagine without ownership rights; in the absence of ownership rights, who could use whose spectrum for what purpose? It is no answer to point to voluntary arrangements. Such arrangements are likely to break down without rules of law allowing some people to exclude others. If the Columbia Broadcasting System does not have a legal right to own spectrum and to enter into binding agreements with others, it will not be able to provide television as we know it. This point should be a familiar one for land and other "tangible" property; it is no less true for the services provided by television. Indeed, it holds, though to a lesser extent, for those who have web sites and provide services over the Internet; without legal protection against trespasses, and without a right to enter into legally enforceable agreements, web sites would be a modern version of the state of nature-a battleground rather than a framework for productive relationships. 0 
I therefore turn to the general question whether there remains any reason for government to regulate television in the "public interest." My concern here is both theoretical and empirical. The question is whether, in the current market, broadcasters are likely to provide viewers what they would like to see, and if so, whether that point is decisive on the question whether public interest obligations should be imposed.71 The brief answer is that the idea that broadcasters show "what viewers want" is a quite inadequate response to the argument for public interest obligations.72 The discussion most part, however, such requirements do not seem necessary. But I cannot discuss these issues in detail here. 
ELLICKSON, ORDER WIrHotrr LAw 4-6 (1991). But even in such circumstances, legal rules of property and contract generally loom in the background. 
DemocraticTheory, 88 CALm. L. Rlv. 395 (2000). Of course it is possible to imagine the Internet as a form of genuine anarchy, unregulated by legal rules, with norms and self-help (in the form of code) doing the work ordinarily done by the law of contract and property. Interestingly, the Internet is not subject to the usual legal realist claim that private ordering is dependent on law and that law is inevitable. See CAss R. Su1.sTEIN, THE PARTIAL CONSTITUTION 51-54 (1993). But it is very hard to imagine this state of affairs for television, and those most critical of the existing legal structure seek only to replace one legal regime with another. See HUBER, supranote 27, at 5-30. 
Audience What It Wants, 58 OMO ST. L. 311 (1997). 
here deals with the technological present and the short-term future; later I introduce complications from emerging technological developments. 
According to the economic model, a well-functioning television market would promote the ideal of consumer sovereignty. On this view, the point of markets is to satisfy consumer preferences. In this system, people would satisfy their "preferences," as these are measured via the criterion of private willingness to pay. People would be able to choose from a range of options, and suppliers would cater to their tastes. To a considerable extent, of course, the existing system already approaches this ideal, and this is increasingly the case. But there are three serious problems, each suggesting that the economic ideal of consumer sovereignty is not in fact served by free markets in programming. These are market failures if it is assumed that the purpose of a well-functioning television market is to ensure that programming is well-matched to viewer preferences. In the next Part, I question the market ideal itself. 
The first point is the simplest. Currently television is not an ordinary product, for broadcasters do not sell programming to viewers in return for cash. A system of "pay-per-view" would indeed fit the usual commodity model; but "pay-per-view" continues to be a relatively rare practice. The difference between the existing broadcasting market and "pay-per-view" is quite important. The key problem here is that viewers do not pay a price, market or otherwise, for television. As C. Edwin Baker has shown, it is more accurate to say that viewers are a commodity, or a product, that broadcasters deliver to the people who actually pay them: advertisers.73 
This phenomenon introduces some serious distortions, at least if we understand an ideal broadcasting market as one in which viewers receive what they want. From the standpoint of consumer sovereignty, the role of advertisers creates market failures. Of course broadcasters seek, other things being equal, to deliver more rather than fewer viewers because advertisers seek, other things being equal, more rather than fewer viewers. But advertisers have issues and agendas of their own, and the interests of advertisers can push broadcasters in, or away from, directions that viewers, or substantial numbers of them, would like. 
This is a substantial difference from the ordinary marketplace. Advertisers like certain demographic groups and dislike others, even when the numbers are equal; they pay extra amounts in order to attract groups that are likely to purchase the relevant products, and this affects programming content.74 Advertisers do not want programming that draws product safety into question, particularly if it concerns their own products and sometimes even more generally.75 In addition, advertisers want programming that will put viewers in a receptive purchasing mood, and hence not be too "depressing."76 Advertisers also tend to dislike programming that is highly controversial or that is too serious, and hence avoid sponsoring shows that take stands on public issues.' In these ways, the fact that broadcasters are delivering viewers to advertisers-this is largely their charge, under existing arrangements--can produce offerings that diverge considerably from what would emerge if viewers were paying directly for programming. To this extent the notion of consumer sovereignty is seriously compromised whenever programming decisions are a product of advertiser wishes. 
A second problem is that it is not clear whether broadcasters are now engaged, in anything like a systematic or scientific way, in catering to public tastes. At first glance it would seem obvious that broadcasters must be engaged in this endeavor (subject to the qualification just stated, involving the role of advertisers); if broadcasters are maximizing anything, they must be maximizing viewers (subject to the same qualification). In general, attracting viewers is their job7 But there is reason to question this judgment, at least in its simplest form. Sometimes rational people make decisions not on the basis of a full inspection of the alternatives, but on the basis of an understanding of what other people are doing.79 Because people obtain information from other people's actions, individual actions carry with them one or more "informational externalities," which potentially affect the decisions of others. Thus, rational and boundedly rational people, in business as elsewhere, rely on the signals provided by the words and deeds of others.'0 This reliance can produce cascade effects, as B follows A, and C follows B and A, and D, as a rational agent, follows the collected wisdom embodied in the actions of A, B, and C. Informational cascades often produce unfortunate outcomes, in fact outcomes far worse than those that would result if individuals accumulated information on their own. Sometimes, moreover, people use the "availability" heuristic, deeming an event more probable if an instance of its occurrence can be readily brought 
andInformationalCascades,12 J. ECON. PERSP.151, 16 
ExternalitiesandSearch, 108 ECON. J.60 (1998). to mind.8 Using the availability heuristic, broadcasters might reason that if one show or another has attracted substantial viewers in the past, they should copy it. The result would be "fads" and "fashions" in program82 ruing. 
In theory, then, broadcasters might be building on the programming judgments of other broadcasters, often, perhaps, reacting to the "availability" of salient recent instances in which a particular program was especially popular (dealing, let us suppose, with the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal or the O.J. Simpson trial) or especially unpopular (dealing, let us suppose, with South Africa). If this is true, private decisions by broadcasters may produce both mistakes and homogeneity-mistakes, in the form of programming that is not what viewers want, and homogeneity, in the form of the "blind leading the blind."83 
Recent evidence suggests that this theoretical account has considerable truth. A careful study shows that there is a good deal of simple imitation, as networks provide a certain kind of programming simply by imitating whatever other networks are doing Recently popular shows tend to create cascade effects. This imitative behavior is not in the interest of viewers. On the contrary, it creates a kind of homogeneity and uniformity in the broadcasting market, and thus makes for problems in terms of providing what viewers "want."' This is not a conventional market failure, but it suggests that existing decisions are unlikely to promote consumer sovereignty. The problem is rapidly diminishing with an increase in available programming options, but to the extent that substantial numbers of people continue to depend on a small number of broadcasters, the existence of informational cascades suggests that the market does not entirely promote consumer sovereignty. 
Even if broadcasters did provide each viewer with what he or she wanted, a significant problem would remain, and from the economic point of view, this is probably the most serious of all. Information is a public good, and once one person knows something (about, for example, product hazards, asthma, official misconduct, poverty, welfare reform, or abuse of power), the benefits of that knowledge will probably accrue to others. 6 Note in this regard Amartya Sen's remarkable observation that no famine has ever occurred in a democratic country with a free press. 87 This observation is complemented by a series of less dramatic ones, showing the substantial benefits for individual citizens of a media that is willing and able to devote attention to public concerns, including the plight of the disadvantaged.88 Individual choices by individual viewers are highly likely to produce too little public interest programming in light of the fact that the benefits of viewing such programming are not fully "internalized" by individual viewers. Thus, individually rational decisions may inflict costs on others at the same time that they fail to confer benefits on others. In this respect, the problem "is not that people choose unwisely as individuals, but that the collective consequences of their choices often turn out to be very different from what they desire or anticipate." 9 
Most generally, there are multiple external effects in the broadcasting area; some of these are positive, but unlikely to be generated sufficiently by individual choices, while others are negative, and likely to be excessively produced by individual choices. Consider a decision to watch violent programming. In short, the effects of broadcasting depend on social interactions. Many of the resulting problems are connected with democratic ideals. A culture in which each person sees a high degree of serious programming may well lead to better political judgments; greater knowledge on the part of one person often leads to more knowledge on the part of others with whom she interacts.9' Perhaps most important, a degree of serious attention to public issues can lead to improved governance through deterring abuses and encouraging governmental response to glaring problems. In these various ways, public interest programming can produce social benefits that will not be adequately captured by the individual choices of individual citizens; the same is true for programming that produces social costs, including apathy, fear, and increased criminal activity.' Because of the collective action problem, an unregulated market will underproduce public goods and overproduce public bads. 

government is prohibited from favoring programming of a particular content, "play or pay" should be unacceptable. The problem with this view is that it seems to convert the First Amendment into a species of Herbert Spencer's Social Statics,"8' in a way that loosens the connection between the free speech principle and underlying democratic goals. If the First Amendment is associated with democratic self-government and with deliberative democracy, "play or pay," of the sort suggested here, would be perfectly consistent with the free speech guarantee. 9 
Thus far I have been exploring economic incentives by contrasting taxes and tradeable rights with command-and-control regulation. But if we wanted a more complete picture, we would widen the viewscreen a bit. In a classic article, Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed proposed four "rules" that courts might adopt for nuisance suits."9 Two of the rules come from a situation in which either the plaintiff or the defendant is given the relevant entitlement, and it is protected via a "property rule," in which case the entitlement could be reallocated only through a trade.191 The other two rules come from a situation in which either is given an entitlement protected by a "liability rule," in which case the entitlement could be reallocated through a legally forced exchange, at a price determined through the legal system (assumed to be the market price)."9 Calabresi and Melamed also discuss "inalienability rules," in which no exchanges are permitted, either voluntarily or through the legal system. 193 
There is a great deal of room for exploring, through this lens, the system of public interest regulation. If public interest programming is desirable, and if certain programming is undesirable, it makes sense to think of ways of requiring broadcasters to pay "damages" or instead requiring the taxpaying public to pay for better programming. Valuation, of course, is a serious problem. Suppose that certain programming (educational or civic, for example) is a public good, producing positive externalities, and that certain programming (violent material, for example) is a public bad, producing negative externalities. How can the government assign monetary values to the desirable and undesirable effects? Is it constitutional for the government to do so? These questions are hard enough in the area of torts; 
supranote 68, at 17-51. 
Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral,85 HARv. L. RFv. 1089 (1972). 
they are far harder in the context of broadcasting. I restrict myself here to a comparison of some leading alternatives. 
est programming;no bargainingis allowed. 
Comment: This is the traditional model, with the debate being about its scope; the number of obligations was sharply reduced in the 1980s, but without rethinking the basic model. Under this system, the public's interest in the relevant programming"9 is protected by an inalienable property rule. The entitlement is granted to the government, and it is entitled to mandate broadcaster performance. Broadcasters have a kind of "split" property right; they own the right to broadcast as they choose (in general), but the public has a kind of lien on the property, giving it ownership rights over certain areas. Those who like the traditional approach appear to think that it has good social consequences, by, for example, ensuring that public interest programming is not relegated to unpopular times and channels, and also that it has desirable "expressive" effects, by, for example, affirming the status of broadcasters as public trustees. As we have seen, it also has several problems; its rigidity is likely to lead to inefficiency, and it may well produce unintended adverse consequences, as in the case of the fairness doctrine. 
interestprogrammingto pay a kind of "damage award" to be determined by the government and then used to fiund public interestprogrammingby others,such as PBS. 
Comment: Under this approach, the public continues to have the relevant entitlement, which is protected by an unusual liability rule. The broadcasters' failure to provide educational programming for children or free air time for candidates would count as a kind of social harm for which broadcasters would have to pay. (The same might be said of the provision of violent or sexually explicit programming, though here the First Amendment problems would be quite serious.) One problem with this approach is the need to calculate the level of the "damage award." There are no clear market measures for this amount, which will therefore have a level of arbitrariness. 
level of public interestprogramming,butpermits broadcastersto transfer their obligations (accompanied by money) to others, at a marketdeterminedrate. 

Comment: This is akin to Rule 2a, in the sense that the public has the relevant entitlement, which is protected by a kind of liability rule, but here the market, rather than the legal system, determines the value of not playing the public interest programming. One station might sell to another its obligation to provide, say, one hour of educational programming; the selling station would pay the market-determined amount to ensure that the buying station will find it worthwhile to take on the new duty. This kind of market determination could be a substantial advantage in light of limited information on the government's part, as the government is in an extremely poor position to calculate any such "damage award." 
As compared with Rule 1, a potential problem with this approach is that some people may avoid the stations that "play" and may not see the relevant programming at all. On the other hand, the empirical question remains whether under Rule 1 most members of the viewing audience will see and benefit from the mandated programming. 
interest broadcastingon broadcastnetworks each year (for example, 6 hours offree air time for candidates,150 hours of educationalprogramming for children); assigns initialobligations to each broadcaster;and then permits broadcastersto trade the obligationsat market-determined prices. 
Comment: This is very close to Rule 2b; the only difference is that it is a precise analogy to certain initiatives in environmental law, in which the government establishes a maximum level of pollution in the relevant area, provides pollution permits, and then allows trades among polluters. 15 A disadvantage of this approach, as compared to Rule 2a, is that it may be harder to calculate the total level of appropriate programming than to decide on the appropriate tax for those who do not "play." On the other hand, the opposite may be true.'96 An additional difficulty, as discussed above, is that broadcasting hours are not fungible. An hour of children's programming is much less valuable at 3:00 A.M. on Monday than at 9:00 A.M. on Saturday. 
Comment: Under this approach, the broadcasters have the relevant entitlement, which is protected by a liability rule. The broadcaster owns the entitlement, but the government is permitted to obtain a forced exchange, just as it is in the general law of eminent domain. In fact it is possible to see some kind of payment as the constitutionally compelled solution, at least if the right to provide such programming as broadcasters choose is taken to be, by constitutional decree, an entitlement in broadcasters. For example, the government might be able to compel coverage of important issues, or attention to the needs of children, or programming involving emergencies, but the public has to pay. 
Interestingly, the government appears not to have tried this approach, at least not as a general rule. An advantage of this approach is that it should not be difficult to calculate the value of the exchange; the market will help answer that question. This is an important advantage over Rule 2a. On the other hand, Rule 3a has probably been resisted, as compared with Rules 1, 2a, and 2b, with the thought that because broadcasters are beneficiaries of public largesse, they should not be paid to promote public interest goals. This is of course a distributional concern, and the underlying judgmentthat "broadcasters," rather than "taxpayers," should pay-is not clearly correct in light of the complexity of the incidence of the burden imposed under Rules 1, 2a, or 2b. The burden under the latter rules does not simply fall on "broadcasters," but more likely on advertisers and ultimately on consumers-perhaps to the benefit of those who advertise in newspapers and on cable. Rule 3a might be preferable if it is amended as suggested in Rule 5a, which would require broadcasters to buy spectrum rights. 
An important difference between Rule 3a and Rules 2a, 2b, and 2c is that the latter rules give the entitlement to the public, in a way that may have important psychological effects on any trades. The initial allocation of the entitlement creates an endowment effect and tends to "stick,"'" in part because of its legitimating function. Those who favor public interest obligations might be skeptical of Rule 3a for this reason alone. 
An additional problem with this kind of system is that it may provide broadcasters with an incentive to produce less public interest broadcasting on their own than they otherwise would, or at least to understate the amount that they would voluntarily provide. In an unrestricted market, political and shareholder pressures, conscience, and advertiser and viewer demand will result in a nontrivial amount of public interest programming. 9 ' But if the government proposes to pay broadcasters for whatever public interest programming they provide, voluntary service may be substantially reduced. This is a pervasive problem with paying people to do good or not to do bad; the payment may induce less of the good or more of ECONOMIC LIFE 63-66 (1992). 
SERVICE HOME 2- 
the bad. The question for Rule 3 is whether it is possible to generate a "baseline production level" from which any subsidy could be calculated. 
Comment: This is a variation on 3a in the sense that it transforms the broadcasters' entitlement into one protected by a property rule. It is akin to a system of free markets in broadcasting, but with two qualifications: Broadcasters are not required to pay for their entitlement in the first instance, and government stands ready to compete with others who seek to obtain access to viewers. One advantage of Rule 3b over 3a is that it operates entirely on the basis of market-determined prices; no one has to calculate a special government rate. But if one believes that existing fare is not problematic, the government's purchases will be wasteful. And those committed to public interest programming may object that the government will not purchase enough (unless this is specified in some way in advance); they may also object that so long as licenses are being given away free, other rules, not giving a "windfall" to broadcasters, are better. 
choose, includingnone atall. 
Comment: Under this approach, the broadcasters' interest is protected by a property rule. Broadcasters own the relevant entitlement. Just as occurs in an ordinary market, people can pay broadcasters to provide public interest programming, at market-determined prices. The problem with this approach is that the market price might be too high, for all of the reasons discussed in Part I.B of this Article. This approach is similar to Rule 3b, except that the government does not stand ready to ensure a certain level of public interest programming. 
once they do that, they can provide such public interest broadcastingas they choose, includingnone at all. 
Comment: This is a genuine market solution. It does not involve a governmental "giveaway" of a scarce resource, and after the valuable commodity has been purchased, free trades are allowed. It seems to have all the advantages of Rule 4, with the further advantage that the valuable property right is purchased rather than simply conferred. The problems with this approach should be easy to identify from Part I.B of this Article. In short, the result may be insufficient public interest programming, partly because of the endowment effect, partly because of collective action problems, partly because of the limitations of the market model in the communications industry, and partly because of public aspirations diverging from private consumption choices. 
once they do that, they may be asked or (if for some reason necessary) compelled to provide public interest broadcastingat market-determined prices. 
Comment: This is quite similar to Rule 5a. The difference is that the government stands ready to pay for public interest programming on broadcast stations, at market prices; and if broadcasters for some reason refuse, the government can force an exchange. Under Rule 5b, part of the entitlement is owned, but protected only by a liability rule. This approach is in one sense a cousin of Rule 2b. The major difference is that here the taxpayers are paying for public interest programming (at the same time that they receive money from the sale of the spectrum), rather than "broadcasters." The most important difference is therefore distributional. As noted above, that difference is more complex than it seems in light of the fact that when a burden is imposed on "broadcasters," their advertisers are likely to be paying much of the bill, and the result will be complex effects on consumers, on other communications outlets, and on advertising choices. There is no simple redistribution, in Rule 2b, from "broadcasters" to the "public." 
Comment: This should also decrease the amount paid for the entitlement, as compared with Rule 5a. This is a "play or pay" version of Rules 5a and 5b. The problem here lies in determining the level of any such "damage award." This approach is in one sense a cousin of Rule 2a, as a "play or pay" system. 
A full understanding of these possibilities would greatly facilitate both conceptual and empirical inquiry. Undoubtedly a choice among the various options should depend partly on the particular public interest obligation involved; for example, a requirement of emergency warnings might take the form of Rule 1, whereas a requirement of free air time for candidates might be some combination of Rules 1, 2b, and 5b. The analysis thus far suggests that Rules 2b and 5b have special advantages over the alternatives. Rule 2b, the basic "play or pay" system, seems well-suited to the current period, as a kind of interim improvement over the regulatory status quo. In some areas, Rule 5b may well be better in the longer term, as broadcasters come to resemble general-interest magazines. Movement in the direction of selling the spectrum, rather than giving it away to preselected owners, would also be highly desirable. 
The immediately preceding discussion raises obvious questions about when and whether it is appropriate for the government to devote collective resources to the promotion of a better cult-are, and in particular, to promotion of a better democratic order. A "cultural policy" might, for example, involve the use of taxpayer funds to promote opera or high art, perhaps by subsidizing musicians and artists, perhaps by making it easier for poor people and children to afford to go, perhaps by creating a situation in which people can attend at vastly reduced rates or even for free. In Washington, D.C., for example, people can attend public museums, including those devoted to historical and democratic issues, for free, a practice that creates a distinctive atmosphere for people who visit the nation's capitol. Such visits would have a different tone if, for example, it were necessary to pay three dollars to attend the National Archives, which house the original Declaration of Independence, Constitution, and Bill of Rights. 
The general topic of public funding of cultural endeavors is highly controversial and has received considerable attention.1" The discussion thus far suggests, at a minimum, that such policies should be less controversial when individual consumption choices involve a collective action problem, or when in their capacity as citizens, most people urge their government to promote some activity in order to promote genuinely public aspirations. The argument is most secure when those aspirations involve democracy itself. There is reason for the government to support programming that promotes public education about civic affairs, whether or not that programming is provided by markets themselves; and at a minimum, government subsidies of this kind are firmly supported on theoretical grounds.2 ® 
VI VOLUNTARY SELF-REGULATION: ASPIRATIONS, TRUSTEES, AND 'WINNER-TAKE-LEss" CODES 
In this Part, I discuss the possibility of promoting public interest goals through voluntary self-regulation, as through a "code" of conduct to be issued and enforced by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), or 221,221-35 (1985). 
perhaps by a wider range of those who produce television for the American public. The idea of voluntary self-regulation--of television and content on the Internet-has received growing attention in many nations."0 ' For many decades, in fact, the NAB did indeed impose a code, partly to promote its economic interest (by raising the price of advertising), partly to fend off regulation (by showing that the industry was engaged in self-regulation), and partly to carry out the moral commitments of broadcasters themselves.' And voluntary self-regulation has played a role in numerous areas of media policy, including, for example, cigarette advertising, children's advertising, family viewing, advertising of hard liquor, and fairness in news reporting.0' A code has a great deal of potential. Above all, it could address a far greater number of problems than could an economic incentive (for First Amendment reasons), and it appears to have far more potential for producing good, and reducing bad, than a disclosure requirement. 
For example, a code could address all public interest obligations mentioned thus far, but also attempt to protect against sexually violent material, against subliminal advertising, against sensationalistic treatment of politics, and against a wide range of other problems with television. The question is whether it is possible, in the current era, for broadcasters to overcome some of the unfortunate effects of the marketplace with voluntary measures. An underlying question, likely to be faced in many areas of regulatory policy both domestically and internationally, is whether a code would work as a kind of unfortunate cartelization or instead as protection against an undesirable "race to the bottom." 
A code might do a great deal of good, partly because of the likely existence of external monitors, partly because of a code's capacity to help develop a kind of internal morality likely to affect many of its signatories. A general lesson is that the antitrust laws ought not to be invoked too readily to prevent producers from undertaking cooperative action in circumstances in which competition is producing palpable social harms. In such contexts, a code can provide some of the advantages of government regulation, but do so in a more flexible and better-informed fashion. It is hazardous to invoke the antitrust laws to prevent an industry from providing the kinds of benefits that might be provided, more crudely and expensively, by direct regulation.20 
BRAITHWAITE, RESPONSIVE REGULATION: TRANSCENDING THE DEREGULATION DEBATE 103-16 (1992). 

Notwithstanding the qualifications described above, competitive pressures often can and do provide programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable and satellite television, and an increasingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be especially important in producing "niche" programming for people who have a particular interest in serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; recall the possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations. But competitive pressures have a downside. They can lead to sensationalistic, prurient, or violent programming, and to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or to the kind of programming that is indispensable to a well-functioning democracy. °s This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can lead to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, [i]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly ill-informed and ill-tempered electorate.2" 
It would be possible to respond to the harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Probably the simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of "code" of good programming; this approach is specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In various nations, including the United States, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.2" Though it has yet to receive much academic commentary,2 s voluntary self-regulation via industry agreements is emerging as a regulatory strategy of choice, especially in the environmental arena?° The EPA, for example, has encouraged companies that produce pesticides to agree on pesticide reduction strategies, and here 
(discussion paper published by the Joan Shorenstein Center at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government). Note also that many international bodies attempt to certify quality in a kind of cooperative action designed to reduce adverse effects of market pressures. See infra note 218. 
Perspective,19 LAw & POL'Y 363 (1997). See also AYRES & BRAITHWATE, supra note 201, at 10132; Campbell, supranote 21, at 715-45. 
the fact of broad agreement is crucial."' California has attempted to deal with the problem of workplace accidents via a "cooperative compliance program" involving self-enforced safety plans on large construction projects. The result has been a significant drop in accident rates.2"' Selfregulating agreements are now in place in Canada's system for forest management; in the Responsible Care program of the chemical industry, now operating in more than forty countries; and in national regulation of nuclear power plants 12 
What accounts for the increasing popularity of industry selfregulation, as part of the general project of "reinventing government"?1 3 From the industry's standpoint, self-regulation allows far more flexibility than government mandates. From the standpoint of government, a special advantage of codes is that they avoid the kind of informational overload that comes from government prescriptions.214 It is partly for this reason that voluntary agreements among companies have had good effects in the area of occupational safety and health?15 In a point of special relevance to television, codes also have been found to have the power to influence community attitudes in a way that tends to contribute to the development of a custodial ethic.216 Thus, codes have helped to develop an institutional morality that brings the behavior of industry members within a normative framework2. 17 
Such cooperative action raises concerns about antitrust violations and self-interested profit-seeking under a public-spirited guise. This is of course a risk, but the antitrust law can go wrong when it prevents cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures. Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation to overcome those adverse effects; 28 the question is whether that experience has communications analogues. 
JOSEPH V. REES, REFORMING THE WORKPLACE: A STUDY OF SELF-REGULATION IN OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY 80-82 (1988). 

1997 
Some of the world's biggest companies are putting their weight behind a new, verifiable code of conduct intended to answer mounting consumer criticism of the exploitative conditions under which the goods they sell are produced in poor countries.... The code, called SA8000 (Social Accountability 8000), is the brainchild of the Council on Economic Priorities, an American public interest group, which tries to improve corporate responsibility. It has been drawn up by companies, non-governmental organisations, trade unions, and other interested groups, and is due to start operating next year. The code covers the basic issues of child 
My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point. Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better;219 competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well. 
The question is whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. There have been many precursors for voluntary self-regulation via codes." A new code might update the old NAB code, and help overcome current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing "standards." A code might even promote some of the goals associated with deliberative democracy. 
What provisions might a new code include? The appropriate level of specificity is an important concern; especially clear provisions ("three hours of educational programming per week") risk excessive rigidity, whereas vague provisions ("reasonable efforts to provide educational programming for children") risk meaninglessness. Discussions of codemaking in general have stressed the need for "the public announcement of the principles and practices that the industry presumptively accepts as a guide to appropriate conduct and also as a basis for evaluating and criticizing performance."' This point argues in favor of a degree of specificity. 
Consider the following possible code provisions, simply for the sake of illustration: candidates during the two-month period preceding the election. 
In return for free air time, candidates shall discuss substantive labour, forced labour, health and safety, trade union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay.... As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modelled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organisation in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality. But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard. 
by the Advisory Committee's FINAL REPORT, supra note 19. I believe that the provisions described there are too vague and tepid to be useful (I can attest that this was a quid pro quo for Committee agreement); for reasons discussed in the text, vague and tepid provisions create a high probability of futility and ineffectiveness. issues in a substantive way and must provide something other than short "sound bites." programming for children each day. Broadcasters shall attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to, or inappropriate for, children. Broadcasters shall avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. not emphasize the sensational and the prurient. It should concern itself with claims and disagreements on matters of substance. Consistent with the exercise of legitimate station discretion, stations should not give excessive or undue attention to sensational accusations, or to reports of "who is ahead in the polls," at the expense of other issues. factual report, especially in connection with stories of crime or sex, should be avoided. News should be broadcast in such a manner as to avoid panic and unnecessary alarm. News programming should attempt to avoid prurience, sensationalism, and gossip. Stations should make an effort to devote enough time to public issues to permit genuine understanding of problems and disagreements. 
Presentation of violence should avoid the excessive, the gratuitous, the humiliating, and the instructional. The use of violence for its own sake and the detailed dwelling upon brutality or physical agony, by sight or sound, should be avoided. Programs involving violence should venture to present the consequences to its victims and perpetrators. Particular care should be exercised where children may see, or are involved in, the depiction of violent behavior. Programs should not present rape, sexual assault, or sexual violence in an attractive or exploitative light. the needs of citizens with disabilities. To this end, broadcasters shall ensure that programming is accessible, through the provision of closed captioning and other means, to the extent that doing so does not impose an undue burden on the broadcaster. Particular efforts should be made to provide full access to news and public affairs programming. Hearing impaired citizens are 
sometimes at risk of a form of disenfranchisement, or even physical danger, because steps are not taken to ensure that television broadcasting is available to them. Stations should take special steps to ensure that information about disasters and emergencies is fully accessible to those who are hearing impaired, ideally in "real time." Broadcasters shall cover international as well as domestic questions and give appropriate coverage to important events in other nations. They should recognize that purely national questions are often hard to evaluate without an understanding of the practices of others, and also that many questions, including those of war and peace, cannot be well-understood without the kind of background that comes from suitable attention to developments and events abroad. 
Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement. Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all, indeed it might be a form of public deception.' The enforcement question is a central part of the general inquiry into the preconditions for effective self-regulation. 4 
NAB to undertake enforcement on its own, just as it did under the old code. It might, for example, give a seal of approval to those who are shown to comply with its provisions and deny a seal of approval to those who have been shown not to have complied. The NAB might also give special public recognition to those stations that have compiled an excellent public service record in the past year. Such recognition might be awarded for, among other things, meeting the needs of children in a sustained and creative way; offering substantive and extended coverage of elections, including interviews, free air time, and debates; offering substantive and extended coverage of public issues; and providing opportunities for discussion of problems facing the local community. At the time of license renewal, a notation might be given to the FCC that there has been compliance or continuing or egregious noncompliance with the code. If the NAB is unwilling to enforce a code of this kind,225 perhaps a private group AND LAW 91 (C. Cody & C. Sampford eds., 1993) (discussing need for enforcement mechanisms); Campbell, supranote 21, at 756-69 (offering a skeptical view of the likelihood of success from any code). For a helpful overview of the preconditions for success, see Douglas C. Michael, Federal Agency Use ofAudited Self-Regulationasa RegulatoryTechnique, 47 ADanN. L. REv. 171 (1995). 22 publicly and officially, but did suggest "serious concern" about any government effort to interfere with could take the initiative, both promulgating the code and publicizing it, and in that (modest) sense sanctioning violations. 6 A special problem here is that in light of increasing competition from nonbroadcast programming sources, a code would not be in the economic interest of broadcasters even if generally adopted, and this is an unpromising fact for a code's effectiveness? 7 Perhaps supplemental enforcement will come from rivals of those who defect from the agreement and violate the code; this is a reasonable prediction in theory, and something similar has been found in analogous areas." 
Any enforcement by the NAB or even a private monitoring group would be most likely to succeed if accompanied by external pressures of one sort or another. As in the case of disclosure requirements, the most promising possibilities include public interest groups able to mobilize relevant social norms and to focus media attention on derelict actors. 229 Perhaps such activity would be accompanied by market pressures of various sorts, as consumer action has had significant effects on code enforcement in related areas 3 0 A degree of FCC interest in the existence of code violations would also help. 
These points raise a related question: the appropriate scope of any such code. Undoubtedly such a code was less painful and easier to operate when three broadcasters exhausted the universe of television. Broadcasters now find themselves in competition with many other entertainment sources, including cable and the Internet. In these circumstances, broadcasters are not likely to constrain themselves if their competitors are not similarly constrained; the competition for an audience for news is much affected by the existence of "tabloid television," and a rule limited to broadcasters would raise an obvious question about fairness. A broadcaster who ties himself to the mast may find himself with a significantly reduced audience. This point suggests that in the development of a code, broadcasters should perhaps be joined by the National Association of Cable Television. 
By itself, however, a code limited to broadcasters should do considerable good, even if some broadcasters are reluctant to subscribe to it. When the market reaches the stage in which broadcasters are merely some of a editorial freedom. See Paige Albiniak, Preparingfor Battle,BROADCASTING & CABLE, July 6, 1998, at 22; FoxStill Undecidedon LeavingNAB, ExpressesConcerns,CoMM. DAiLY, Jan. 14, 1999, at 6. 
members of the NAB. For NAB stations that must compete with nonmember stations, a code creates an obvious competitive risk, and there is a continuing question whether it is possible to design strategies, public or private, to combat this risk. 
self-interest and self-regulation). large number of providers, with no distinctive status, it might make sense to think of a more general code (with suitable adjustments for particular kinds of programmers).3 1 It is worth underlining the point that, as in the context of disclosure, the likelihood of success will increase with the existence of third-party monitors, both public and private, and also with a threat of more intrusive action should it prove necessary.3 2 
A code for television broadcasters might be thought to raise issues of both constitutional and antitrust law. The constitutional issues are relatively straightforward; the antitrust issues are a bit more complex. I offer a brief discussion here. 
There is essentially no risk that a code of the sort suggested here would create serious First Amendment problems. By itself, a code is a private set of guidelines, and private guidelines by themselves raise no First Amendment issue- 3 If a private group decides to impose restrictions on the speech of its members, and government is not involved, the First Amendment is irrelevant.' Of course things would be different if government mandated any such code. 
Nor would provisions like those described above be likely to violate the antitrust laws. The Department of Justice has so concluded, as have district courts in two important cases in which the private antitrust actions at issue involved parts of previous codes. The district court in American 
code standards forbidding cigarette advertising violated antitrust laws. That court refused to issue an injunction against such standards. In 
Broadcasters, 6 the district court upheld code standards regarding advertising aimed at children. The courts in both of these cases found the code standards reasonable and in the public interest. As I have noted, the most free air time for political candidates. 

(1987) (holding that the Constitution is not applicable to Olympic Committee); Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982) (holding that the Constitution is inapplicable to private actors); Flagg Bros. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149 (1978) (noting that a private contract raises no First Amendment issue). If a code is a product of government threat, and is effectively required by government, the First Amendment comes into play. There can be no question that a governmentally mandated code, not voluntary but taking the form outlined here, would raise legitimate constitutional problems. This does not necessarily mean that the First Amendment would be violated, but it does mean that the code would have to be tested for compliance with First Amendment principles, including constitutional limits on content regulation. 
recent code's disintegration came at the hand of a 1979 antitrust action, in which the Department of Justice alleged that certain Code provisions violated the Sherman Act. But the Justice Department's complaint was quite narrow, and the court's decision 7 would not invalidate a code of the sort suggested here." The television market's unique characteristics would allow a code of the sort porposed here to survive a "rule of reason" inquiry, which requires balancing of the relevant factors. It would be most reasonable to hold that any restrictions contained in the code would promote competition as well as various public interests goals, such as education of children, access for the handicapped, and other civic functions.239 E. 
We are now in a position to disentangle the two puzzles discussed in Part I.B above. Why were broadcasters pleased that the proposed NAB code would violate antitrust laws? Why did they prefer rigid government mandates to a flexible, "play or pay" approach? The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though generally "winners," they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of competition. They were vulnerable to "winner-take-all" effects insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain competitive practices. In this way, a code might even help them. But the NAB would not like a meaningful code at all. The broadcasting industry as a whole would be hurt by such a code, especially because cable television would not be bound by it. Why should broadcasters, in an intensely competitive market, give a significant edge to cable? Especially if the result would be that cable could take a lot more, of the viewing audience than it now does? It is not surprising if broadcasters who supply a large degree of public interest programming believe that they would be net winners with a codeand if the broadcasting industry as a whole believes that it would be a net loser. Such an industry, cautious about invoking its own economic interest alone, is all too likely to invoke the antitrust laws (or the First Amendment) for purely strategic and self-interested reasons. 
This point also helps explain the Committee broadcasters' skepticism about "play or pay" alternatives. A set of rigid public interest requirements does not hurt them and may even help them, insofar as it places their competitors under legal duties that they would themselves meet voluntarily (because of their aspirations or because of the particular demands of their audience and their advertisers). A system of "play or pay" would mean that 
SeeUnited States v. National Ass'n of Broadcasters, 536 F. Supp. 149 (1982). 
SeeFINAL REPORT, supra note 19. 
See id. at 120-21. these broadcasters would be undercut by competitors who, unwilling to play, would pay-and capture a large audience share, in a version of "winner-take-most." But this is not a convincing objection to a system of "play or pay." It is true that some of those who "play" will be at a competitive disadvantage with respect to some of those who "pay" others to play instead. But by itself this competitive disadvantage is not worthy of concern, any more than we should be concerned when, in the environmental context, some of those who reduce pollution are at a competitive disadvantage with respect to those who, instead of reducing pollution, pay a substantial fee to third parties who have reduced pollution. The question is what approach yields the best outcome for the public. If there is too little public interest broadcasting, or too much pollution, the solution is not the simple command to "play," or to "reduce," but to increase the price for failing to play or for failing to reduce.2 
The best defense of a code of the sort I have discussed is that it would produce "winner-take-less" outcomes, in a way that would provide significant benefits for the public by diminishing some of the adverse effects of market competition and by strengthening broadcaster norms in favor of obligations to children and to democratic values. And if this is so, it provides a general lesson about how voluntary private action might sometimes handle problems usually dealt with by direct regulation-and a lesson about the reflexive use of the antitrust laws to prevent producer cooperation. A key question is whether mechanisms might be created to ensure compliance with any such code. 
VII 
A SUMMARY 
This discussion has ranged over a number of regulatory tools, and it may be helpful, by way of summary, to discuss them all briefly and at once. We have seen that both disclosure and codes have the advantage of ensuring a minimal government role, in a way that reduces constitutional concerns and also allows a high degree of flexibility. The danger is that these remedies will have little effect; here the key question is whether there are good external monitors, able to impose reputational or other costs on those who do poorly. We have also seen that "taxes" on programming that does not serve public interest goals, and subsidies to programming that does serve such goals, can have similar effects. A principal problem with subsidies is that they create an incentive not to provide such programming voluntarily. The following table charts the basic territory: 
V.B. 04 .0 lp 0 0 6)0.0 o R. 00 23 = , a Oa) 0~. 0 *0 
U 
a a 0 as w 0 0 
Q)0E4) 0s t 
",j >, 
0-. 
A0 0 *1*00 c -r 
Some of these tools could serve as complements rather than as alternatives. Disclosure makes sense with or without additional strategies. It should be the least controversial item on the list; the only real question is what else should accompany it. Disclosure is likely to work especially well in tandem with voluntary self-regulation, indeed the two tools are natural allies. By contrast, mandates and economic incentives are genuine competitors, and in the current context, economic incentives generally seem best, with mandates operating as a "backstop," probably to be eliminated in the long term.24 
As I have emphasized, these recommendations are designed for the current stage of telecommunications technology; they are also likely to make sense for the near term. For the next decade, the key question is whether initiatives designed for broadcasters should be applied to cable programmers as well (especially disclosure and compliance with a code). In the very long term, when broadcasters occupy no special role, it may be best to impose disclosure requirements on general-interest stations, and also to subsidize high-quality programming of various sorts. A reasonable conclusion would be that in the long-term, public interest programming will be best promoted via subsidies, not through regulation of any kind. In such an era, much will have been gained and much will also have been lost, with the fragmentation of the television market, with less in the way of common experiences, and, possibly, with less frequent exposure to serious coverage of serious issues0 2 It is too soon to know whether the very long term will come in the next decade or long thereafter2.43 
One final note: The discussion here has been focused on law, not on norms or culture; but the argument for a certain conception of the social role of television bears at least as much on norms and culture as on law. It is possible to think that before long, it will not make sense to impose regulatory requirements on CBS, NBC, ABC, and Fox, any more than it makes sense to impose regulatory requirements on Newsweek, Time, The 
have argued against this conclusion, but it must be taken seriously. Even if it is accepted, it is crucial to say that those who provide television, like those who produce newspapers and magazines, have a distinctive cultural responsibility, associated with the promotion of a democratic culture. Many people not subject to regulation take this responsibility seriously; many do not. If law diminishes as a constraining force, it is all the more important to speak on behalf of the basic norms-protection of children, environmental law, see GUNNINGHAM ET AL., supra note 20, at 422-48. 

the suggestion that the Internet may never become an important means of delivering television). serious attention to serious issues, inclusion of a wide variety of social groups, including the hearing impaired-that have undergirded regulatory law in the past. If it flourishes, a "trustee culture" can do much of the work of the law. 
CONCLUSION 
Much of the discussion here has involved appropriate regulatory tools. For the most part, the policy instruments of choice should not involve rigid dictates or commands, which are expensive and potentially counterproductive, and in any case ill-suited to an era of rapidly changing technology. I have suggested a strong preference for the less intrusive options of disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation. Disclosure has been a surprisingly successful, low-cost strategy in other areas of regulatory law. If certain broadcasting is seen as a public good, analogous to clean air, economic incentives may be able to accomplish a good deal, and to do so at relatively low cost. Because competitive pressures are frequently the engine behind poor broadcaster performance, voluntary selfregulation may turn out to be a desirable kind of "cartel," helping to counteract short-term interests. Through this route it may be possible to develop an intermediate system of controls, responding to the market and nonmarket failures of current markets, but without introducing the rigidity and inefficiencies of command-and-control regulation. These points hold notwithstanding current and anticipated technological developments.2 Of course, the appropriate attitude toward such instruments is pragmatic, empirical, and experimental, rather than dogmatic or theological. If these instruments fail to work, it will be worthwhile to consider alternatives. 
If measures of this kind have promise in the areas of environmental protection and public interest programming, there is every reason to explore them in other, less familiar contexts as well. In many areas of law, command-and-control regulation has proved a partial or complete failure, and the natural alternative-a system of well-defined property rights and freedom of contract-may produce serious problems of its own. In such circumstances, any "third way," if it is ultimately to develop for the modem regulatory state, is likely to place heavy reliance on disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation. 

A further point of some importance is that there is no single new media form or market, and there is never likely to be such uniformity. Markets remain distinct; for example there is still a clear distinction between television-type services and on-line services. Technological convergence may be imminent in the form of television Internet access (or Web TV) becoming cheaply available, but the cultures remain radically different. Indeed, in the context of television, it seems likely that, though delivery forms may change, the culture may not, and that new types of media may supplement rather than replace existing ones. Again the message is one ofcaution before we scrap existing regulatory arrangements. 
The most fundamental points involve the appropriate understanding of a system of free expression-an understanding of what gives such a system its motivation and point. I have emphasized the external benefits that come from public interest programming and also the peculiar characteristics of the television market, where viewers, or eyeballs, are a commodity provided to advertisers. Because of the collective action problem, regulatory efforts that attempt to promote democratic goals, or that provide captioning for the hearing impaired, are easily defended in principle. But I have also argued that purely economic principles should be rejected as the foundation for communications policy. With respect to public interest programming, viewers' tastes may be a product of an undesirable set of communications options, and in their capacity as citizens, people may weli want to make things better rather than worse. Especially in light of the role of the communications media in the production of culture-and on both preferences and values-it is entirely legitimate for a democratic government to refuse to make "consumption choices" the exclusive basis for policy design. I have emphasized that a public committed to deliberative democracy might well support initiatives designed to provide better programming for children and better coverage of public issues. 45 So long as they are subject to democratic control, such initiatives should be regarded not as a paternalistic interference with private choices by a regulatory elite, but as an effort by a self-governing public to promote a political culture that is consistent with its own highest aspirations. Above all, this is the sense in which there is a difference between the public interest and what interests the public. 

