Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory law (with notes on interpretive theory)" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 158, 2002). 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 158 (2D SERIES) 
(with Notes on Interpretive Theory) 
Cass R. Sunstein 
THE LA W S C HOOL 
THE U NIV ERS ITY OF CHICA GO This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=323662 Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law Cass R. Sunstein* 
In the last two decades, federal courts have been developing a new and thus far unacknowledged canon of regulatory law: As a general rule, administrative agencies will be taken to have the authority to interpret statutes so as to avoid absurd or patently unreasonable results, even if the interpretation is hard to square with the literal language of the statute. This canon authorizes agencies, and in particular agencies that regulate the environment, far more flexibility in the interpretation of literal language than courts are now permitted to have. My narrow goal in this Essay is to describe and to defend this canon. My broader goal is to use the canon as a basis for urging that contemporary theories about interpretation go wrong by emphasizing large claims about democracy and legitimacy at the expense of an inquiry into the real-world capacities of our various institutions, including the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the federal courts. 
The new canon has old roots in the time-honored idea that courts will not construe statutes to produce absurdity.1 But that notion remains highly controversial, at least in some applications,2 in part because of a belief that much mischief might follow if courts attempt to avoid what they consider to be absurdity. For reasons to be elaborated, the canon that I am defending should be endorsed even by those who believe that courts have no business departing from statutory language.3 Compared to courts, regulatory agencies have a high degree of specialized competence and a large measure of political accountability. They are in a good position to know if a departure from literal language will unsettle the regulatory scheme. Because of these characteristics, courts should allow agencies to avoid absurdity, in the face of literal text, even in cases in which courts should not themselves exercise this power–and to allow agencies more freedom to assume this canon than courts. 
I will also connect the new canon to some of the largest and most intense of current debates about legal interpretation, especially in the context of regulatory law and environmental protection. In particular, I will urge that it is important to understand interpretive disputes not by reference to abstractions, but in the light of institutional considerations–by asking who is good at what, and by asking about the effects, over time, of one or another approach to interpretation.4 Consider, for example, the debate over formalism: the view, defended most prominently by Justice Antonin Scalia, that legitimate interpretation requires fidelity to the ordinary meaning of *Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Adrian Vermeule for extremely helpful discussion. 1 Church of the Holy Trinity v United States, 143 U.S. 457 (1892). 
Vand. L. Rev. 715 (1992) 
L. Rev. 579 (1992). Some of these issues, and the jurisprudential questions, are discussed in some detail in Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (University of Chicago Working Paper, July 2002); related issues of regulatory law are discussed, from a different angle, in Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason: Law, Safety, and the Environment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 
4 See id; Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, 75 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 74, 103 (2000). the relevant text when originally enacted.5 Some people, including Justice Stephen Breyer, reject this view, arguing legitimate interpretation includes a variety of devices designed to ensure that sense, rather than nonsense, is made of the law.6 Often this debate seems highly abstract and conceptual, involving contests over big ideas like democracy, legitimacy, authority, and constitutionalism. 
The last decade, however, has witnessed a kind of “institutional turn,”7 in which it is starting to be seen that debates over the best approach to interpretation are debates about consequences and, in particular, about institutional capacities.8 The controversy over formalism might itself be seen in these terms. If courts adopt formalism, will the system of regulatory law be better or worse? If courts, abandoning the ordinary meaning of the text, are likely to blunder, the argument for formalism is greatly strengthened. That argument would also be strengthened if our legislatures, faced with a formalist judiciary, would be likely to anticipate problems before they arise and to correct them after the fact. In that event, the problems introduced by formalism, for regulatory law or environmental protection, would be reduced by legislative corrections. But if courts, abandoning formalism, are likely to make the law far more sensible, and if legislatures cannot be expect to anticipate or correct errors, the argument for formalism is greatly weakened. If we emphasize institutional capacities, we will see that in deciding about the appropriate approach to interpretation, two issues are central. The first involves the capacity of the relevant interpreters. The second involves the systemic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. 
These general points very much bears on the canon that I am identifying here. In the context of apparent absurdity, reasonable people can disagree about whether and to what extent judges should depart from literal language. But as we shall see, the issue is quite different when agencies are seeking to make that departure. This point has large implications for interpretation in the context of regulation and environmental protection. It suggests that regulators, simply because of their comparative advantages, should be allowed to repudiate or to endorse formalism as they see fit. 
The new canon of interpretation is best understood in light of certain pathologies of the largest development in the last century of American law: the rise of the modern regulatory state. In controlling risks to safety, health, and the environment, and in regulating banking and communications, modern legislatures issue countless rules. Some of them are vague; some of them are precise and detailed. In either case, legislatively-enacted rules sometimes amount to “thin simplifications” that often extend over decades and that must be engrafted onto complex systems of natural and human interactions.9 Simply because of human limitations, these systems cannot be well-understood by legislators at the time of enactment. As a result, thin simplifications threaten, on occasion, to produce harm or even disaster, not least from the standpoint of their proponents. The harms can involve safety, health, and the environment itself, as when a statutory enactment, designed to protect air or water quality, has the unintended effect of doing the opposite in one or another application. I will not be able to discuss the point in detail in this space; but there are many ways of reducing the relevant risks. One of the simplest, I suggest, is to authorize agency officials not to reject enacted law, but to abandon a literal approach to interpretation by adapting statutory terms to unanticipated circumstances. By abandoning literalism where it would produce absurdity or patent unreasonableness, agencies, like the courts that do the same, engage in a legitimate form of interpretation -- one that occurs in households and workplaces as well as in government agencies and courtrooms. 
Some pertinent clarifications before we begin: The canon authorizes agencies to avoid absurdity; it does not compel them to do so. There are systemic reasons why an agency might want to stick to the literal language and to allow absurdity in particular cases. As we shall see, an agency might want to do this if it believes that fidelity to the literal language is the best way of promoting planning and reducing confusion for the future. In addition, the principle is limited to cases of patent unreasonableness or unintended absurdity. These cases usually arise in the context of excessive generality, a problem that occurs when statutory language operates sensibly and as intended in most of its applications, but produces patently unjustifiable and unintended results in a particular case. This case might be too strange or exotic to have been anticipated in advance; or it might be a product of changed circumstances, which makes literal language, never or almost never absurd when enacted, absurd because of new developments. I emphasize that the principle that I am discussing should not be seen as authorization to ignore statutory requirements; it applies only when literal language produces an outcome that was not anticipated and could not plausibly be defended. One of my main goals is to show the difference between ignoring statutes and counteracting this problem through an acceptable form of interpretation. 
For regulatory law, the interpretive background is established by Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council,10 by far the dominant case in the area, which sets out a twostep inquiry for judicial review of agency decisions. The first question (“step one”) is whether Congress has “directly decided the precise question at issue”–more simply, whether Congress has unambiguously banned what the agency proposes to do.11 Under Chevron, agencies are generally permitted to construe ambiguous statutes as they see fit. Under step two, it remains to ask whether the agency’s interpretation of the statute is reasonable.12 I am focusing on step one here: Will the agency be taken to have the power to depart from the literal language of the statute, if its reason for doing so is to avoid absurdity? Many cases suggest an affirmative answer. 
The leading case is American Water Works Association v. EPA.13 The case involved a creative effort by EPA to regulate lead in drinking water. The details are somewhat technical, but the outcome is of general interest. The court allowed EPA to produce an outcome that flew in the face of statutory language, but that, on a reasonable view of the facts, any sensible person would prefer. The court permitted EPA to stretch the statutory language in order to ensure against an evidently absurd outcome. 
The Safe Drinking Water Act14 requires EPA to produce maximum contaminant level goals (MCLG) for water contaminants. These goals must “be set at the level at which no known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons occur,” with an adequate margin of safety.15 Because no safe threshold had been established, the EPA’s MCLG for lead was zero, Once an MCLG is established, EPA is required to set a maximum contaminant level (MCL), “as close to the maximum contaminant level goal as is feasible.”16 EPA is authorized not to set an MCL, and to require “the use of a treatment technique in lieu of establishing” that level, if (and only if) it finds “that it is not economically or technologically feasible to ascertain the level of the contaminant.”17 
For lead, then, EPA would be expected to set its MCL as close as “feasible” (economically and technologically) to the MCLG of zero, except if it was not “feasible” to ascertain the level of lead contamination (and no one urged that the task of ascertainment was not feasible). But this is not what EPA did, because of some distinctive features of the lead problem. Source water is basically lead-free; the real problem comes from corrosion of service lines and plumbing materials. With this point in mind, EPA refused to set any MCL for lead. EPA reasoned that an MCL would require public water systems to use extremely aggressive corrosion control techniques, which, while economically and technologically “feasible,” would be counterproductive, because they would increase the level of other contaminants in the water. What appeared to be the legally mandated solution would make the water less safe, not more so. EPA therefore chose a more subtle and modest approach. Instead of issuing an MCL, it required all large water systems to institute certain corrosion control treatment, and required smaller systems to do so if and only if representative sampling found significant lead contamination. 
EPA did not contend that an MCL was not “feasible” to implement, nor did it argue that it was not “feasible,” in the economic or technological sense, to monitor lead levels in water. Nonetheless, the court upheld the Agency’s decision.18 The court accepted EPA’s seemingly implausible suggestion that the word “feasible” could be construed to mean “capable of being accomplished in a manner consistent with the Act.”19 The court said that “case law is replete with examples of statutes the ordinary meaning of which is not necessarily what the Congress intended.” It added, pointedly and controversially, that “where a literal meaning of a statutory term would lead to absurd results,” that term “has no plain meaning.”20 Because an MCL would itself lead to more contamination, “it could lead to a result squarely at odds with the purpose of the SDWA.”21 The court therefore accepted EPA’s view “that requiring public water systems to design and implement custom corrosion control plans for lead will result in optimal treatment of drinking water overall, i.e., treatment that deals adequately with lead without causing public water systems to violate drinking water regulations for other contaminants.”22 
interpretation of the Act. The critical point in the court’s opinion is the suggestion that a statutory term lacks a plain meaning when the literal language would produce “absurd results.” The 14 42 U.S.C. §§300f-j26, ELR Stat. SDWA §§1401-1465. 15 Id. §300g-1(b)(4)(A), ELR Stat. SDWA §1412(b)(4)(A). 16 Id. §300g-1(b)(4)(B), ELR Stat. SDWA §1412(b)(4)(B). 17 Id. §300g-1(b)( 18 American Water Works, 40 F.3d at 1271, 25 ELR at 20336. 
19Id. statutory terms seem to make no room for EPA’s refusal to issue an MCL. In upholding EPA’s refusal, the court authorized the Agency to avoid absurdity. 
Sometimes regulation appears to require government to control small or trivial harms. To the extent that this is so, two problems might arise. The first is that significant private and public expense might be imposed for no real gain–itself an absurdity. The second is that people might be less safe on balance–if, for example, the product or process that causes a trivial risk is less hazardous than a product or process that is already on the market, and that will not be regulated in the future. In that case, regulation of a small or trivial risk would seem threaten to produce absurdity from the standpoint of the statute’s proponents. Can agencies provide correctives? 
In a series of cases, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals has developed a principle authorizing (not requiring) agencies to make de minimis exceptions to regulatory requirements. The initial case was Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy.23 There, the Agency banned acrylonitrile on the ground that it counts as a “food additive,” migrating in small amounts from bottle into drinks within bottles. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concluded that the ban was justified on safety grounds, a conclusion that the court found inadequately justified. But what is more important in the case is the general language with which the court remanded the case to FDA. The court stressed that the Agency had discretion to exclude a chemical from the statutory definition of food additives if “the level of migration into food . . . is so negligible as to present no public health or safety concerns.”24 
A related case presented the question whether EPA was permitted to make categorical exemptions under the prevention of Significant Deterioration program of the Clean Air Act (CAA).25 Here, the court spoke in far more ambitious terms, showing considerable enthusiasm for de minimis exemptions. It announced that “[c]ategorical exemptions may be permissible as an exercise of agency power, inherent in most statutory schemes, to overlook circumstances that in context may fairly be considered de minimis. It is commonplace, of course, that the law does not concern itself with trifling matters, and this principle has often found application in the administrative context. Courts should be reluctant to apply the literal terms of a statute to mandate pointless expenditures.”26 In fact the court expressly connected this principle with the idea that the court should “look beyond the words to the purpose of the act” to avoid “absurd or futile results.”27 Thus the court concluded, in its broadest statement on the point, that “most regulatory statutes, including the [CAA],” permit de minimis exemptions upon an adequate factual showing.28 
Here, then, is an explicit recognition of agency authority to prevent patent unreasonableness by exempting tiny risks from regulatory controls–even if the exemption seems to fly in the face of the statutory terms. The recognition is best seen as permission to agencies to avoid regulatory absurdity, and in particular the sort of absurdity that comes from “thin simplications” in the form of rigid regulatory commands. 
23 613 F.2d 947 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 24 Id. at 955. 25 Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 10 ELR 20001 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 26 Id. at 360, 10 ELR at 20011. 27 Id. at 360 n.89, 10 ELR at 20011 n.89. 28 Id. at 360, 10 ELR at 20011. Suppose that a regulatory statute appears to ban agencies from considering costs. Suppose that any such ban would produce serious problems, not because the ban is itself absurd, but because the ban prevents the agency from adopting a creative approach that would, in a sense, involve more aggressive regulation. 
This appeared to be the problem in State of Michigan v. EPA.29 At issue there was an EPA decision to approve a state implementation plan (SIP) for the regulation of ozone. The key statutory phrase provided that SIPs must contain provisions adequately prohibiting “any source or other type of emissions activity within the state from emitting any air pollutants in amounts which will . . . contribute significantly to nonattainment in, or interfere with maintenance by, any other State with respect to any such national primary or secondary ambient air quality standard.”30 At first glance, this provision might well be read as a kind of absolute ban on “significantly contributing” pollutants. But EPA did not understand it that way. Instead, EPA reached an apparently ingenious conclusion. It would adopt a low threshold for deciding whether a contribution was “significant.” In this way, many states would count as significant contributors. But the significant contributors would be required to reduce their ozone only by the amount achievable via “highly cost-effective controls,”31 meaning those that could produce large reductions relatively cheaply. In states with high control costs, then, relatively low reductions would be required. In states with low control costs, substantial reductions would be mandatory. 
Was this unlawful? Challenging EPA’s interpretation, the plaintiffs urged that the statute banned any consideration of costs at all. In their view, “contribute significantly” made no room for an inquiry into the costs of compliance. The court rejected the argument, finding no “clear congressional intent to preclude consideration of costs.”32 But the court obviously had a difficult time with the statutory phrase “contribute significantly,” which seems to refer to environmental damage, not to environmental damage measured in light of cost. In upholding EPA’s decision, and in ruling that EPA would be allowed (not required) to do what it did, the court insisted that significance should not “be measured in only one dimension,” that of “health alone.” In fact, in some settings, the term “begs a consideration of costs.”33 In the court’s view, EPA would be unable to determine “’significance’ if it may consider only health,” especially in light of the fact that ozone causes adverse health effects at any level. If adverse effects exist on all levels, how can EPA possibly choose a standard without giving some weight to cost?34 In any case “the most formidable obstacle” to a ban on consideration of cost “is the settled law of this circuit,”35 which requires an explicit legislative statement to preclude consideration of cost. The best way to understand this decision is to see it as an effort to authorize the Agency to adopt a solution that would avoid patent unreasonableness. 
Here, as in American Water Works, the court permitted the Agency to read the statutory text aggressively, on the theory that the Agency’s approach was so much more sensible, and so much less unreasonable, than the approach that would be required by textualism. It seems clear that the Congress that enacted the SDWA could not foresee the special problems creating by removing lead from water, problems that, EPA plausibly argued, would make a MCL counterproductive. So too for the nonattainment program: From every point of view, EPA’s effort to require only cost-effective controls seemed better than an effort to define “contribute significantly” in a cost-vacuum.36 Thus the Agency was allowed to depart from the ordinary meaning of the statutory language, as court perhaps would not be; and the reason was to enable the agency to avoid an outcome that seemed absurd in light of the statutory variables and common sense. 
I now explore the legitimacy of the new canon. Why, exactly, are agencies being authorized to avoid absurdity? Why are they being authorized to approach statutory text more aggressively than courts? To approach these questions, it is necessary to know something about the theory of legal interpretation. No one should deny that a sensible legal system might well allow interpreters—courts or administrators -- to abandon literal language in cases of absurdity. This is a familiar and conventional aspect of legal interpretation in the United States, England, and elsewhere. Such a system would abandon textualism in some cases. But whether to abandon the text, and how often to do so, are questions that reasonable people can dispute. My basic claim here is that a decision to follow literal language, or instead to allow exceptions for absurdity or patent unreasonableness, calls for an inquiry into (a) the capacities of the interpreter and (b) the effects, on the relevant system of law, of one or another approach. These issues, typically neglected in theories of interpretation, help show why agencies might be permitted to make exceptions for absurdity even if courts are not. To see this point, some jurisprudence is necessary. 
I have emphasized that according to a time-honored principle of interpretation, courts should not construe statutes so as to produce absurd results. In a way this old principle is entirely familiar. In ordinary life, as in law, the literal meaning of words will often produce unintended absurdity. A parent tells a child, “don’t leave the house under any circumstances”; but if the house is on fire, the child had better leave. Someone tells his best friend, “do not tell anyone where I am going this weekend”; but under emergency conditions, disclosure might well be justified. Building on an understanding that literal language is not always the best guide to meaning, courts 36 Many cases fall in the same category as those discussed here. See, e.g., Natural Resources Defense Council v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 17 ELR 21032 (D.C. Cir 1987). But there are counterexamples. Consider, for example, American Mining Congress v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1177, 17 ELR 21064 (D.C. Cir. 1987). Congress had not clearly dealt with the problem of how to handle materials held for recycling, and the relevant EPA regulation defined certain materials involved in recycling as “solid waste.” In particular, it said that spent materials, sludges, scrap metal, and the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry’s ongoing production process. EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were associated with the same kinds of environmental harms as materials that were abandoned or disposed of in some final way. The court of appeals struck down EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid waste as “garbage, refuse, sludge . . . and other discarded material”; for the court, material held for recycling was not “discarded.” Citing the dictionary, the court thought that the “ordinary plain-English meaning” was decisive. Cf. Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108, 18 ELR 20173 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (court found it necessary or at least relevant to emphasis that the rigid text was not, in fact, absurd). have made unintended absurdity a central theme in two of the most controversial and celebrated cases in American law: Riggs v. Palmer37 and Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States. 38 In Riggs, a court prohibited a murderer from inheriting from the estate of the murder victim, even though the language of the governing law made no exception for murderers, and seemed to require the murderer to inherit. In Church of the Holy Trinity, the U.S. Supreme Court refused to ban a church from paying for the importation of a rector into the United States, even though the literal language of the statute seemed to ban the importation. 
These are famous cases, but they are hardly uncontroversial.39 Is it so clear that courts should be allowed to allow exemptions for absurd outcomes? How might we answer that question? There is a conventional answer, and we can take the analysis of the legal philosopher H.L.A. Hart as both classic and representative. Hart appear to welcome judicial corrections for unintended absurdity, finding them necessary in light of our inevitable “inability to anticipate”40 the countless contexts to which statutory terms will have to be applied. In Hart’s account, a “feature of the human predicament (and so the legislative one)” is that we labour under two connected handicaps whenever we seek to regulate, unambiguously and in advance, some sphere of conduct by means of general standards to be used without further official direction on particular occasions.”41 These handicaps are “our relative ignorance of fact” and “our relative indeterminacy of aim.”42 Mechanical jurisprudence, involving simple application of law to fact, would be possibly only if “the world in which we live were characterized only by a finite number of features, and these together with all the modes in which they combine could be known to us.”43 But “[p]lainly this world is not our world.”44 The problem with a mechanical approach is that it secures “a measure of certainty or predictability at the cost of blinding prejudging what is to be done in a range of future cases, about whose composition we are ignorant. We shall thus indeed succeed in settling in advance, but also in the dark, issues which can only be reasonably be settled when they arise and are identified.”45 The problem with that kind of decision is that it forces us “to include in the scope of a rule cases which we would wish to exclude in order to give effect to reasonable social aims. . . . “46 In the context of environmental protection, the analysis seems straightforward. The literal language of congressional enactments will often include cases that Congress could not anticipate, and hence interpreters who follow that language will produce judgments “in the dark,” and unreasonable, even absurd ones to boot. The cases discussed above seem to fall in this category. 
Of course much of Hart’s account is sensible and right. But Hart neglects some key issues, and he is able to do so only because of his apparently unselfconscious use of word “we” to identify the interpreting authority. Why should we think that “we” are interpreting the statute? If “we” are engaging in interpretation, it might well make sense to insist that “we” should settle the relevant issues in the light rather in the dark. But if the question of how to interpret a statutory text is approached in institutional terms, it will become clear that Hart fails to attend to two crucial points. The first involves the risk of judicial blunder; the second involves the dynamic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. 
In cases involving unanticipated problems, the question is not what “we” will do; it is what courts will do. Perhaps they will make nonsense rather than sense of the law. The possibility is far from remote in the context of regulatory law and environmental protection, where courts may lack the information that would enable them to answer the complex question about what should be done “in the light.” And it is important to investigate the effects of the courts’ choice on future litigants and on legislative behavior. A sensible system of interpretation understands the inevitability of dynamic effects; it sees that the judges’ choice will not be limited, in its consequences, to the immediate parties. Suppose that courts, abandoning the text because it will produce nonsense, will introduce a high degree of uncertainty into the law. Suppose that if they proceed blindly and in the dark, they will create good incentives for the legislature, which will promptly correct the problems that arise. In these circumstances, perhaps a refusal to correct absurdities is not so bad after all. In the environmental context, these issues can be quite difficult. A decision to abandon the text, on the ground that it produces an absurd result in a particular case, might introduce a great deal of uncertainty into the future 
Ironically, Ronald Dworkin, often taken to be Hart’s adversary, shares the same blindness. Dworkin also rejects literalism, believing that judges should make the best constructive interpretation of the existing legal materials.47 At first glance, the belief seems unexceptionable; but like Hart, Dworkin fails to address the imperfections of judges and the systemic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. It is not false to say, with Dworkin, that the controversy in Riggs “was a dispute about what the law was, about what the real statute the legislators enacted really said.”48 But it is hopelessly inadequate to cast the issue in those terms. The dispute was about the appropriate approach to a statute whose literal text produces absurdity. If courts ask about the meaning of “the real statute the legislators enacted,” they will be neglecting some of the crucial issues. 
What are those issues? Three are central: (a) the capacity of courts to make sound decisions if they make such exceptions; (b) the problems, in terms of increased uncertainty, that would be produced by the granting of exceptions; (c) the likelihood that a legislature, faced with a rigid, rule-following judiciary, would correct the situation.49 It is not at all clear, in the abstract, how the empirical issues should be resolved. In fact, they cannot be resolved in the abstract. Everything depends on context and on institutional capacities. In a legal system in which legislatures are able to anticipate many potential absurdities, the need for exemptions will decrease; so too in a system in which legislatures will promptly correct absurdities as they arise. In the environmental context, courts should probably take a literalist approach if Congress will correct absurdities and if courts lacks the tools to identify situations in which literalism does not fact make for absurdity. But in a legal system in which absurdities are common and unlikely to be anticipated or corrected, and in which judges are able to exempt absurdities without creating systemic harm, the case for literalism is severely weakened. In this light, those who debate the role of “plain meaning” in interpretation might well be taken to be disagreeing over some highly empirical questions about the real-world consequences of one or another approach. Those 47 See his discussion of Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153, 8 ELR 20513, in Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire 345-48 (1985). 
48 Id. at 20. 
49 See Sunstein and Vermeule, supra note 3, for a detailed discussion. questions might not be easy to resolve; but if we focus on them, we will know what we are disagreeing about, and some quasi-theological disputes about how to interpret statutes might appear to be relatively mundane. 
It is tempting to think this argument neglects the whole issue of legitimacy. Does it? I do not believe so. Almost everyone agrees that judges should not ignore statutory terms, even if the relevant judges are superb and even if the relevant legislatures are hopelessly inattentive and confused.50 But we are speaking here not of ignoring terms, but of preventing unintended absurdity and, much of the time, of handling the particular interpretive problem of excessive generality. This is Hart’s focus as well. The problem is pervasive in ordinary life, where language sometimes sweeps more broadly than any reasonable person would like. Legislatures, even the most attentive, are unable to avoid the problem. In such circumstances, judges who make sense rather than nonsense of the law are interpreting it, not ignoring it. If judicial interpreters, like other sensible people, disregard literal language to avoid a result that (in all likelihood) was not intended or sought, it is ludicrous to object that courts have committed some abstract sin called “illegitimacy.” But it is not ludicrous to object; perhaps courts will make the situation worse rather than better, and perhaps they do better to interpret the statute literally. Whether the objection is reasonable depends on the pragmatic and institutional factors that I have identified here. 
Now let us turn to administrative agencies, giving particular attention to the Environmental Protection Agency and other agencies involved in protecting safety, health, and the environment. Recall that for courts, the case for literalism, even in the case of absurdity, depends on a belief that courts will not always make sound decisions about what counts as absurd; a judgment that literalism will create good incentives for legislatures, to anticipate problems before the fact and to correct them after the fact; and a fear that efforts to prevent absurdity will create systematic harm, by making planning more difficult and by increasing the level of uncertainty. We have seen that in the abstract, reasonable people might well disagree about how to do this calculus in the context of judges. But the calculus changes, in major ways, when agencies are involved. 
It changes for two fundamental reasons. First, agencies are in a good position to know whether a particular outcome is, in fact, absurd. In the environmental setting, a court may be unlikely to have a clear sense of whether one or another approach would produce a patently unreasonable outcome; but the Environmental Protection Agency has far more information. To say the least, courts would have a hard time in deciding whether the language of the SDWA, taken literally, would compromise drinking water safety in the context of regulatory controls on lead. Confronted by an argument to that effect from regulated companies, courts might well hesitate to resolve the underlying issues; they might sensibly choose to follow the text. By contrast, agencies face no such disabilities. They are likely to know whether a literal interpretation really would cause environmental harm. 
Second, agencies are in a far better position to know whether systemic harm will be created by departing from the text and trying to produce sense rather than nonsense in particular cases. A serious problem with abandoning literalism is that the abandonment might undermine planning and make it hard for the agency to enforce the law, in a simple and predictable way, in 50 Actually, I believe the underlying issues are more complicated than the agreement suggests, but I cannot address the complications here. the future. But it is difficult for courts, and other generalists, to know whether this risk is real or fanciful. Because of their specialized competence, agencies are in a far better position to resolve that question. Compared to courts, they are more likely to know (for example) whether a decision to allow de minimis exceptions to a regulatory program would undo the regulatory scheme, or whether a decision to proceed as the EPA did under the SDWA would make for unacceptable confusion in the future. 
But this is not the only point. In resolving these questions, judgments of value might also be involved, and they can be extremely important. To the extent that value judgments are being made, agencies have advantages over courts too, precisely because of their political accountability. It is not inappropriate to conclude that EPA, subject as it is to presidential oversight, should be authorized to decide whether to make such exemptions, to the extent that the statute might fairly be described as ambiguous. (Recall that excessive generality is a form of ambiguity, and that where a statute produces absurdity, it is reasonable to say, as did the American Water Works court, that it lacks a plain meaning.) This point means that the Bush Administration has the authority to resolve certain issues, under Chevron step 1, differently from the Clinton Administration. So be it. In the ordinary run of cases, it is a virtue, not a vice, of Chevron that the decision allows different administrations to resolve statutory ambiguities in different ways. Chevron itself, allowing the Reagan Administration to reject the view of the Carter Administration, is the most salient case in point. What I am adding here is a suggestion that under step 1, the relevant administration should also be authorized, most of the time, to accept or to reject literalism when that approach would lead to an absurd or patently unreasonable outcome. As the recent cases suggest, agencies should have significantly more discretion, on this score, than federal courts. 
In my view, the problem in Holy Trinity should be seen very differently in the context of the modern regulation, which will pose as a central question: What are the views of any agency charged with implementation of this law? As against occasional pleas for judicial “updating” of obsolete statutes, offered most influentially by Judge Guido Calabresi,51 it might be claimed that the argument needs to be updated: for the most part, solutions to the problem of legal obsolescence should come from administrative agencies, immersed in the problems at hand and having both technocratic and democratic virtues as compared to courts. In modern Holy Trinitytype cases, courts should not do the work on their own, but should permit agencies to engage in a degree of statutory adaptation. This is not at all on the theory that agencies are authorized to violate the statute (no agency is authorized to do that), but after a conclusion that agencies reasonably concluded that despite the generality of the text, it is legitimate to interpret it to avoid absurdity, at least if there is no considered legislative judgment that the text should be applied in a way contrary to the agency’s view. 
To say this is not to deny the possibility of counterarguments. In defending the new canon of construction, I have not discussed the possibility of congressional correction. If the legislature is highly responsive, then it will, by hypothesis, be less important to allow agencies to have the authority to avoid absurdity. And if agencies themselves should be distrusted, the new principle will seem much less appealing. If agencies deserve distrust, we might suspect that they are not applying their expertise, and we might be skeptical about their judgments of value. Suppose, for example, that agencies will seek to exempt risks not because those risks are genuinely trivial, but because of political pressures, imposed by regulated industries with selfserving agendas,. If so, agency authority to exempt de minimis risks, as a way of avoiding 51 See Guido Calabresi, The Common Law in An Age of Statutes (1989). apparent absurdity, seems far less appealing. Or suppose that in the American Water Works case, the EPA was not really adopting the most sensible approach, but attempting to ease regulation in a way that allowed unacceptable health risks from lead. More generally, endorsement of the new canon that I have identified here depends on the judgment that when agencies claim that a certain outcome would be absurd, we have good reason to believe that they are likely to be right. 
There is no algorithm to prove that the new canon is justified; everything depends on context and on the reliability of our various institutions. In a world in which legislatures correct absurdities and agencies are confused or untrustworthy, formalism—an insistence on adherence to the literal language -- would make as much sense for agencies as for courts. In such a world, American Water Works, and the other cases I have discussed, would be wrong. But this is not our world. Agencies must apply statutory language in countless settings, many of them new and unanticipated and often in the face of changing circumstances. In the environmental context, agencies must work with statutes that are frequently quite rigid, that must of course be obeyed, but that in some applications produce outcomes that Congress could not possibly have wanted. It is far too much to expect Congress to be closely attentive whenever excessive generality produces absurdity. Indeed a well-functioning system of interpretation would make it unnecessary for Congress to spend its time on such comparative trivia; it would allow corrections through the interpretive methods discussed here. 
Of course regulatory agencies often blunder. But in the modern state, statutory terms must be engrafted onto countless situations and problems that even the most reasonable and farsighted legislatures could not easily have foreseen. The “thin simplifications”52 of enacted law will inevitably fit poorly with at least some of the contexts to which they apply. Indeed this is a pervasive problem -- and an inevitable product of the movement from a common law system to one pervaded by statutory commands. In areas ranging from safety in drinking water to telecommunications and banking, statutory law cannot possibly fit well with the range of situations to which, over decades or more, to which it must be adapted. This is an extremely serious problem for which it is important to find correctives.53 The new canon that I am discussing is a modest means of reducing that problem. 
Will agencies abuse their new authority? Can the EPA be trusted to use the new canon so as to avoid real absurdity, rather than bowing to powerful private interests? I think that the underlying risks are minimal. In the cases I am discussing here, there is no need for alarm; the usual pattern is one in which sensible regulators are attempting to counteract excessive generality or palpable unreasonableness, neither intended by Congress. In allowing agencies to make corrections, courts are merely permitting agencies to do what courts themselves have long done. Once we debate interpretive questions in institutional terms—in terms of who is good at what -we might reasonably dispute whether courts should be authorized to interpret statutory language so as to avoid absurdity. But even if courts should be denied that authorization, we should welcome agency power to make sense rather than nonsense of regulatory law. The new canon of interpretation thus fits well with the displacement of the common law by regulatory programs– and it is likely to find an increasingly receptive judiciary in the coming decades. 52 See Scott, supra note 9. 
53 The movement toward economic incentives, as opposed to command-and-control regulation, can be understood in these terms. See A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air (2000). 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) 
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000) Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein & Robert W. Hahn, "A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 150, 2002). 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
A. Processes and Problems 
For over twenty years, the executive branch of the federal government has required regulatory agencies to assess the costs and benefits of regulation, and to attempt to ensure that the benefits outweigh, or justify, the costs.1 At least in a formal sense, cost-benefit balancing is now the official creed of the executive branch, as demonstrated by a series of executive orders.2 The point cuts across partisan divisions: President Clinton’s approach differed somewhat from President Reagan’s, but it shared the fundamental commitment to cost-benefit balancing.3 
Notwithstanding this public commitment, national regulation has hardly come into compliance with the principles of cost-benefit balancing.4 This overall pattern of imperfect compliance should raise many alarm bells, even for those who have real doubts about costbenefit analysis and merely want more coherence and better priority-setting. The general record does show numerous successes, in the form of regulations that promise to deliver significant benefits at a relatively low price.5 But in many cases, regulations seem to do more harm than good.6 Indeed, a close look at federal regulatory policy shows a wide range of problems. Perhaps foremost among them is exceptionally poor priority-setting, with substantial resources 1 President Reagan first issued an executive order requiring agencies to use cost-benefit analysis. See Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127(1982). 2 See id. (requiring regulations to pass a cost-benefit test); see also Exec. Order No. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323 (1986) (requiring agencies to submit an annual regulatory plan and to adhere to cost-benefit principles); Exec. Ord. No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638(1994) (requiring agencies to assess all costs and benefits of regulatory alternatives). 3 President Clinton’s cost-benefit approach expressly required agencies to include qualitative measures of costs and benefits, see Exec. Order No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638, 639 (1994), while President Reagan’s approach did not specify which costs and benefits were to be measured, see Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 (1982). 4 See Eric Posner, “Controlling Agencies With Cost-Benefit Analysis”, University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 68, no.4, Fall 2001; Robert W. Hahn et al., “Assessing Regulatory Impact Analysis: The Failure of Agencies To Comply With Executive Order 12866”, 23 Harvard. J. L & PP 859 (2000) (suggesting that the absence of information on net benefits in Regulatory Impact Analyses leads to the conclusion that agencies have failed to carry out cost-benefit analyses). 5 See Robert W. Hahn et al., Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? 15-19 (2000) (evaluating twenty-four regulations whose mortality benefits constitute 90% of total benefits and concluding that nine pass a cost-benefit test because their net cost per statistical life saved is less than $5 million); Cass R. Sunstein, “Cost-Benefit Default Principles”, 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1651, 1661 (2001) (providing examples where “cost-benefit analysis has ... led to regulations that accomplish statutory goals at lower cost”). sometimes going to small problems, and with little attention being paid to some serious problems.7 There are also unnecessarily high costs, with $146 to $229 billion being attributable to compliance costs each year.8 
We do not contend that an assessment of quantified costs and quantified benefits tells us everything that we need to know or that precise numbers are always possible9 But when the costs are high and the benefits low or nonexistent, something seems seriously amiss, especially because an absence of significant benefits signals a likely absence of significant savings in terms of health, safety, or the environment. Especially in a period in which economic growth and improved safety and health are among government’s highest priorities, this is a major problem. And indeed, the recent reports of the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”), designed to capture the costs and benefits of a wide range of regulations, reveal some disturbing numbers: the EPA’s regulation for financial assurance for municipal solid waste landfills has monetized benefits of $0, but costs of $100 million, and this is expected for the next thirteen years;10 for the next thirteen years, OSHA’s methylene chloride regulation will have annual costs of $100 million and annual benefits of $40 million;11 the cost-benefit ratio for airbag depowering regulation seems bad, though there is uncertainty in the data.12 
Consider Table 1, which lists some estimates of costs and benefits of recent regulations. 6 See Hahn et al., supra note 5, at 23 (finding that over half of the twenty-four regulations studied were likely to cause an increase in mortality risk). 7 This is the theme of Stephen Breyer’ recent book. See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (1993). 8 Unless otherwise noted, year dollars are taken from the source that is cited. In this case, OMB estimates that the cost of social regulation as of 1999 is between $146 and $229 billion in 1996 dollars. Office of Management and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations tbl.4 (2000) [hereinafter OMB 2000 Report Charts] http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/2000fedreg-charts.pdf. In an earlier report to Congress, OMB notes that the EPA’s Cost of Clean report in 1990 estimated the cost of environmental regulations as of 1988 to be $101 billion (1996 dollars). OMB used this figure as a baseline and added the cost of all major environmental regulations issued by the agencies between 1987 and 1996 to estimate the annual cost of environmental regulation in 1997 at $144 billion (1996 dollars). Office of Management and Budget, Report to Congress on the Cost and Benefits of Federal Regulation tbl.1 (1997) at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/chap2.html. 9 See Kenneth Arrow et al., Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health and Safety Regulation 8 (1996) (recommending that analysts “give due consideration to factors that defy quantification but are thought to be important”), available at http://www.aei.brookings.org.publications/books/benefit_cost_analysis.pdf. Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, “Pricing the Priceless: Cost-Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection,” U. Penn L. Rev. 10 OMB 2000 Report Charts, supra note 8, tbl.12. 11 Id. 12 Id. kind, but apparently these orders have not had a large effect.14 Indeed, there is some evidence that the existing orders have had little impact on what agencies actually do.15 
This is no mere academic objection. Expensive regulation may well increase prices, reduce wages, and increase unemployment (and hence poverty).16 Resources now being devoted to small or imaginary problems might be diverted instead to areas where, by all accounts, they could produce far more good. Cost-benefit analysis is not an effort to reduce all human goods to 14 See Hahn & Litan, supra note 13. Another study suggests that roughly half of the government’s final regulations would not pass a cost-benefit test. See Robert W. Hahn, Regulatory Reform: Assessing the Government's Numbers (AEI-Brookings Joint Ctr. for Regulatory Studies, Working Paper No. 99-6, 1999); see also Hahn & Litan, supra note 13, at tbl.1. (showing that a significant number of recent regulations would fail a strict cost-benefit test). 15 See Posner, supra note 4. For an examination of the impact of the efficiency effects of the executive orders on regulation, see Scott Farrow, Evaluating the Regulatory Process and Government Performance: Does Executive Office Oversight Matter? (Discussion Paper, Oct. 18, 1999) http://www.epp.cmu.edu/csir/. Farrow finds that executive office oversight does not have a significant efficiency-improving impact on the difference between proposed and final regulations, or on the cost effectiveness of regulation. Id. at 2. A partial reason is that some statutes forbid cost-benefit balancing, but we believe that this is not the whole picture. 16 To offer a few more details: If regulation increases marginal costs for firms, it is certain to lead to higher prices; if regulation increases a firm’s labor costs, wages will be reduced; but it is less clear whether regulation will increase numbers, but to increase the likelihood that regulation will actually produce human good. According to one study, better allocations of health expenditures could save, each year, 60,000 additional lives at no additional cost––and such allocations could maintain the current level of lives saved with $31 billion in annual savings.17 We do not believe that cost-benefit analysis should be the exclusive basis for assessing regulation, but we do believe that it is an important tool, and that a movement toward improved balancing is likely to promote many social goals, including better health and increased longevity.18 This somewhat abstract claim has been dramatized by repeated demonstrations that some regulations create significant substitute risks19– –and that with cheaper, more effective tools, regulation could achieve its basic goals while saving billions of dollars.20 B. A Deeper and Wider Commitment to Cost-Benefit Analysis 
How can regulation be moved in more sensible directions? This is a large question, and we will not attempt to answer it thoroughly here. But it seems to us that much of the answer lies in improved institutions, and, in particular, in institutional reforms that increase the role of costbenefit analysis in regulatory policy as a way of drawing attention to the likely effects of alternative courses of action. Of course statutory changes would be necessary in many cases. We emphasize two points here. First, the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been far too superficial, and in some ways mostly symbolic; it should be deepened through efforts to strengthen its actual role. Second, the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been far too narrow; it should be widened through efforts to incorporate independent regulatory commissions within its reach. unemployment, at least in the long-run. If the regulation increases the cost of capital relative to labor, employment might even increase. 17 Tammy O. Tengs & John D. Graham, “The Opportunity of Costs of Haphazard Social Investments” in LifeSaving, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 167-182 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 18 See Hahn et al., supra note 5, at 24 (positing that evaluating the mortality implications of regulatory costs is a useful complement to cost-benefit analysis). 19 See Risk versus Risk: Tradeoffs in Protecting Health and the Environment (John D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds., 1995) (containing case studies demonstrating that risk substitution exists). 20 See, e.g., A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Problem 315 (2000) (stating that the emissions-trading program “can both achieve stated environmental objectives and reduce compliance costs”); Robert N. Stavins, Market-Based Environmental Policies, in Public Policies for Environmental Protection 31, 35-41 (Paul R. Portney & Robert N. Stavins eds., 2d ed. 2000) (demonstrating that tradable permit programs can achieve environmental goals and save money). 
In this Article, we propose and explore a modest but potentially significant step toward greater depth and width: a new executive order on federal regulation, building on lessons derived from the experience of the last two decades. The proposed order, designed to replace the current one offers eight basic innovations over existing practice. Most of these address the issue of depth; the last point goes to the issue of width. 
comply with the basic principles established in previous orders, in part by explicitly requiring agency compliance with OMB guidelines for regulatory analysis. This would be an extremely significant step, because OMB’s guidelines have been widely ignored,21 and because compliance with those guidelines would significantly increase rationality and coherence in the regulatory process. 
Information and Regulatory Affairs (“OIRA”) and explicitly creates a mechanism by which OIRA might “prompt” regulation as well as constrain it. This is an important way to ensure that cost-benefit analysis will be used not simply to reduce and limit regulation, but also to spur regulation in those cases where it will do more good than harm.22 By creating a mechanism for prompting regulation, our order moves cost-benefit analysis in the direction of service as a technical tool for improving regulation, rather than simply being a mechanism for reducing it. 
explicit requirements that, to the extent permitted by law, agencies (a) consider the substitute risks introduced by regulation and (b) do not attempt to regulate trivial or de minimis problems. These requirements build on some important developments within the federal courts, which have created default rules authorizing agencies to consider substitute risks and to make de minimis exceptions from regulatory requirements.23 
These default rules are mirrored in federal 21 See Hahn et al., supra note 4, at 861 (concluding that agencies have ignored OMB guidelines from the fact that RIAs “do not provide enough information to allow regulatory agencies to make decisions that will maximize the efficiency or effectiveness of a rule”). 22 Warren, Edward W., and Gary E. Merchant, “More Good Than Harm: A First Principle for Environmental Agencies and Reviewing Courts.” 20 Ecology Law Quarterly 379-440 (1993). 23 See Sunstein, supra note 5, at 1669-76. legislation, which often bars regulation of trivial risks,24 and which also calls, in many places, for attention to substitute risks.25 
that benefits should generally be expected to exceed costs, and ask agencies to provide a rationale for proceeding with any regulation that fails to pass a cost-benefit test (based on best quantifiable estimates).26 Some statutes explicitly require agencies to act even if the benefits fall short of the costs27. There may also be cases in which an agency believes that it is worthwhile to proceed even though the quantifiable benefits do not exceed the quantifiable costs. Either way, we believe that accountability and transparency would be enhanced if the head of an agency were required to explain why a regulation is being adopted. 
ask the appropriate agency to include an underlying analysis of the benefits and costs, so that interested parties inside and outside of the government can understand how the results were obtained, and perform their own analysis of the issue if they so choose. We believe that this requirement will also promote transparency and enhance accountability. 
annual regulatory retrospective and an annual regulatory plan. The retrospective should contain a general analysis of the costs and benefits of significant regulations; this analysis will facilitate OMB’s statutory task of compiling an annual account for the executive branch as a whole.28 The annual regulatory plan, following a similar requirement in the existing executive order,29 would contain an account of what the agency aspires to do in the following year. The purpose of the regulatory plan is to ensure early, rather than last-minute, OIRA involvement in planning, and also to promote the involvement of high-level agency staff at an early stage. 24 This is the prevailing interpretation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, under both the toxic substance provisions and the more general provisions of the Act. Indus. Union Dep’t, AFL-CIO v. Am. Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 639 (1980); Int’l Union, UAW v. OSHA, 37 F.3d 665, 669 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 25 42 USC § 7411(a)(1) (1994). 26 For a related view, see Robert W. Crandall et al., An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform (1997). Crandall et al. recommend that Congress require all regulatory agencies to report the quantifiable and non-quantifiable benefits of regulations. Id. at 12. In addition, the authors argue that “Congress should require that all new regulations costing more than $100 million annually pass a broadly defined benefit-cost test.” Id. (emphasis omitted). 27 This could be the case, for example, where a specific performance standard for tailpipe emissions is statutorily set and regulations require automakers to meet that standard regardless of the outcome of a cost-benefit test. See 42 U.S.C. 7409(b)(1). 28 This task is required by the FY2000 Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 106-58, § 628(a)), 113 Stat. 472, 472-73 (1996). regulatory agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), and Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”), within the ambit of the order. This is a significant departure from existing practice. We believe that the innovation is justified because these agencies are engaged in particularly important regulatory functions. The inclusion of independent agencies raises obvious legal issues, which we discuss below.30 and materials generated as a result of the order. The goal of this provision is to increase the likelihood that agencies will take the order’s requirements seriously. It also authorizes the invalidation of arbitrary and capricious agency action, to the extent that the relevant materials are pertinent, as a matter of law, in a test of the legality of agency conduct. 
We believe that a new executive order is probably the best way to move in the directions suggested by these ideas. There are, however, reasonable counterarguments. For well over a year, the Bush Administration has been operating under an executive order issued by President Clinton, and there are real virtues in a situation in which regulatory oversight under a president of one party is done under a set of principles issued by another. It is important to give such oversight both the reality and the appearance of nonpartisanship. A possible approach would be to retain the Clinton order and to issue a supplemental order that embodies some of the proposals described here. In any case many of the ideas in this Essay might be promoted without a new order. Greater depth, at least, might well be achieved simply by a stronger effort, by OIRA, to ensure compliance with existing requirements,31 and, indeed, by an insistence on many of the proposals made here.32 If a new executive order were not to be issued, considerable progress might well be made with these suggestions in mind. For those who lack enthusiasm for our recommendations, we hope that the discussion will nonetheless cast light on the actual performance of the federal government after twenty years of experience under a (nominal) 29 See infra note 73 (describing the regulatory plan requirement of Executive Order No. 12,866). 30 See infra Part III.G. 31 See John D. Graham, “Executive Regulatory Review: Surveying the Record, Making It Work,” Address Before the Weidenbaum Center Forum (Dec. 17, 2001), http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/graham_speech121701.html (“The changes we are making at OMB are not headline-grabbers: No far-reaching legislative initiatives, no rhetoric-laden executive orders, and no campaigns of regulatory relief. Yet we are making some changes that we believe will have a long-lasting impact on the regulatory state.”) commitment to cost-benefit analysis.33 Indeed, some critics will be pleased to see the modest effects of cost-benefit requirements to date.34 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I briefly outlines the development of executive orders on federal regulation. At the same time, it provides an account of what we mean by the still-controversial idea of cost-benefit balancing, and an exploration of the lessons from two decades of experience with executive orders on federal regulation. We emphasize here the extent to which the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been, too much of the time, symbolic rather than real. Part II explains and defends our innovations. Part III explores the limits of reform via executive order, and offers an account of what else might be done. Following a brief conclusion, the attached Appendix contains the text of our proposed executive order. 
A. What is Cost-Benefit Analysis? 
Before proceeding to the details, it is important to clarify our basic understanding of costbenefit analysis. We mean to use the term in a modest, nonsectarian way, seeing cost-benefit analysis as a tool and a procedure, rather than as a rigid formula to govern outcomes.35 Thus understood, cost-benefit analysis requires a full accounting of the consequences of an action, in both quantitative and qualitative terms. Officials should have this accounting before them when they make decisions. 
We do not insist that regulators should be bound by the “bottom-line” numbers; qualitative considerations, and a sense of distributive impacts (not themselves considered “benefits” in the analysis), are permitted to influence public officials. But if regulators are to proceed, they should be prepared to explain either how the benefits exceed the costs, or if they do not, why it is nonetheless worthwhile to go forward. When the benefits do not exceed the costs, it would make sense to adopt a presumption against proceeding––a presumption that might 32 Of course, it would not be possible, without a new executive order, to incorporate the independent regulatory commissions under the process of OIRA review. 33 We do not deal here with a pervasive problem: OIRA has a small staff (about fifty) and many regulations to review (about 600 are deemed significant each year). To produce the improvements that we think desirable, it would obviously be important to ensure that OIRA’s staff is large enough to do the necessary work. 34 Supra 10. 35See Kenneth Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3 (“Benefit-cost analysis should play an important role in informing the decision making process....”) (emphasis added); Matthew D. Adler &Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit be rebutted by showing, for example, that children would be the principal beneficiaries of the regulation, or that poor people would be disproportionately benefited. We therefore understand cost-benefit analysis to require a certain procedure: A quantitative and qualitative accounting of the effects of regulation, together with a duty to explain the grounds for action unless the benefits exceed the costs. On this view, the antonym to regulation guided by cost-benefit analysis is regulation undertaken without anything like a clear sense of the likely consequences––or regulation that amounts to a stab in the dark.36 
What are the arguments for cost-benefit analysis, so understood? We do not attempt to answer this question in detail37; but it is important to see the central points. The standard response is economic in character: Regulation should ordinarily promote social welfare, and while social welfare might be promoted by regulations that fail cost-benefit analysis,38 costbenefit analysis is an imperfect but useful and administrable proxy for the inquiry into the social welfare question. At the very least, it seems clear that regulation is unlikely to promote social welfare when its costs are very high and its benefits are very low––especially when we consider the fact that high costs are likely to be translated into some combination of higher prices, lower wages, and lower returns to capital. It is not necessary to think that government should be treated as some maximizing machine in order to conclude that officials should know the consequences of regulation before they act, and that they should be reluctant to issue regulations that promise to cost much and to deliver little. 
Of course it is possible that in practice, quantitative cost-benefit analysis will have excessive influence on government decisions, drowning out “soft variables.” Since the numbers are not all that matters, any such effect would be a point against cost-benefit analysis. But to date, the actual record does not support this concern. To take just one example, the EPA’s Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J. Legal Studies 1105, 1106 (2000) (“CBA is properly conceptualized as a welfarist decision procedure....”) (emphasis added). 36 We are assuming throughout that regulators are acting in a situation of risk (where probabilities can be assigned to various outcomes) rather than uncertainty (where no such probabilities can be assigned). In a situation of uncertainty, when existing knowledge does not permit regulators to assign probabilities to outcome other decision rules may be useful, because it is exceedingly hard to do cost-benefit analysis. In such circumstances, the maximin principle could be used (choose the policy with the best worst-case outcome). See Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change 185-207 (1983), for a helpful discussion. 37 For a discussion of the value of cost-benefit analysis, see Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3-6; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2002). 38 See Matthew D. Adler & Eric A. Posner, “Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis,” 109 Yale L.J. 165, 245-46 (1999) (stating that “maximizing overall well-being is an important role of the government” and providing examples of situations where the outcome of cost-benefit analysis should be disregarded in favor of welfarist considerations). decision to go forward with new controls on arsenic in drinking water was supported partly on the ground that nonquantifiable variables tipped the balance. We will suggest that in appropriate cases, distributional considerations should also count. The risk that cost-benefit analysis will drown out relevant variables is not a reason to abandon the analysis, but to take steps to ensure against any such effect. 
It is useful to compare cost-benefit analysis with the “precautionary principle,” often invoked as a foundation for risk regulation and indeed as an alternative to cost-benefit analysis.39 The precautionary principle asks government to prevent risks, even if they are quite speculative, on the ground that it is important to guard against large problems even if they might not come to fruition. Of course it is worthwhile to take some precautions against serious risks, even if the probability of their occurrence is well under 100%. We think, however, that the precautionary principle is an inadequate guide to action, simply because dangers often lie on both sides of the equation.40 Consider the case of genetic modification of food, a process that does carry some risks: A failure to allow genetic modification might well result in many deaths, and a small probability of many more, simply because genetic modification might well deliver cheaper and healthier food.41 Doesn’t the precautionary principle require genetic modification of food at least as much as it prohibits it? 
Or consider the question whether to ban the use of DDT. The precautionary principle might well seem to require the ban, because DDT imposes health risks for birds and mammals, including human beings. But the ban itself seems to be banned by the principle, because any such ban might lead to either unsafe or more expensive substitutes, and in either case the ban creates a 39 See Risk and the Precautionary Principle (Julian Morris ed., 2000).Some suggested alternatives to cost-benefit analysis are nothing of the kind. For example, Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Pricing the Priceless: CostBenefit Analysis of Environmental Protection (2002), discuss technology-based regulation and pollution trading as preferable alternatives. Id. at 31. But cost-benefit analysis, far from being an alternative to technology-based regulation, is a tool for assessing what kind of regulation makes best sense. Pollution trading is a low-cost method of bringing about compliance with regulatory goals. But in any trading system, it is necessary to “cap” overall emissions, and cost-benefit analysis is a way of helping to decide on the most sensible cap. Heinzerling and Ackerman are right to say that many “regulatory programs have been a terrific success without using cost-benefit analysis to set pollution limits.” Id. at 32. As we have suggested, cost-benefit analysis helps to identify the successes. Our claim is that we could have more successes, and better successes, and fewer failures if we attempted to analyze the consequences first. 40 See Jonathan Weiner, Precaution in a Multi-Risk World, in The Risk Assessment of Environmental and Human Health Hazards (Dennis D. Paustenbach ed., 2d ed. 41 Indur Goklany, Applying the Precautionary Principle in a Broader Context, in Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra note 33, at 189, 207-220. (speculative) risk of serious harms.42 Or consider an effort to introduce stringent regulation of arsenic in drinking water. It is possible to justify the regulation on the ground that low levels of arsenic might create substantial risks; but it is also possible to complain that the expensive regulation (costing, say, $200 million) itself creates a risk of mortality effects, a risk that would be forbidden by the precautionary principle. What should government do? 
The precautionary principle, taken for all that it is worth, is thus frequently paralyzing: It stands as an obstacle to regulation and to nonregulation, and to everything in between. Of course speculative harms often deserve attention. But we think that too much of the time, the precautionary principle is merely a combination of rhetoric and myopia, having force only when people look at an essentially arbitrary part of the picture, rather than at the whole. A competent cost-benefit analysis takes good account of what is sensible in the precautionary principle, by asking regulators to attend to low-probability risks of significant harms. Cost-benefit analysis subsumes this risk, as it does all others, into the overall assessment of welfare effects of regulation.43 Indeed the most sensible understandings of the precautionary principle emphasize the need for an overall assessment, and insist on exploring all of the risks at stake, including lowprobability, potentially catastrophic risks.44 
A less familiar argument for cost-benefit analysis, growing out of our doubts about the precautionary principle, is cognitive in character. One goal of cost-benefit analysis is to overcome cognitive limitations by ensuring that people have a full, rather than limited, sense of what is at stake.45 People often miss the systemic effects of risk regulation;46 cost-benefit analysis is a way of putting those effects squarely on-screen. At the same time, cost-benefit analysis helps overcome the problems created by cognitive heuristics that can lead people to misunderstand the magnitude of risks, by allowing an accounting of the actual consequences of 42 See id. at 190-92. 43 Obviously, it is impossible to take extra caution (or spend more) on all activities, simply because there is a finite budget constraint at any point in time. For a good overview of the precautionary principle, see Kimberly M. Thompson et al., “Decision-analytic Refinements of the Precautionary Principle,” 4 J. of Risk Res. 127 (2001). Some suggested alternatives to cost-benefit analysis are nothing of the kind. For example, Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Pricing the Priceless: Cost Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection (2002), discuss technologybased regulation and pollution trading as preferable alternatives. Id. at 31. But cost-benefit analysis, far from being an alternative to technology-based regulation, is a tool for assessing what kind of regulation makes best sense. Pollution trading is a low-cost method of bringing about compliance with regulatory goals. But in any trading system, it is necessary to “cap” overall emissions, and cost-benefit analysis is a way of helping to 44 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle (2001). 45 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36. current hazards and of the effects of reducing them.47 To the extent that people’s emotions are getting the better of them, by producing massive concern about small risks,48 cost-benefit analysis should help put things in perspective, and at the same time might help to calm popular fears. And if people are indifferent to a risk that is actually quite large, cost-benefit analysis will help to stir them out of their torpor. The result should be to help with cognitive distortions and to produce sensible priority setting. 
There are democratic advantages as well.49 Interest groups often manipulate policy in their preferred directions, sometimes by exaggerating risks, sometimes by minimizing them, and sometimes by mobilizing public sentiment in their preferred directions. An effort to produce a fair accounting of actual dangers should help to diminish the danger of interest-group manipulation. More generally, cost-benefit analysis should increase the likelihood that citizens generally, and officials in particular, will be informed of what is actually at stake. By itself, this is a large democratic gain. 
Of course, interest groups will also try to manipulate the numbers in their preferred directions. Industry will tend to exaggerate the costs and minimize the risks. Public interest groups will do the opposite. A government that attempts to produce cost-benefit analysis will face a formidable task; it is possible that government will lack the information necessary to do this task well. But if there is a degree of accuracy, and if ranges are specified where there is uncertainty, cost-benefit analysis can be seen, not as some antidemocratic effort to tyrannize people with numbers, but instead as an indispensable tool of democratic self-government. 
We can go further. Prospective estimates of both costs and benefits often turn out to be wrong.50 This is not merely because of interest group pressures. One reason is that officials lack the extensive information that would permit them to take accurate predictions; indeed, the informational demand on agencies is overwhelmingly, especially because technologies change 46 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure 1-10 (Rita & Robert Kimbel, trans. 1996) (introducing ways in which people discount risk and the potential negative consequences that follow). 47 See Roger Noll & James Krier, “Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation,” 19 J. Legal Stud. 747, 762 (1990) (describing how these “pathologies” can affect estimates of risk). 48 See George Loewenstein et al., Risk As Feelings, 127 Psychol. Bull. 267 (2001). 49 Cf. Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, “Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market Incentives,” 13 Colum. J. Env. L. 171, 172-75, 178-90 (1988) (emphasizing the democratic virtues of economic incentives). 50 See OMB, 1999 Report to Congress, at 40-43. over time.51 An enduring problem for regulatory policy is the absence of precise information on the cost or benefit sides. This point should be taken, not as a criticism of cost-benefit analysis as such, but as a reason for continuous monitoring and updating.52 Our emphasis on retrospective analysis and on prompt letters is intended to take account of the frequent inadequacy of prospective estimates. 
There are numerous challenges to cost-benefit analysis as a regulatory tool.53 We cannot discuss those challenges in this space. We suspect that many of them are rooted, at bottom, in pragmatic considerations-–in a belief that in practice, cost-benefit analysis will be used as an obstacle to desirable regulation. According to some skeptics, the antonym of cost-benefit analysis is not the unguided stab in the dark, but regulatory protection itself. If this were so, the argument for cost-benefit analysis would be greatly weakened. But the evidence does not support this pessimistic prediction;54 indeed, cost-benefit analysis has helped to spur regulation, not merely to stop it.55 We believe that, in principle, cost-benefit analysis has a great deal of promise, and that when it has been used, it has often made things better rather than worse.56 Of course, the case for cost-benefit analysis will depend, in large part, on what people do with it in the future. B. History 
Since 1980, all three branches of American government have shown increased interest in cost-benefit balancing.57 Our emphasis here is on the actions of the executive branch, which has had a longstanding interest in cost-benefit balancing, an interest that cuts across partisan divisions.58 A brief historical review will set the stage. 51 See Bradley Karkkainen, “Toward a Smarter NEPA: Monitoring and Managing Government’s Environmental Performance,” Columbia Law Review (Forthcoming 2002). 52 See id. (urging a reform of NEPA that would call for careful attention to new information over time). 53 See Lisa Heinzerling, “Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,” 107 Yale L.J. 1981 (1998) (noting that an assessment of the cost-effectiveness of regulating risk is dependent on subjective evaluations of discounting future benefit, risk assessment, and regulatory purpose). see Heinzerling and Ackerman, “Pricing the Priceless,” supra 10. 54 For varying perspectives, see “Economic Analysis at EPA” (Richard Morgenstern ed. 1999); Eric Posner, University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 68, no. 4,(forthcoming 2002). 55 For a discussion of the role of economic analysis in spurring regulation of lead in gasoline and regulation of CFCs, destructive of the ozone layer, see “Economic Analysis at EPA,” supra note 44. See also the discussion of prompt letters, infra Part II.B.. 56 See “Economic Analysis at EPA,” supra note 44 57 Within Congress, see e.g., 5 U.S.C. § 1532, 1535 (requiring cost-benefit analyses and explanations for agency actions); within the executive branch, see supra note 2 (noting presidential directives on cost-benefit requirements). 58 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36, at ch. 1 . 
President Nixon inaugurated the process of this general sort as long ago as 1970, with a mechanism for “Quality of Life” reviews of administrative action.59 President Carter introduced a similar process with his Regulatory Analysis Review Group, designed to conduct interagency analysis of cost-effectiveness analysis, required for “significant” rules.60 But the decisive step came under President Reagan, with the formal creation of a mechanism for OMB review of major regulations. 
The most important innovations in President Reagan’s Executive Order 12,291 were: (1) a set of substantive principles for all agencies to follow, “to the extent permitted by law,” including a commitment to cost-benefit analysis; (2) a requirement that a Regulatory Impact Analysis, including cost-benefit analysis, accompany all “major” rules; and (3) a formal mechanism for OMB oversight, with a general understanding that OMB had some (undefined) substantive control over what agencies would actually do. President Reagan considered subjecting the independent agencies to the new order, but ultimately declined to do so, partly because of concerns about legal authority, but mostly because of fears of an adverse congressional reaction.61 The independent agencies were asked voluntarily to comply with Executive Order 12,291; all of them declined. 
Executive Order 12,291 proved extremely controversial.62 Nonetheless, President Reagan expanded on the basic idea four years later with Executive Order 12,498.63 That order established a requirement that agencies submit “annual regulatory plans” to OMB for review. The result was an annual publication, the Regulatory Program of the United States, which contains a discussion of all proposed actions that might be either costly or controversial. Executive Order 12,498 served to increase the authority of agency heads over their staffs, by exposing proposals to toplevel review at an early stage. But it also increased the authority of OMB, by allowing OMB supervision over basic plans, and by making it hard for agencies to proceed without OMB preclearance. 59 See Richard R. Nathan, The Plot That Failed and the Administrative Presidency 45-49 (1975). 60 See Richard H. Pildes & Cass R. Sunstein, “Reinventing the Regulatory State,” 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 14 (1995). 61 See Peter M. Shane & Harold H. Bruff, The Law of Presidential Power 355-359 (1988) (describing and questioning the use of the presidential supervisory power with respect to congressional legislation). 62 See, e.g., Thomas McGarity, Rationalizing Regulation (1990) . 63 3 C.F.R. 323 (1985). 
Bush, the principal innovation was the Competitiveness, chaired by the Vice President.64 The Council engaged in occasional review of agency rules, operating as a kind of supervisor of OMB itself. It also set out a number of principles and proposals for regulatory reform.65 In essence, however, the Bush Administration followed the basic approach of its predecessor, with OMB review remaining under the two Reagan executive orders. 
Cost-benefit balancing had been highly controversial when conducted by Republican administrations. For this reason, it was uncertain whether President Clinton would allow it to continue to play a role within the executive branch. But in a significant and dramatic step, President Clinton endorsed the essential features of the Reagan-Bush orders in his Executive Order 12,866.66 The crucial point about Clinton’s order is that it accepted the basic commitments of the two Reagan-Bush orders, by requiring agencies to assess both costs and benefits and to proceed only when the latter justified the former. At the same time, President Clinton offered several changes to the Reagan-Bush processes, mainly attempting to create assurances against the fear of industry capture of the system of review. First, he attempted to diminish public concerns about interest-group power over regulation, by providing a process to resolve conflicts and procedures for greater openness.67 Second, he included references to “equity,” to “distributive impacts,” and to qualitative as well as quantitative factors, evidently so as to ensure that agencies could make adjustments in the process of decision, and abandon the cost-benefit assessment where this seems sensible.68 Third, President Clinton moved, in a modest but important way, toward including independent agencies within the executive orders. He did so by requiring the participation of the independent agencies within the unified regulatory agenda69 and also by requiring independent agencies to submit their proposals for inclusion within the annual 64 See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Program of the United States Government, April 1, 1990March 31, 1991 5 (1990). Another very different innovation that occurred under the first President Bush was the active promotion of market-based approaches for protecting the environment--the most notable example being the acid rain allowance-trading program, which was the crown jewel of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. For an evaluation of this program, see A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air (2000). 65 See id. 66 Id. at (1994). 67 See id. ] 68 Id. at 69 Id., at §(4)(b). regulatory plan, allowing the Vice President an opportunity to advise and consult.70 We will build on these initiatives here. 
Congress has been slower to support efforts to require the balancing of benefits and costs of major regulations. In 1982 the Senate unanimously passed such a law, but it was defeated in the House of Representatives.71 Two primary environmental statutes that allowed the balancing of benefits and costs prior to the mid-1990s are the Toxic Substances Control Act72 and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.73 Recently, Congress has shown greater interest in emphasizing the balancing of benefits and costs. Table 2 reviews recent regulatory reform initiatives, which could help improve regulation and legislation. The table suggests that Congress now shares the concern of the executive branch that the regulatory system is in need of repair and could benefit from more in the way of economic analysis.74 All reforms highlighted in the table emphasize a trend towards considering the benefits and costs of regulation, although the effectiveness of the provisions remains unclear. Perhaps because of the politicized nature of the debate over regulatory reform, these reform efforts have come about in a piecemeal fashion, and there is some overlap in the requirements for analysis.75 70 Id. at § 4(c). 71 Id. 72 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (1994) (describing an allowed balancing of “risk of injury to health or the environment”). 73 See 7 U.S.C. § 136a (1994) (allowing regulation to prevent unreasonable adverse effects on the environment). 74 Robert W. Crandall et al., An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform 3 (1997) (noting that “recent legislative debates masked a broad consensus among knowledgeable observers on the need for regulatory reform”). 75 There has been some recent interest in Congress in reducing this overlap by establishing a single congressional agency that would have the responsibility for assessing the government regulation. This agency would be similar to the Congressional Budget Office, but it would have responsibility for regulation. In principle, such an agency could help stimulate better analysis and review of agency rules by providing an additional source of information. See Robert W. Hahn & Robert E. Litan, “Joint Testimony before the Committee on Governmental Affairs,” U.S. Senate, “The Regulatory Right-to-Know Act and the Congressional Office of Regulatory Analysis Act,” (April 1999) at http://www.aei-brookings.org/publications/testimony/testimony_99_01.pdf. Unfunded Mandates Reform CBO is required to estimate the costs of laws with Act of 1995 new mandates in excess of $50 million in any one year on state, local, and tribal governments, and in excess of $100 million in any one year on the private sector. Likewise, an executive branch agency must prepare a cost-benefit analysis of regulations with new mandates in excess of $100 million in any one year on state, local, and tribal governments or the private sector. The agency is required to choose the “least costly, most costeffective, or least burdensome alternative,” unless the provisions are inconsistent with law or the head of an agency can explain why such an alternative was not adopted. 
Small Business Regulatory Enforcement An agency must submit each final regulation and Fairness Act of 1996 the supporting analyses to Congress and the General Accounting Office. Congress has at least sixty calendar days to review major regulations before they can become effective. During that time, Congress can enact a joint resolution of disapproval that, if passed and then signed by the president, would void the regulation. In addition, strengthened judicial review provisions hold agencies more accountable for the impacts of regulations on small entities. 
Regulatory Accountability Provision of In separate appropriations legislation in 1996, 1996, 1997, and 1998 1997, and 1998, Congress required the Office of Management and Budget to submit an assessment of the annual benefits and costs of all existing federal regulatory programs to Congress for 1997, 1998, and 2000, respectively. The Office of Management and Budget already must review and approve analyses submitted by agencies estimating the costs and benefits of major 76 See Robert W. Crandall et al. An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform, 10-11 (1997); Robert W. Hahn, The Impact of Economics on Environmental Policy, 39 J. Envtl. Econ. & Mgmt 375-399 (2000). Pipeline Safety and Partnership Act of 1995 Food Quality Protection Act of 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 Truth in Regulating Act of 1999 Biennial Review Provision Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
of the proposed rules. The annual report provisions build on this review process. 
The Secretary of Transportation must issue a pipeline standard “only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended standard justify its costs.” This Act eliminates the Delaney Clause for pesticides that set a zero-tolerance standard for carcinogens from residues in processed foods. In setting standards for raw or processed foods, the EPA will now establish a tolerance level to ensure “a reasonable certainty of no harm” from pesticide residues. For pesticide products that exceed that negligible risk, the EPA may consider the benefits of the pesticide to justify granting a tolerance. 
Under the original act, the maximum contaminant level (MCL) was to be set as close to the maximum contaminant level goal as “feasible.” Feasible was defined as using the best technology available “taking costs into consideration.” Under the new act, the EPA administrator “shall publish a determination as to whether the benefits of the MCL justify, or do not justify, the costs.” Establishes a three-year pilot program under which individual agency Regulatory Impact Analyses are subject to independent evaluation by GAO, upon request by Congress. 
Requires Federal Communications Commission: (1) to review biennially its regulations pertaining to telecommunications service providers and broadcast ownership; and (2) to determine whether economic competition has made those regulations no longer necessary in the public interest. 
Courts, too, have shown interest in cost-benefit principles, developing a set of default rules that authorize agencies to minimize costs and maximize benefits, in the face of statutory ambiguity. Consider the following principles,77 all with support in the cases. Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to make de minimis exceptions to statutory 77 For a more detailed discussion of these principles, see Cass R. Sunstein, “Cost-Benefit Default Principles,” 99 Mich L Rev 1651 (2001). 
It is not difficult to understand why the executive branch would be skeptical of the idea of judicial intervention. As a general rule, it is not in the interest of the executive branch to increase the authority of the judiciary over executive officers. To be sure, judicial review might solve an agency problem faced by the President if courts could be enlisted to enforce presidential prerogatives against agencies. But the apparent judgment of the executive branch has been that the risks of that course, prominently including losses on appeal, outweigh the advantages. 
We have suggested a modest but significant change, slightly compromising the interests of the executive in favor of the interests of the public as a whole. Under our order, judicial review would be available of the materials generated pursuant to the order, but only to the extent that those materials are relevant to the agency’s decision under the relevant statute. This proposal would not violate current law; it would merely add to the set of materials that courts examine when testing the question whether the agency has followed the statute or acted arbitrarily. To be sure, this innovation would add materials to the file for judicial review, and in that sense would complicate the judicial task. But it would add little beyond what courts are now considering in the regulatory context.165 
We believe that a new executive order on federal regulation could do a great deal of good. One reason is the very signal that such an order would send: By virtue of its high visibility, and because of its source (the White House), a new order would suggest a serious commitment, on the part of high-level officials, to improving regulatory outcomes. Another reason is that such an order could embody institutional and substantive reforms that would reduce the problems of shallowness and narrowness. Our central goal has been to ensure that the commitments in previous executive orders are real rather than symbolic, and we believe that the steps suggested here would be helpful in promoting that goal. 
An executive order is not, however, a panacea; it is not sufficient for real change, and for some purposes it is not even necessary. With respect to the question of necessity, we have noted that OIRA could move in many of the directions we propose under 165 See, e.g., Chlorine Chemistry Council v. EPA 206 F.3d 1286 (DC Cir 2000) (ruling that chloroform must be treated as a threshold pollutant under the Safe Drinking Water Act). 
44 existing law, including the existing executive order. Indeed, one of our major goals has been to outline the lessons of over two decades of experience with presidential requirements of cost-benefit balancing and to suggest what can be done in response to that experience. If a new executive order does not seem desirable or feasible, we hope that our discussion and our proposed order will have heuristic value, suggesting what should be done even without formal changes.166 With respect to the insufficiency of a new order, some statutes ban cost-benefit balancing, and the executive must obey the law. A thoroughgoing reform effort would require legislative reforms, not merely executive action. At the executive level itself, everything depends on implementation. It is possible that an executive order, like a Constitution, will be a mere “parchment barrier,”167 with little or no effect on the real world. In fact, successful implementation probably requires high-level political support, in the form, for example, of a clear understanding that the President or the Vice President is committed to the process inaugurated by the executive order. But an executive order would itself be a step toward establishing that understanding. 
To make the process truly effective, however, greater congressional support will probably be required. This support will only come if the public sees a need for greater transparency and accountability in the regulatory process. The reality is that most of the public is (usually rationally) uninformed on many regulatory issues, including the issue of regulatory oversight.168 And legislators do not typically have a strong incentive to support regulatory reforms that promote accountability. Indeed, many members of Congress seem to prefer to pass laws and regulations that give the appearance of fixing the problem––leaving it to the executive and the judiciary to sort out implementation.169 Without stronger congressional efforts, any steps from the President will have a limited effect. 166 Note in this regard that prompt letters and return letters are being issued in significant numbers without any formal changes. See Prompt Letters, supra note 108; Return Letters, at http://www.whitehouse.gove/omb/inforeg/return_letter.html (archiving recent return letters). 167 Jack N. Rakove, Parchment Barriers and the Politics of Rights, in A Culture of Rights: The Bill of Rights in Philosophy, Politics, and Law--1791 and 1991 98, 129-36 (Michael J. Lacey & Knud Haakonssen eds., 1991). 168 For the classic discussion of rational ignorance on the part of voters, see, e.g., Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (1957),. 169 On the political economy of regulation, see e.g., Roger G. Noll, Reforming Regulation (1971); Bruce M. Owen & Ronald Braeutigam, The Regulation Game (1978); Roger Noll, The Economics and Politics of the Slowdown in Regulatory Reform (1999), available at http://www.aei.brookings.org/publications/books/economics_and_politics.pdf. 
Government regulation continues to display a pattern of “paranoia and neglect.”170 Understood as a pragmatic tool for drawing attention to the likely effects of regulation, cost-benefit analysis holds out considerable promise for overcoming the underlying problems. For over twenty years, executive orders have attempted to discipline the administrative process by requiring agencies to pay close attention to both costs and benefits. But the overall record is mixed. In many cases, cost-benefit analysis does appear to have improved agency decisions in quite significant ways.171 At the same time, the system for OIRA review has not succeeded in fundamentally redirecting regulation toward areas where it would do the most good. 
Of course there are many reasons for this mixed record.172 But part of the reason, we suggest, is that the executive’s commitment to cost-benefit analysis remains both too shallow and too narrow. It is too shallow because too much of the time agencies fail to take the commitment seriously, and the process of OIRA review has not ensured that they will do so. It is too narrow because a large number of agencies are not subject to OIRA review at all. We have suggested a range of possible responses. To overcome shallowness, we have called for mandatory compliance with OMB guidelines on regulatory analysis; formalized the ideas of “return letters” and “prompt letters;” offered new principles governing substitute risks and trivial risks; clarified the issue of equity and distributional effects; and authorized limited judicial review of the materials generated through this process. To overcome narrowness, we have included the independent agencies, which issue many of the nation’s most important regulations, within the scope of the order. 
As we have discussed, an executive order, standing by itself, will not do all, or even nearly all, of what should be done. A great deal depends on personnel and on a serious commitment, on the part of high-level officials, to regulatory reform. Congressional support is also important. As we have emphasized, such a commitment could accomplish a great deal, building on what we have suggested here, under the 170 John D. Graham, Making Sense of Risk: An Agenda for Congress, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 183, 183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 171 See Economic Analysis at EPA, supra note 44. 172 One reason, mentioned above, is that Congress sometimes bans cost-benefit balancing. See Whitman v. American Trucking Ass’n, 531 U.S. 457, 471 (2001) (holding that the Clean Air Act “unambiguously bars cost considerations” when the EPA sets ambient air quality standards under the Act). existing executive order; and to reduce the reality and appearance of partisanship, there are clear advantages to a situation in which an administration of one party is operating under principles laid down under an administration of another party. But the experience of the last two decades suggests that a revised and improved executive order could attract the support of people with a wide range of political commitments, and inaugurate significant improvements in the system of government regulation. 
The American people deserve a regulatory system that protects and improves their health, safety, environment, and well-being without imposing unacceptable or unreasonable costs on society. Regulatory policies should be based on a careful assessment of the likely consequences of regulation, including an effort to assess and balance both costs and benefits. Regulatory policies should use the lowest-cost means of achieving social goals. Public and private resources should be devoted to large problems, not trivial ones. The general objective of this Executive Order is to ensure that cost-benefit analysis, understood as a tool to produce better decisions, will have a far larger role in the federal government than it now does. The particular objectives are: to ensure that regulations are adopted on the basis of an evaluation of their likely consequences; to promote sensible priority-setting; to increase attention to neglected problems while reducing expenditures on minor or nonexistent problems; to ensure that agencies consider alternatives to costly regulation; to enhance planning and coordination with respect to both new and existing regulations; and to make the process accessible and open to the public. In pursuing these objectives, the regulatory process shall be conducted so as to meet applicable statutory requirements and with due regard to the discretion that has been entrusted to the Federal agencies. 
Accordingly, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows: SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF REGULATORY APPROACH AND REQUIREMENTS (A) Approach. Federal agencies should promulgate only those regulations that are required by law, are necessary to interpret the law, or are made necessary by compelling public need, such as material failures of private markets to protect or improve the health and safety of the public, the environment, or the well-being of the American people. In deciding whether and how to regulate, agencies shall assess the costs and benefits of reasonable regulatory alternatives, including the alternative of not regulating. Costs and benefits shall be understood to include both quantifiable measures (to the fullest extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider. Agencies should ordinarily act only if the incremental benefits exceed the incremental costs. Further, in choosing among alternative regulatory approaches, agencies should ordinarily select the approach that maximizes net benefits, unless a statute requires another regulatory approach. (B) Agency Requirements. To ensure that agency regulations are consistent with the approach set forth above, agencies shall adhere to the following requirements, to the extent permitted by law: 
(1) Each agency shall identify the problem that it intends to address as well as assess the significance of that problem. 
(2) Each agency shall explain why the problem that it intends to address is not adequately handled by private markets or by state or local authorities. 
(3) Each agency shall examine whether existing regulations (or other law) have created, or contributed to, the problem that a new regulation is intended to correct and whether those regulations (or other law) should be modified to achieve the intended goal of regulation more effectively. 
(4) Each agency shall identify and assess available alternatives to direct regulation, including providing economic incentives to encourage the desired behavior, such as user fees or marketable permits, or providing information upon which choices can be made by the public. 
(5) In setting regulatory priorities, each agency shall attempt to ensure that it addresses serious problems rather than trivial ones and shall consider, to the extent reasonable, the degree and nature of the risks posed by various substances or activities within its jurisdiction. 
(6) Each agency shall explore and explain whether any regulation will create significant new risks of any kind, and if so, shall identify the extent of any new risks in qualitative and quantitative terms. 
(7) When an agency determines that a regulation is the best available method of achieving the regulatory objective, it shall design its regulation in the most cost-effective manner to achieve that objective. 
(8) Each agency shall assess both the incremental costs and benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing that some costs and benefits are uncertain and difficult to quantify, should generally propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the incremental benefits of the intended regulation exceed its incremental costs. If an agency determines to proceed even though the quantifiable incremental benefits do not exceed the quantifiable incremental costs, then the agency should explain why it intends to proceed in those circumstances, by, for example, referring to distributional effects as authorized by subsection (15) below. 
(9) Each agency shall base its decisions on the best reasonably obtainable scientific, economic, and other information concerning the need for, and consequences of, the intended regulation. 
(10) Each agency shall identify and assess reasonable alternative forms of regulation, including at least two reasonable alternatives to the option under consideration, one more stringent and one less stringent. 
(11) Each agency shall, to the extent feasible, use performance objectives, rather than specifying the behavior or manner of compliance that regulated entities must adopt. 
(12) Wherever feasible, agencies shall seek the views of those most likely to be affected, including appropriate state, local, and tribal officials before imposing regulatory requirements that might significantly or uniquely affect those governmental entities. As appropriate, agencies shall seek to reduce unnecessary conflicts between federal regulatory actions and other law and regulation, including that issued by state and local governments. 
(13) Each agency shall avoid regulations that are inconsistent, incompatible, or duplicative with/of other regulations or policies. 
(14) Each agency shall draft its regulations in language that is simple and easy to understand. 
(15) Each agency shall consider, as appropriate, distributional effects, and after undertaking the analysis of costs and benefits, agencies shall be permitted to take account of those distributional effects in deciding whether to proceed. If the costs exceed the benefits by a substantial margin, agencies shall proceed only if the distributional effects are very clear and highly desirable. 
SECTION 2. ORGANIZATION An efficient regulatory planning and review process is vital to ensure that the Federal Government’s regulatory system best serves the American people. (A) The Office of Management and Budget. Coordinated review of agency rulemaking is necessary to ensure that regulations are consistent with applicable law, the President’s priorities, and the principles set forth in this Executive Order, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or actions taken or planned by another agency. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall carry out that review function. Within OMB, the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) is the repository of expertise concerning regulatory issues and should thus take the lead in implementing this Executive order. Where appropriate, OIRA should draw heavily on the expertise of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of Science and Technology Policy in developing sound regulatory policy. To the extent permitted by law, OMB shall provide guidance to agencies and assist the President, the Vice President, and other regulatory policy advisors to the President in regulatory planning, and shall be the entity that reviews individual regulations, as provided by this Executive order. (B) OIRA shall be authorized to review proposed regulations. To carry out this task, OIRA shall issue guidelines governing regulatory impact analyses. These guidelines shall be issued after an appropriate period for comments from affected agencies, the private sector, and any interested persons. When a proposed regulation does not, in OIRA’s view, conform to the principles set out in this Executive Order or to OIRA guidelines for engaging in regulatory analysis, OIRA shall return the regulation to the agency for reconsideration. (C) OIRA shall be authorized to prompt agencies to undertake actions where the incremental benefits exceed the incremental costs. When OIRA has asked an agency to undertake such action, the agency shall, within 60 days, offer a public account of its intended course of action. (D) The Vice President. The Vice President is the principal advisor to the President on, and shall coordinate the development and presentation of recommendations concerning, regulatory policy, planning, and review, as set forth in this Executive Order. In fulfilling their responsibilities under this Executive Order, the President and the Vice President may be assisted by the regulatory policy advisors within the Executive Office of the President and by such agency officials and personnel as the President and the Vice President may, from time to time, consult. 
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS For purposes of this Executive order: (A) “Advisors” refers to regulatory policy advisors consulted by the President and Vice President, including, among others: the Director of OMB; the Chair (or another member) of the Council of Economic Advisers; the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy; the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy; the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology; the Assistant to the President for Intergovernmental Affairs; the Assistant to the President and Staff Secretary; the Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff to the Vice President; the Assistant to the President and Counsel to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director of the White House Office on Environmental Policy; and the Administrator of OIRA, who also shall coordinate communications relating to this Executive order among the agencies, OMB, the other Advisors, and the Office of the Vice President. (B) “Agency,” unless otherwise indicated, means any authority of the United States that is an “agency” under 44 U.S.C. § 3502(1), including those considered to be independent regulatory agencies, as defined in 44 U.S.C. § 3502(10). (C) “Director” means the Director of OMB. (D) “Regulation” or “rule” means an agency statement of general applicability and future effect, which the agency intends to have the force and effect of law, that is designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or to describe the procedure or practice requirements of an agency. It does not, however, include: 
(1) Regulations or rules that pertain to a military or foreign affairs function of the United States, other than procurement regulations and regulations involving the import or export of non-defense articles and services; 
(2) Regulations or rules that are limited to agency organization, management, or personnel matters; or (3) Any other category of regulations exempted by public notice of the Administrator of OIRA. (E) “Regulatory action” means any substantive action by an agency (normally published in the Federal Register) that promulgates or is expected to lead to the promulgation of a final rule or regulation, including notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, and notices of proposed rulemaking. (F) “Significant regulatory action” means any regulatory action that is likely to result in a rule that may: 
(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, the environment, public health or safety; (2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; or 
(3) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof. 
SECTION 4. CENTRALIZED REVIEW OF REGULATIONS The guidelines set forth below shall apply to all regulatory actions, for both new and existing regulations, by agencies other than those agencies specifically exempted by public notice of the Administrator of OIRA: (A) Agency Responsibilities. In addition to adhering to its own rules and procedures and to the requirements of applicable law, each agency shall develop its regulatory actions in a timely fashion and adhere to the following procedures with respect to a regulatory action: 
(a) Each agency shall provide OIRA, at such times and in the manner specified by the Administrator of OIRA, with a list of its planned regulatory actions, indicating those which the agency believes are subject to review under this Executive order. Absent a material change in the development of the planned regulatory action, those not designated as significant will not be subject to review under this section unless, within 10 working days of receipt of the list, the Administrator of OIRA notifies the agency that OIRA has determined that a planned regulation is a significant regulatory 53 action within the meaning of this Executive Order. The Administrator of OIRA may by public notice waive review of any planned regulatory action designated by the agency as significant, in which case the agency need not further comply with subsection (A)(2)(b) or subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section. 
(b) For each matter identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to be, a significant regulatory action, the issuing agency shall provide to OIRA: (i) The text of the draft regulatory action, together with a reasonably detailed description of the need for the regulatory action and an explanation of how the regulatory action will meet that need. The description of need should clearly identify whether the regulation is designed to address a specific failure in the functioning of markets and how it addresses that need. 
(ii) An assessment of the potential costs and benefits of the regulatory action, including an explanation of the manner in which the regulatory action is consistent with a statutory mandate and, to the extent permitted by law, maximizes net economic benefits. 
(c) For those matters identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to be, a significant regulatory action within the scope of section 3(F)(1), the agency shall also provide to OIRA the following additional information developed as part of the agency’s decision-making process (unless prohibited by law): 
(i) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of benefits anticipated from the regulatory action together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of those benefits. 
(ii) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of costs anticipated from the regulatory action, together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of those costs; and 
(iii) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of costs and benefits of potentially effective and reasonably feasible alternatives to the planned regulation––including improvements to the current regulation and viable nonregulatory actions such as information provision––and an explanation why the planned regulatory action is preferable to the identified potential alternatives. (d) In emergency situations, or when an agency is obligated by law to act more quickly than normal review procedures allow, the agency shall notify OIRA as soon as possible and, to the extent practicable, comply with subsections (A)(2)(b) and (c) of this section. For those regulatory actions that are governed by a statutory or courtimposed deadline, the agency shall, to the extent practicable, schedule rulemaking proceedings so as to permit sufficient time for OIRA to conduct its review, as set forth below in subsection (B)(2) through (4) of this section. 
(e) After the regulatory action has been published in the Federal Register or otherwise issued to the public, the agency shall: 
(i) Make available to the public, via the Internet and through other appropriate means, the information set forth in subsections (A)(2)(B) and (A)(2)(C); (ii) Identify for the public, in a complete, clear, and simple manner, the substantive changes between the draft submitted to OIRA for review and the action subsequently announced; and 
(iii) Identify for the public those changes in the regulatory action that were made at the suggestion or recommendation of OIRA. (B) OIRA Responsibilities. The Administrator of OIRA shall provide meaningful guidance and oversight so that each agency’s regulatory actions are consistent with applicable law, the President’s priorities, and the principles set forth in this Executive Order and do not conflict with the policies or actions of another agency. OIRA shall, to the extent permitted by law, adhere to the following guidelines: 
(1) OIRA shall review all actions identified by the agency or by OIRA as significant regulatory actions. 
(2) OIRA shall waive review or notify the agency in writing of the results of its review within the following time periods: 
(a) For any notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, or other preliminary regulatory actions prior to a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, within 10 working days after the date of submission of the draft action to OIRA; (b) For all other regulatory actions, within 90 calendar days after the date of submission of the information required by this Order, unless OIRA has previously reviewed this information and, since that review, there has been no material change in the facts and circumstances upon which the regulatory action is based, in which case, OIRA shall complete its review within 60 days; and 
(c) The review process may be extended either (1) once by no more than 30 calendar days upon the written approval of the Director or (2) at the request of the agency head. 
(3) For each regulatory action that the Administrator of OIRA returns to an agency for further consideration of some or all of its provisions, the Administrator of OIRA shall provide the issuing agency a written explanation for such return, setting forth the pertinent provision of this Executive Order on which OIRA is relying. 
(4) For each regulatory action for which the Administrator of OIRA issues a prompt letter, the Administrator of OIRA shall provide the issuing agency a written explanation for such prompt, setting forth the pertinent provision of this Executive Order on which OIRA is relying. 
(5) Except as otherwise provided by law or required by a Court, in order to ensure greater openness, accessibility, and accountability in the regulatory review process, OIRA shall be governed by the following disclosure requirements: (a) All substantive communications between OIRA personnel and persons not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government regarding a regulatory action under review shall be governed by the following guidelines: 
(i) A representative from the issuing agency shall be invited to any meeting between OIRA personnel and such person(s); 
(ii) OIRA shall forward to the issuing agency, within 10 working days of receipt of the communication(s), all written communications, regardless of format, between OIRA personnel and any person who is not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government, and the dates and names of individuals involved in all substantive oral communications (including meetings to which an agency representative was invited, but did not attend, and telephone conversations between OIRA personnel and any such persons); and (iii) OIRA shall publicly disclose relevant information about such communication(s), as set forth below. 
(b) OIRA shall maintain a publicly available log that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information pertinent to regulatory actions under review: 
(i) The status of all regulatory actions, (ii) A notation of all written communications forwarded to an issuing agency; and 
(iii) The dates and names of individuals involved in all substantive oral communications, including meetings and telephone conversations, between OIRA personnel and any person not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government, and the subject matter discussed during such communications. (c) After the regulatory action has been published in the Federal Register or otherwise issued to the public, or after the agency has announced its decision not to publish or issue the regulatory action, OIRA shall make available to the public all documents exchanged between OIRA and the agency during the review by OIRA under this section. Provided, that OIRA shall make exceptions to ensure protection of material that is proprietary or otherwise privileged. 
SECTION 5: REGULATORY RETROSPECTIVE AND REGULATORY PLANNING (A) Each agency shall produce an annual report on the benefits and costs of its significant regulations during the past year. A draft of the annual report shall be submitted to OIRA to ensure an adequate period (in no case less than ninety days) for OIRA review and comment. (B) Each agency shall produce, by December 31 of each year, a report on its planned activities for the following year (“annual regulatory plan”). OIRA shall be given an opportunity to comment on the annual regulatory plan and to work with the relevant agency to ensure compliance with the requirements and principles in this order. SECTION 6. RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS To the extent permitted by law, disagreements or conflicts between or among agency heads, or between OIRA and any agency, that cannot be resolved by the Administrator of OIRA shall be resolved by the President, or by the Vice President acting at the request of the President, with the relevant agency head (and, as appropriate, other interested government officials). Vice Presidential and Presidential consideration of such disagreements may be initiated only by the Director, by the head of the issuing agency, or by the head of an agency that has a significant interest in the regulatory action at issue. Such review will not be undertaken at the request of other persons, entities, or their agents. 
Resolution of such conflicts shall be informed by recommendations developed by the Vice President, after consultation with the Advisors (and other executive branch officials or personnel whose responsibilities to the President include the subject matter at issue). The development of these recommendations shall be concluded within 60 days after review has been requested. 
At the end of this review process, the President, or the Vice President acting at the request of the President, shall notify the affected agency and the Administrator of OIRA of the President’s decision with respect to the matter. 
SECTION 7. PUBLICATION Except to the extent required by law, an agency shall not publish in the Federal Register or otherwise issue to the public any regulatory action that is subject to review under section 4 of this Executive Order until whichever of the following occurs first: (1) the Administrator of OIRA notifies the agency that OIRA has waived its review of the action or has completed its review without any requests for further consideration; or (2) the applicable time period expires without OIRA having notified the agency that it is returning the regulatory action for further consideration. If the terms of the preceding sentence have not been satisfied and an agency wants to publish or otherwise issue a regulatory action, the head of that agency may request Presidential consideration through the Vice President, as provided under section 6 of this Order. Upon receipt of this request, the Vice President shall notify OIRA and the Advisors. The guidelines and time period set forth in this Order shall apply to the publication of regulatory actions for which Presidential consideration has been sought. 
SECTION 8. JUDICIAL REVIEW This Executive order is intended to improve the internal management of the Federal Government. Agency analyses generated by this Executive order shall be placed on file for judicial review and, to the extent that those analyses are relevant to the legality of the agency’s conduct, the reviewing court may consider them in assessing the legal issues. This Executive order does not otherwise create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person. 
Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992) Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993) Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994) Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) (May 2001) 2001) 
Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Beyond the Precautionary Principle" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 149, 2002). 
Beyond the Precautionary Principle 
Cass R. Sunstein 
Updated January 2003 Preliminary draft 1/12/03 All rights reserved The precautionary principle has been highly influential in legal systems all over the world. In its strongest and most distinctive forms, the principle imposes a burden of proof on those who create potential risks, and it requires regulation of activities even if it cannot be shown that those activities are likely to produce significant harms. Taken in this strong form, the precautionary principle should be rejected, not because it leads in bad directions, but because it leads in no directions at all. The principle is literally paralyzing— forbidding inaction, stringent regulation, and everything in between. The reason is that in the relevant cases, every step, including inaction, creates a risk to health, the environment, or both. This point raises a further puzzle. Why is the precautionary principle widely seen to offer real guidance? The answer lies in identifiable cognitive mechanisms emphasized by behavioral economists. In many cases, loss aversion plays a large role, accompanied by a false belief that nature is benign. Sometimes the availability heuristic is at work. Probability neglect plays a role as well. Most often, those who use the precautionary principle fall victim to what might be called “system neglect,” which involves a failure to attend to the systemic effects of regulation. Examples are given from numerous areas, involving arsenic regulation, global warming and the Kyoto Protocol, nuclear power, pharmaceutical regulation, cloning, pesticide regulation, and genetic modification of food. The salutary moral and political goals of the precautionary principle should be promoted through other, more effective methods. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to valuable comments from Peter Dorman, Jack Knetsch, Saul Levmore, Eric Posner, Indra Spiecker, and Adrian Vermeule, and from participants in the Midwest Faculty Seminar. I am also grateful to Martha Nussbaum for helpful discussions. 
All over the world, there is increasing interest in a simple idea for the regulation of risk: In case of doubt, follow the precautionary principle.1 Avoid steps that will create a risk of harm. Until safety is established, be cautious; do not require unambiguous evidence. In a catchphrase: Better safe than sorry. In ordinary life, pleas of this kind seem quite sensible, indeed a part of ordinary human rationality. People buy smoke alarms and insurance. They wear seatbelts and motorcycle helmets, even if they are unlikely to be involved in an accident. Shouldn’t the same approach be followed by rational regulators as well? Many people believe so.2 
directions, but because read for all that it is worth, it leads in no direction at all. The principle threatens to be paralyzing, forbidding regulation, inaction, and every step in between.3 To explain this problem very briefly, the precautionary principle provides help only if we blind ourselves to many aspects of risk-related situations and focus on a narrow subset of what is at stake.4 A significant part of my discussion will be devoted to showing why this is so. I will also urge that the precautionary principle gives the (false) appearance of being workable only because of identifiable cognitive mechanisms, which lead people to have a narrow rather than wide viewscreen. With that narrow viewscreen, it is possible to ignore, or to neglect, some of the risks that are actually at stake. I emphasize that we have good reason to endorse the goals that motivate many people to endorse the precautionary principle. These goals include the importance of protecting 1 See, for general discussion, Interpreting the Precautionary Principle (Tim O'Riordan and James Cameron eds. 2002); Protecting Public Health & the Environment: Implementing the Precautionary Principle (Carolyn Raffensberger & Joel Tickner eds. 1999). 2 See the account of widespread international support below. 3 For criticisms that also emphasize the range of risks at stake, but without stressing the paralyzing quality of the principle, see Wiener, supra note; Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle ( 4 For discussion of the possibly perverse effects of the precautionary principle, see Frank B. Cross, Paradoxical Perils of the Precautionary Principle, 53 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 851 (1996). I think that much of what Cross says is convincing, but my emphasis here is quite different: I stress the cognitive foundations of the principle and urge not that the principle leads in perverse directions but that it offers no guidance at all. health and the environment even from remote risks; the need to attend to unintended adverse effects of technological change; and the need to ensure that wealthy countries pay their fair share for environmental improvement and risk reduction. But the precautionary principle is a crude way of protecting these goals, which should be pursued directly. I do not attempt to develop any particular replacement for the precautionary principle, but I do argue on behalf of wide viewscreens in the regulation of risks. 
In making these claims, I will be challenging an idea that has been a staple of regulatory policy for several decades.5 Indeed, it has been claimed that the precautionary principle has become, or at least is becoming, a binding part of customary international law.6 In the mid-1970s, German environmental policy was founded on the basis of 
German policy has been described as seeing “precaution” as a highly interventionist idea, one that embodies “a loose and open-ended interpretation of precaution.”8 In the United States, federal courts, without using the term explicitly, have built in a notion of precaution in some important cases, allowing or requiring regulation on the basis of conservative assumptions.9 The precautionary principle has played a significant role in international documents, to the point where it has become ubiquitous. Variations on the notion can be found in at least fourteen international documents.10 In 1982, the United 5 For helpful discussion, see David Freestone and Ellen Hey, Origins and Development of the Precautionary Principle, in The Precautionary Principle and International Law 3 (David Freestone and Ellen Hey eds. 1994); Jonathan Wiener, Precaution in a Multirisk World, in The Risk Assessment of Environmental and Human Health Hazards (Dennis D. Paustenbach, ed., 2d ed., 2002, forthcoming). 6 See O. McIntyre and T. Mosedale, The Precautionary Principle as a Norm of Customary International Law, 9 J Env Law 221 (1997); see generally Arie Trouwborst, Evolution and Status of the Precautionary Principle in International Law (2002). 7 Julian Morris, Defining the Precautionary Principle, in Risk and the Precautionary Principle 1, 1 (Julian Morris ed. 2001). 8 See Interpreting the Precautionary Principle (T. O’Riordan and J. Cameron eds. 1994). 9 See, e.g., American Trucking Association v. EPA, F.3d (DC Cir 2002); Lead Industries v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 (DC Cir 1980). 10 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle 3 ( here, with informational and reputational influences leading to many casual uses of the precautionary principle, to the point where a failure to incorporate the principle would seem to be a radical statement. Simply because the precautionary principle has been used so often, those involved in international agreements are likely to believe that it is probably sensible to use it yet again. And because so many people identify the precautionary principle with a serious commitment to environmental protection, see, e.g., Protecting Public Health & the Environment, supra note, any nation that rejects the principle risks incurring international opprobrium. For a general treatment of informational cascades, in which decisions by others Nations World Charter for Nature apparently gave the first international recognition to the principle, suggesting that when “potential adverse effects are not fully understood, the activities should not proceed.”11 The closing Ministerial Declaration from the United Nations Economic Conference for Europe in 1990 asserts, “In order to achieve sustainable development, policies must be based on the precautionary principle. . . . Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.”12 
The widely publicized 
Wingspread 
Declaration, from a meeting of environmentalists in 1998, goes further still: “When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not established scientifically. In this context the proponent of the activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”13 The European Union treaty states that on the environment, EU policy “shall be based on the precautionary principle.”14 Notwithstanding official American ambivalence about the principle,15 there are unmistakable echoes of the principle in American environmental law.16 The precautionary principle has received a high-profile endorsement in the New York Times Magazine, which listed the principle as one of the most important ideas of 
convey information about what it makes sense to do, see David Hirschleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188, 189 (Mariano Tommasi and Kathryn Ierulli eds 1995). On reputational pressures, see Timur Kuran, Public Lies, Private Truths (1996). 11 Goklany, supra note, at 4. 12 Id. at 5. 13 Id. 14 European Union Treaty, article 130R (1993), currently Article 174. 15 See John Graham, The Role of Precaution and Risk Assessment in Risk Managament: An American’s View (2002), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/eu_speech.html; Wiener, supra note. 16 Seethe reference to an “adequate margin of safety” in the Clean Air Act, section 109, 42 USC 7409(b(1). 17 The Year in Ideas: A to Z, New York Times, December 9, 2001, p. 92, column 2. 18 http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/press/press38_en.html 
In many ways the precautionary principle seems quite sensible, even appealing. To justify regulation, a certainty of harm should not be required; a risk, even a low one, may well be enough. It makes sense to expend resources to prevent a small chance of disaster; consider the high costs, pecuniary and otherwise, that are spent to reduce the risk of terrorist attack. On reasonable assumptions, these costs are worth incurring even if the probability of harm, in individual cases or even in the aggregate, is relatively low. The precautionary principle might well be seen as a plea for a kind of regulatory insurance. Certainly the principle might do some real-world good, spurring them to attend to neglected problems. Nonetheless, I will be urging that the principle cannot be fully defended in these ways, simply because risks are on all sides of social situations. Any effort to be universally precautionary will be paralyzing, forbidding every imaginable step, including no step at all. 
But if the precautionary principle, taken in a strong form, is unhelpful, in a way literally senseless, how can we account for its extraordinary influence, and indeed for the widespread belief that it can and should guide regulatory judgments? I have mentioned its possible pragmatic value. And undoubtedly the principle is invoked strategically by selfinterested political actors, with European farmers, for example, invoking the idea of precaution to stifle American competitors, who are far more likely to rely on genetically modified crops.19 But apart from this point, I suggest that an understanding of human rationality and cognition provides five useful clues. 
aversion. The central point here is that people dislike losses far more than they like corresponding gains.20 The result is that out-of-pocket costs, or deterioration from the status quo, seem much worse than opportunity costs, or benefits lost as a result of continuing the status quo. In the context of risks, people tend to focus on 19 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683 (1999). 20 See Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1995). 
gains that might be associated with that activity or hazard. The precautionary principle often becomes operational only because of loss aversion, as people take precautions against potential losses from the status quo, but neglect potential benefits that would be unmistakable gains. A closely related point is that unfamiliar risks produce far more concern than familiar ones, even if the latter are statistically larger; and the precautionary principle, in practice, is much affected by this fact. mistaken belief that nature is essentially benign,21 leading people to think that safety and health are generally at risk only or mostly as a result of human intervention. A belief in the relative safety of nature and the relative risk of new technologies often informs the precautionary principle. because they are cognitively “available,” whereas other risks are not.22 When the precautionary principle seems to require stringent controls on one risk, even though other risks are in the vicinity, the availability heuristic is a common reason. And when the availability heuristic is at work, certain hazards will stand out whether or not they are not statistically large. 23 The hazards associated with heat waves, for example, receive little public attention, while the hazards associated with air travel are a significant source of public concern24; one reason is that the latter hazards come readily to mind. bad outcome will occur; they focus instead on the outcome itself.25 The precautionary principle often embodies a form of probability neglect. At least this is so when people invoke the precautionary principle to favor stringent controls on 21 See generally James P. Collman, Naturally Dangerous ( 22 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3, 11-14 (1982). 23 Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 40 (2000). 24 See Eric Klinenberg, Heat Wave: A Social Autopsy of Disaster in Chicago (2002). 25 Yuval Rottenstreich and Christopher Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Risk, 12 Psych Science 185, 188 ( 
a low-probability risk, when the consequence of those very controls is to give rise to new risks of equal or greater probability.26 systemic effects of regulation.27 When a single problem is placed in view, it can be difficult to see the full consequences of legal interventions. Sometimes the precautionary principle has the appearance of being workable only because a subset of the relevant effects are “on screen”—and hence there seems to be no need to take precautions against other possible adverse effects, also involving health and safety, that do not register. An important aspect of system neglect is tradeoff neglect, one source of the conflict between experts and ordinary people in thinking about risks.28 When experts disagree with ordinary people about risks, it is sometimes because experts look at both the benefits and the harms associated with the relevant practice, whereas ordinary people are paying attention to the harms but not the benefits.29 I suggest that the precautionary principle seems appealing, to ordinary people, in large part for the same reason. 
One of my major goals is show that the precautionary principle can be made workable only through routes of this kind. An understanding of behavioral economics simultaneously sheds light on the operation of the principle, explains its otherwise puzzling appeal, and suggests why it should be abandoned or at least substantially recast. Indeed, such an understanding provides a better understanding of the uses and pitfalls of the old adage, “better safe than sorry,” which is subject to many of the same objections as the precautionary principle. I do not attempt to identify a competing principle for adoption by sensible regulators. But I do urge that such regulators should use a wide rather than narrow viewscreen—and that as applied, the precautionary principle is defective precisely because it runs afoul of this idea. To be sure, many of those who endorse the principle seek to protect against neglect of the future, disregard of the 26 In some cases, this is a reasonable reading of the evidence governing genetically modified food. See Alan McHughen, Pandora’s Picnic Basket 230-42 (2000); note in particular the evidence of harms from organic foods, discussed in id. 27 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure 6-42 (1996). 28 The conflict is treated in Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 29 See Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (1996). interests of those suffering from the greatest deprivation, and impossible demands for unambiguous evidence from regulators. But as we shall see, the precautionary principle is a crude and sometimes perverse way of promoting those goals, which can be obtained through other, better routes. A major purpose of this Essay is to suggest the need to use more direct effective strategies to pursue the salutary goals of risk regulation. 
This Article comes in four parts. Part I briefly traces the nature and the appeal of the precautionary principle. Part II explains why the principle is paralyzing, with particular reference to the issues raised by arsenic, global warming, nuclear power, and genetic engineering of food. Part III suggests that the apparent sense of the principle is best understood in light of the behavioral points just mentioned. Part IV is a brief conclusion, in the form of a plea for wider viewscreens. 
I have said that the precautionary principle enjoys widespread international support.30 But what does the principle mean or require? There are numerous definitions, and they are not compatible with one another.31 We can imagine a continuum of understandings. At one extreme are weak versions to which no reasonable person could object; at the other extreme are strong versions that would appear to call for a fundamental rethinking of regulatory policy. 
The most cautious and weak versions suggest, quite sensibly, that a lack of decisive evidence of harm should not be a ground for refusing to regulate. Regulation might be justified even if we cannot establish a definite connection between, for example, low-level exposures to certain carcinogens and adverse effects on human health. Thus the 1992 Rio Declaration states, “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective 30 See Arie Trouwborst, Evolution and Status of the Precautionary Principle in International Law (2002). 31 See Julian Morris, Defining the Precautionary Principle, in Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra, at 1-19; Wiener, supra note. measures to prevent environmental degradation.”32 The Ministerial Declaration of the Second International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea, held in London in 1987, is in the same vein: “Accepting that in order to protect the North Sea from possibly damaging effects of the most dangerous substances, a precautionary principle is necessary which may require action to control inputs of such substances even before a causal link has been established by absolutely clear scientific evidence.”33 Similarly, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change offers cautious language: “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing [regulatory] measures, taking into account that policies and measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost.”34 
The Wingspread Declaration goes somewhat further: “When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not fully established scientifically. In this context the proponent of an activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”35 The first sentence just quoted is a mildly more aggressive version of the statement from the Rio Declaration. It is more aggressive because it is not limited to threats of serious or irreversible damage. But in reversing the burden of proof, the second sentence goes further still.36 Of course everything depends on what those with the burden of proof must show in particular. 
suggesting that it is important to build “a margin of safety into all decision making.”37 According to one definition, the precautionary principle means “that action should be taken to correct a problem as soon as there is evidence that harm may occur, not after the 32 Quoted in Bjorn Lomborg The Skeptical Environmentalist 347 ( 33 Quoted in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle 3, Julian Morris ed. (2000). 34 See Goklany, supra note, at 6. 35 See http://www.monitor.net/rachel/r586.html 36 See the discussion in Wiener, supra note; David Pearce, The Preconditions for Achieving Consensus in the Context of Technological Risk, in Technological Risk: Its Perception and Handling in the European Community (M. Dierkes et al. eds 1980). 37 See Bjorn Lomborg The Skeptical Environmentalist 348 ( harm has already occurred.”38 In a comparably strong version, it is said that “the precautionary principle mandates that when there is a risk of significant health or environmental damage to others or to future generations, and when there is scientific uncertainty as to the nature of that damage or the likelihood of the risk, then decisions should be made so as to prevent such activities from being conducted unless and until scientific evidence shows that the damage will not occur.”39 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity, adopted in 2000, appears to adopt a strong version as well.40 The Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference says that if “the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a small amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity is sufficient to stop it taking place.”41 typology here: 
Professor Richard Stewart usefully distinguishes among four different versions of the precautionary principle, capturing both weak and strong types42; I paraphrase his absence of scientific uncertainty about activities that pose a risk of substantial harm. safety, limiting activities below the level at which adverse effects have not been found or predicted. requirements should be imposed on activities that pose an uncertain potential to create substantial harm, unless those in favor of those activities can show that they present no appreciable risk. 38 http://www.logophilia.com/WordSpy/precautionaryprinciple.asp 39 Testimony of Dr. Brent Blackwelder, President, Friends of the Earth, before the Senate Appropriate Committee, Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services (Jan. 24, 2002). 40 See Goklany, supra note, at 6. 41 Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” Conference, Annex 1, Copenhagen, 1994. 42 Richard B. Stewart, Environmental Regulatory Decision Making Under Uncertainty, 20 Research in Law and Economics 71, 76 (2002). 
that have an uncertain potential to impose substantial harm, unless those in favor of those activities can show that they present no appreciable risk. 
This account shows that the precautionary principle might be described both in terms of the level of uncertainty that triggers a regulatory response and in terms of the tool that will be chosen in the face of uncertainty (as in the case of technological requirements or prohibitions). With an appreciation of this point, we can easily imagine many other variations on these themes. For example, an Information Disclosure Precautionary Principle might say that in the face of uncertainty, those who subject people to potential risks must disclose relevant information to those so subjected. The debate over labeling genetically modified organism can be seen as a debate over this form of the precautionary principle.43 For every regulatory tool, there is a corresponding precautionary principle,44 with possible matches or mismatches between the problem that causes for precautions and the chosen tool.45 The idea of “margin of safety” can be understood in multiple different ways, with a continuum from a small margin, designed to counteract likely risks, to a small one, designed to prevent worst cases. 
The official account in Europe is very much in favor of one or another version of the precautionary principle, with the European Commission having formally adopted it.46 But European practice is far more complex, with the precautionary principle being invoked against some risks but not against others.47 To take just one example, “Europe has been more precautionary about hormones in beef, while the US has been more precautionary about mad cow disease (BSE) in beef and blood donations.”48 While 43 See Alan McHughen, Pandora’s Picnic Basket 201-29 (2000). 44 For discussions of regulatory tools, see Stephen Breyer, Regulation and its Reform 36-183 (1982); Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason 251-88 (2002). 45 On mismatch, see Breyer, supra, at 191-96. 46 European Commission, Communication from the Commission on the Precautionary Principle, COM (200)!, Brussels, 2 Feb. 2000 (available at http://europa.eu.int/comm/dgs/health_consumer/library/pub/pub7_en.pdf 47 See the illuminating discussion in Jonathan Wiener and Michael Rogers, Comparing Precaution in the United States and Europe, 5 J Risk Research 317 (2002). 48 Id. at 323. 
European nations have taken a highly precautionary approach to genetically modified foods,49 the United States has been especially willing to control the risks associated with carcinogens in food additives.50 In the context of occupational risk, American law is far more precautionary than Swedish law.51 I cannot venture a survey here, but it is reasonable to speculate that in actual practice, nations cannot plausibly be ranked along some continuum of precaution. More plausibly, some nations are precautionary about some risks but not others, and a general adoption of the precautionary principle will conceal this inevitable fact.52 I will return to this point and to its inevitability below, because it is closely connected to my central claims here. Nonetheless, the mounting importance of the principle in Europe deserves close attention, if only because the idea of precaution is playing such a large role in public debates. 
unobjectionable and important. Every day, people take steps (and incur costs) to avoid hazards that are far from certain. We do not walk in moderately dangerous areas at night; we exercise; we buy smoke detectors; we buckle our seatbelts; we might even avoid fatty foods. Sensible governments are willing to consider regulation of risks that, in individual cases or even in the aggregate, have a well under 100% chance of coming to fruition. The weak versions of the precautionary principle state a truism—uncontroversial and necessary only to combat public confusion or the self-interested claims of private groups demanding unambiguous evidence of harm, which no rational society requires. This function should not be trivialized. Nearly a fifth of Americans, for example, recently agreed that “until we are sure that global warming is really a problem, we should not take 49 See David Vogel, The Regulation of GMOs in Europe and the United States: A Case-Study of Contemporary European Regulatory Politics (Publication of the Study Group on Trade, Science and Genetically Modified Foods, 2001), available at http://www.cfr.org/pubs/Victor_ModFood_Paper2.html; Symposium, Are the US and Europe Heading for a Food Fight Over Genetically Modified Food? ( available at http://pewagbiotech.org/events/1024/; TonyGilland, Precaution, GM Crops, and Farmland Birds, in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle 84, 84-88 (Julian Morris ed. 2001). 50 See Richard Merrill, FDA's Implementation of the Delaney Clause: Repudiation of Congressional Choice or Reasoned Adaptation to Scientific Progress?, 5 Yale J. on Reg. 1 (1988). 51 See Steven Kelman, Regulating America, Regulating Sweden: A Comparative Study of Occupational Safety and Health Policy (1981). 52 See Wiener and Rogers, supra note. any steps that would have economic costs.”53 Sometimes people do seem to seek certainty before showing a willingness to expend costs, and well-organized private groups like to exploit this fact. Insofar as the precautionary principle counteracts the tendency to demand certainty, it should be approved. 
Because the weak versions are sensible, I will not discuss them here. Instead I will understand the principle in a strong way, to suggest that regulation is required whenever there is a possible risk to health, safety, or the environment, even if the supporting evidence is speculative and even if the economic costs of regulation are high. To avoid palpable absurdity, the idea of “possible risk” will be understood to require a certain threshold of scientific plausibility. To support regulation, no one thinks that it is enough if someone, somewhere, urges that a risk is worth taking seriously. But under the precautionary principle as I shall understand it, the threshold burden is minimal, and once it is met, there is something like a presumption in favor of stringent regulatory controls. I believe that this understanding of the precautionary principle fits with the understandings of its most enthusiastic proponents,54 and that with relatively modest variations, this understanding fits with many of the legal formulations as well.55 
Why might the precautionary principle, understood in this strong sense, have such widespread appeal? At first glance, the answer is simple, for the principle contains some important truth. Sometimes it is much better to be safe than sorry. Certainly we should acknowledge that a small probability (say, 1 in 100,000) of a serious harm (say, 100,000 deaths) deserves extremely serious attention. It is worthwhile to spend a lot of money to eliminate that risk. The fact that a danger is unlikely to materialize is hardly a decisive objection to regulatory controls. Now an economically oriented critic might observe that our resources are limited and that if we spend large amounts of resources on highly speculative harms, we will not be allocating those resources wisely. In fact this is the 53 See http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/GlobalWarming/buenos_aires.html#1 54 See the essays in Protecting Public Health & the Environment : Implementing the Precautionary Principle, Carolyn Raffensberger & Joel Tickner eds. (1999). 55 See Lothar Gundling, The Status in International Law of the Principle of Precautionary Action, 5 Intl J. Estuarine and Coastal Law 23, 26 (1990). simplest criticism of the precautionary principle.56 Unless the harm would be truly catastrophic, a huge investment makes no sense for a harm that has a 1 in 1 billion chance of occurring. Taken for all that it is worth, the precautionary principle might seem to require indefensibly huge expenditures, exhausting our budget well before the menu of options could be thoroughly consulted.57 If we take costly steps to address all risks, however improbable they are, we will quickly impoverish ourselves. On this view, the principle “would make for a dim future.”58 This is no less true for nations than for individuals. 
Some version of this argument is surely convincing, but it also seems to be missing something about human cognition.59 In some contexts, regulation is indeed a form of insurance, or a way of placing special locks on a door. Consider the following choice. Would you rather have 
In terms of expected value, (b), representing a statistical loss of $19.80, is a bit less bad than (a); but most people would gladly choose the sure loss of $20.60 People do not like to run a small risk of a large or catastrophic loss; this is why people buy insurance and take special precautions against serious harms, even in circumstances in which an analysis of expected value would not justify these steps.61 If government follows the judgments of ordinary people, it will be risk-averse in this sense as well. The willingness to incur sure losses, in preference to low-probability catastrophes of lower 56 See Graham, supra note. 57 See Bjorn Lomborg, supra note, at 349. 58 See Julian Morris, Defining the Precautionary Principle, in Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra, at 1, 17. 59 See Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, in Choices, Values, and Frames 17 (Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky eds. 2001). 60 Id. 61 A lucid discussion, with applications to litigation, is Chris Guthrie, Framing Frivolous Litigation, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev. 163 (2000). expected value, helps explain decisions in a variety of domains, involving both law and politics, including foreign policy.62 
This point about judgment under risk might seem to suggest that a democratic society, following popular views, will depart from the predictions of expected utility theory and even embody a form of risk aversion for low-probability catastrophes.63 The result will be to move regulation in the direction suggested by the precautionary principle. But prospect theory cannot provide a defense of the principle in its strong form. I now explain why this is so. 
The most serious problem with the precautionary principle is that it offers no guidance—not that it is wrong, but that it forbids all courses of action, including inaction. To understand this point, it will be useful to anchor the discussion in some concrete problems: the Bush administration involved the regulation of arsenic.64 There is a serious dispute over the precise level of risks posed by low levels of arsenic in drinking water, but on the “worst case” scenario, over one hundred lives might be lost each year as a result of the 50 part per billion standard that the Clinton Administration sought to revise.65 At the same time, the proposed 10 ppb 62 See id; Rose McDermott, Risk-Taking in International Politics: Prospect Theory in American Foreign Policy (1998). 63 See Roger Noll and James Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud. 747 (1990). 64 Robert K. Musil, Arsenic on Tap, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 24, 2001, at A18. 65 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, Geo. L. J. (forthcoming 2002). 
would save as few as six lives annually.66 risks of that practice are not known with precision.68 Some people fear that genetic modification will result in serious ecological harm and large risks to human health.69 warming,70 but there is general agreement that global warming is in fact occurring.71 It is possible that global warming will produce, by 2100, a mean temperature increase of 4.5 degrees C72; that it will result in well over $5 trillion in annual monetized costs73; and that it will also produce a significant number of deaths from malaria. The Kyoto Protocol would require most industrialized nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 92%-94% of 1990 levels.74 raise various health and safety issues, including some possibility of catastrophe.75 But if a nation does not rely on nuclear power, it is likely to rely instead on fossil fuels, and in particular on coal-fired power plants.76 Such plants create risks of their own, including risks associated with global warming. China, for example, has relied on nuclear energy in part as a way of reducing greenhouse gases and in part as a way of reducing other air pollution problems.77 66 See id, 67 Alan McHughen, Pandora’s Picnic Basket ( 68 See id. 69 See Tony Gilland, Precaution, GM Crops and Farmland Birds, in Rethinking Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra note, at 60. 70 See Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist ( 71 Id. 72 Id. at 317. 73 Id. 74 See Robert Percival et al., Environmental Regulation 1141 (3d ed. 2000). 75 See Robert Goodin, No Moral Nukes, 90 Ethics (1980). 76 See Stephen Breyer, Vermont Yankee and the Courts' Role in the Nuclear Energy Controversy, 91 Harv L Rev 1833, 1835-36 (1978). 77 See Note, Nuclear Energy: China's Approach Towards Addressing Global Warming, 12 Geo. Int'l Envtl. L. Rev. 493 (2000). Of course it is possible to urge that nations should reduce reliance on either coal-fired military exercises. The United States Navy, for example, engages in many such exercises, and it is possible that marine mammals will be threatened as a result. Military activities in the oceans might well cause significant harm; but a decision to suspend those activities, in cases involving potential harm, might also endanger military preparedness.78 
In these cases, what kind of guidance is provided by the precautionary principle? It is tempting to say, as is in fact standard, that the principle calls for strong controls on arsenic, on genetic engineering of food, on greenhouse gases, on threats to marine mammals, and on nuclear power.79 In all of these cases, there is a possibility of serious harms, and no authoritative scientific evidence suggests that the possibility is close to zero. If the burden of proof is on the proponent of the activity or processes in question, the precautionary principle would seem to impose a burden of proof that cannot be met. Put to one side the question whether the precautionary principle, understood to compel stringent regulation in these cases, is sensible. Let us ask a more fundamental question: Is that more stringent regulation therefore compelled by the precautionary principle? 
its own way, stringent regulation would actually run afoul of the precautionary principle. The simplest reason is that such regulation might well deprive society of significant benefits, and for that reason produce a large number of deaths that would otherwise not occur. In some cases, regulation eliminates the “opportunity benefits” of a process or activity, and thus causes preventable deaths.80 If this is so, regulation is hardly precautionary. The most familiar cases involve the “drug lag,” produced by a highly power plants or nuclear power, and move instead toward environmentally preferred alternatives, such as solar power. For general discussion, see Godfrey Boyle, Renewable Energy: Power for Sustainable Future (1996); Allan Collinson, Renewable Energy (1991); Dan E. Arvizu, Advanced Energy Technology and Climate Change Policy Implications, 2 Fl. Coastal L.J. 435 ( their own, involving feasibility and expense. See Lomborg, supra note, at 118-48. 78 See Testimony of Vice Admiral Charles W. Moore, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Readiness and Logistics, before the Committee on House Resources, Subcommittee on Fisheries Conservation, Wildlife and Oceans (June 13, 2002). 79 See http://www.inra.fr/Internet/Produits/dpenv/som-ec43.html. 80 See Aaron Wildavsky, Searching for Safety (1994). precautionary approach to the introduction of new medicines and drugs into the market.81 If a government takes such an approach, it might protect people against harms from inadequately tested drugs; but it will also prevent people from receiving potential beneits from those very drugs.82 Is it “precautionary” to require extensive premarketing testing, or to do the opposite? 
Or consider the case of genetic modification of food. Many people believe that a failure to allow genetic modification might well result in numerous deaths, and a small probability of many more.83 The reason is that genetic modification holds out the promise of producing food that is both cheaper and healthier—resulting, for example, in “golden rice,” which might have large benefits in developing countries.84 Now the point is not that genetic modification will definitely have those benefits, or that the benefits of genetic modification outweigh the risks. The point is only that if the precautionary principle is taken literally, it is offended by regulation as well as by nonregulation. So too for regulation of ground-level ozone. Such regulation does seem justified by the precautionary principle, for responsible people believe that low levels of ozone produce a range of health harms, including risks of death.85 But there is also evidence that groundlevel ozone produces health benefits, by reducing risks of cataracts and skin cancer. 86 Because the precautionary principle calls for protection when causal connections are unclear, it would appear to require, with respect to ground-level ozone, both stringent regulation and no regulation at all. 
give rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards that materialize, or are increased, as a 81 See Henry Grabowski and John Vernon, The Regulation of Pharmaceuticals (1983); John Mendeloff, Decision Analysis and FDA Drug Review: A Proposal for "Shadow" Advisory Committees (2002), available at http://www.fplc.edu/RISK/vol6/summer/mendelof.htm. 82 See sources cited in note 64 supra. 83 Bill Lambrecht, Dinner at the New Gene Cafe : How Genetic Engineering Is Changing What We Eat, How We Live, and the Global Politics of Food ( 84 Id. greatly affected by recent experiences.152 If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase insurance.153 In the aftermath of an earthquake, insurance for earthquakes rises sharply—but it declines steadily from that point, as vivid memories recede.154 Note that the use of the availability heuristic, in these contexts, is hardly irrational.155 Both insurance and precautionary measures can be expensive, and what has happened before seems, much of the time, to be the best available guide to what will happen again. The problem is that the availability heuristic can lead to serious errors, in terms of both excessive fear and neglect. 
The availability heuristic helps to explains the operation of the precautionary principle for a simple reason: Sometimes a certain risk, said to call for precautions, is cognitively available, whereas other risks, including the risks associated with regulation itself, are not. For example, it is easy to see that arsenic is potentially dangerous; arsenic is well-known as a poison, forming the first word of a well-known movie about poisoning.156 By contrast, there is a relatively complex mental operation in the judgment that arsenic regulation might lead people to use less safe alternatives. In many cases where the precautionary principle seems to offer guidance, the reason is that some of the relevant risks are available while others are barely visible. 
It is well-known that the availability heuristic affects risk judgments, and we can now appreciate the relationship between that heuristic and the operation of the precautionary principle. But to say the least, the availability heuristic does not operate in 152 Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 40 (2000). 153 Id. 154 Id. 155 Kahneman and Tversky emphasize that the heuristics they identify “are highly economical and usually effective,” but also that they “lead to systematic and predictable errors.” See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in Judgment and Decision Making: A Interdisciplinary Reader 38, 55 (Hal Arkes and Kenneth Hammond). Gerd Gigenzer, among others, has emphasized that some heuristics can work extremely well, see Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999); Gerd Gigerenzer, Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World (2000), and used this point as a rejoinder to those who stress the errors introduced by heuristics and biases. For a helpful recent discussion, see Kahneman and Frederick, supra note. I do not mean to take a stand on the resulting debates. Even if many heuristics mostly work well in daily life, a sensible government can do much better than to rely on them. 156 Arsenic and Old Lace. a social vacuum.157 What is readily “available” to some individuals, groups, cultures, and even nations will not be available to all. In part because of the use of the availability heuristic, the precautionary principle does not call for bans on nuclear power plants in France, which has not caused serious health risks in that nation despite its heavy reliance on nuclear energy.158 By contrast, the Three Mile Island incident provoked intense concerns about nuclear power plants in the United States159 and helped promote the widespread idea that a precautionary approach would discourage reliance on nuclear power. Many of those who favor gun control legislation have “available” a set of incidents in which such legislation would have avoided unnecessary deaths; many of those who reject such legislation are alert to incidents in which private gun ownership allowed people to fend off criminal violence.160 Much remains to be done to clarify the relationship between the availability heuristic and social interactions, including the operations of the media and political officials. For present purposes, the key point is that the availability heuristic often underwrites the use of the precautionary principle, by suggesting the importance of taking precautions against some, but hardly all, of the risks involved. 
The availability heuristic can produce an inaccurate assessment of probability. But sometimes people will attempt little assessment of probability at all, especially when strong emotions are involved. 161 In such cases, large-scale variations in probabilities will matter little—even when those variations unquestionably should matter. The point applies to hope as well as fear; vivid images of good outcomes will crowd out consideration of probability too.162 Lotteries are successful partly for this reason.163 But 157 See Dan Kahan and Donald Braman, More Statistics, Less Persuasion: A Cultural Theory of Risk Perception (unpublished manuscript 2002); Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683 (1999). 158 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 159 See id. 160 See Kahan and Braman, supra note. 161 Yuval Rottenstreich and Christopher Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Probability Weighting, supra, at 176-88. 162 See id. 163 See Phillip Cook, Selling Hope (1993). for purposes of applying the precautionary principle, the topic is fear rather than hope. I suggest that sometimes the precautionary principle becomes workable because the issue of probability is neglected, and people focus on one emotionally gripping outcome among a large set of possibilities. 
Probability neglect has received its clearest empirical confirmation in a striking study of people’s willingness to pay to avoid electric shocks.164 The central purpose of the study was to test the relevance of probability in “affect rich” decisions. One experiment investigated whether varying the probability of harm would matter more, or less, in settings that trigger strong emotions than in settings that seem relatively emotionfree. In the “strong emotion” setting, participants were asked to imagine that they would participate in an experiment involving some chance of a “short, painful, but not dangerous electric shock.”165 In the relatively emotion-free setting, participants were told that the experiment entailed some chance of a $20 penalty. Participants were asked to say how much they would be willing to pay to avoid participating in the relevant experiment. Some participants were told that there was a 1% chance of receiving the bad outcome (either the $20 loss or the electric shock); others were told that the chance was 99%; and still others were told that the chance was 100%. 
The central result was that variations in probability affected those facing the relatively emotion-free injury, the $20 penalty, far more than they affected people facing the more emotionally evocative outcome of an electric shock.166 For the cash penalty, the difference between the median payment for a 1% chance and the median payment for a 99% chance was predictably large and indeed consistent with the standard model: $1 to avoid a 1% chance, and $18 to avoid a 99% chance.167 For the electric shock, by contrast, the difference in probability made little difference to median willingness to pay: $7 to avoid a 1% chance, and $10 to avoid a 99% chance!168 Apparently people will pay a 164 Yuval Rottenstreich and Christopher Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Probability Weighting, supra, at 176-88. 165 Id. at 181. 166 Id. 167 Id. 168 Id. significant amount to avoid a small probability of a hazard that is affectively-laden—and the amount that they will pay will not vary greatly with changes in probability. The point explains “why societal concerns about hazards such as nuclear power and exposure to extremely small amounts of toxic chemicals fail to recede in response to information about the very small probabilities of the feared consequences from such hazards.”169 
It should be easy to the connection between probability neglect and the precautionary principle. If probabilities are neglected, especially when emotions are engaged, then the principle will operate through excessive public concern with certain low-probability hazards. Return to the contrast between deaths from heat waves and deaths from airplane crashes.170 The latter trigger far more intense public attention, in part because of the availability heuristic, but in part because for some people, the outcome itself has such salience, and the probability much less so. In the context of genetic modification of food and global warming, the same phenomenon is at work, leading people to think that the precautionary principle, simply applied, calls for aggressive regulatory controls. Note that I am not urging that such controls are a mistake; in the context of global warming, they seem to be warranted by the facts. My claim is only that the precautionary principle appears to give guidance in part because the issue of probability is neglected. 
For purposes of understanding the operation of the precautionary principle, it is important to see that visualization or imagery matters a great deal to people’s reactions to risks.171 When an image of a bad outcome is easily accessible, people will become greatly concerned about a risk, holding probability constant.172 Consider the fact that when people are asked how much they will pay for flight insurance for losses resulting from “terrorism,” they will pay more than if they are asked how much they will pay for flight 169 See Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic, forthcoming in Intuitive Judgment: Heuristics and Biases (Tom Gilovich et al. eds, forthcoming), unpublished manuscript at 11. 170 See Eric Klinenberg, supra note. 171 See Paul Slovic et al., Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Communication, 24 Law and Human Behavior 271 (2000). 172 See Loewenstein et al., supra, at 275-76. insurance from all causes.173 The evident explanation for this peculiar result is that the word “terrorism” evokes vivid images of disaster, thus crowding out probability judgments. Note also that when people discuss a low-probability risk, their concern rises even if the discussion consists mostly of apparently trustworthy assurances that the likelihood of harm really is infinitesmal.174 The reason is that the discussion makes it easier to visualize the risk and hence to fear it. 
Note that probability neglect does not involve the availability heuristic. That heuristic leads not to neglect probability, but to answer the question of probability by substituting a hard question (what is the statistical risk?) with an easy question (do salient examples readily come to mind?).175 My point here is not that visualization makes an event seem more probable (though this is also often true), but that visualization makes the issue of probability less relevant or even irrelevant. In theory, the distinction between use of the availability heuristic and probability neglect should not be obscure. In practice, of course, it will often be hard to know whether the availability heuristic or probability neglect is driving behavior. 
The most sensible conclusion is that with respect to risks of injury of harm, vivid images and concrete pictures of disaster can “crowd out” other kinds of thoughts, including the crucial thought that the probability of disaster is really small. “If someone is predisposed to be worried, degrees of unlikeliness seem to provide no comfort, unless one can prove that harm is absolutely impossible, which itself is not possible.”176 Probability neglect, I suggest, often makes the precautionary principle seem sensible and workable. Indeed, the precautionary principle often embodies a form of probability neglect. When people focus on highly speculative risks associated with certain risks, it is often because of intense emotional reactions that make those risks, and not relevant others, stand out from the background. In many cases, probability neglect and loss 173 See E.J. Johnson et al., Framing, Probability Distortions, and Insurance Decisions, 7 H. Risk and Uncertainty 35 (1993). 174 See A.S. Alkahami and Paul Slovic, A Psychological Study of the Inverse Relationship Bteween Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit, 14 Risk Analysis 1086, 1094-94 (1994). 175 See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability, 5 Cognitive Psychology 207 (1973). 176 See Weingart, supra note 1, at 362. aversion march hand-in-hand. Potential losses, from the status quo, often trigger intense emotions, as potential gains do not; and when the precautionary principle is operating, the low-probability losses have far more salience than they deserve.177 
Nor is the problem of probability neglect foreign to law. In many contexts, law seems to be a response, in part, to fear of bad outcomes without close attention to the question of probability—along one dimension, the precautionary principle in action.178 The European Community’s ban on meat products treated with hormones has raised large-scale issues about the role of public fear in risk regulation.179 The Appellate Body of the World Trade Organization ruled180 that the ban ran afoul of Article 5.1 of the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement),181 which requires members of the WTO to justify all health and safety regulations by reference to scientific risk assessments.182 In this way, the Appellate Body rejected the EC’s effort to defend itself in part by reference to consumer fears about the safety of beef treated with hormones.183 In this context, such fears were apparently real, but they neglected the issue of probability.184 177 With respect to global warming, this is the suggestion in Goklany, supra note, at 58-88, and Lomborg, supra note. 178 See Sunstein, Probability Neglect, supra note, at 179 For an illuminating discussion, see Howard Chang, Risk Regulation, Public Concerns, and the Hormone Dispute: Nothing to Fear Except Fear Itself? (unpublished manuscript 2002). 180 Report of the Appellate Body, EC Measures Concerning Meat and Meat Products (Hormones), WT/DS48/AB/R & WT/DS48/AB/R, Jan. 16, 1998 (adopted Feb. 13, 1998), available in Westlaw, WTO-DEC file, 1998 WL 25520 [hereinafter Appellate Body]. 181See id. at ¶ 208 (citing Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures art. 5.1, Apr. 15, 1994, annex 1A-4 to Final Act Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, 33 I.L.M. 1125 (1994) [hereinafter SPS Agreement]). 182See SPS Agreement, supra note , art. 5.1 (“Members shall ensure that their sanitary or phytosanitary measures are based on an assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances, of the risks to human, animal or plant life or health, taking into account risk assessment techniques developed by the relevant international organizations.”). 183See Michele D. Carter, Selling Science Under the SPS Agreement: Accommodating Consumer Preference in the Growth Hormones Controversy, 6 MINN. J. GLOBAL TRADE 625, 627 (1997). 184 For discussion of the complex normative issues, see Chang, supra note. 
The fourth point is, in a way, the largest. My suggestion is that much of the time, and with respect to risks, people neglect the systemic effect of one-shot interventions. They tend to assume that a change in a social situation would alter the part at issue, but without altering other parts. System neglect, thus understood, includes the general phenomenon of tradeoff neglect, by which people fail to see the frequent need to way competing variables against one another.185 But tradeoff neglect is only part of what is involved here. When the precautionary principle gives guidance, and when it goes wrong, it is often because those who use it are falling victim to system neglect. 
The clearest evidence comes from the German psychologist Dietrich Dorner, who has designed some fascinating experiments to see whether people can reduce social risks.186 Dorner’s experiments are run via computer. Participants are asked to reduce risks faced by the inhabitants of some region of the world. The risks may involve pollution, poverty, poor medical care, inadequate fertilization of crops, sick cattle, insufficient water, or excessive hunting and fishing. Through the magic of the computer, many policy initiatives are available—improved care of cattle, childhood immunization, drilling more wells). Participants are able to choose among them. Once particular initiatives are chosen, the computer projects, over short periods and then over decades, what is likely to happen in the region. 
In these experiments, success is entirely possible. Some initiatives will actually make for effective and enduring improvements. But many of the participants—even the most educated and professional—produce calamities. They do so because they fixate on isolated problems and do not see the complex, system-wide effects of particular interventions. For example, they may appreciate the importance of increasing the number of cattle, but once they do that, they create a serious risk of overgrazing, and they fail to 185 See Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (1995). 186 Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure: Recognizing and Avoiding Error in Complex Situations (1996). anticipate that problem.187 They may understand full well the value of drilling more wells to provide water, but they do not anticipate the energy and environmental effects of the drilling, which then endangers the food supply. Only the rare participant is able to see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions into the system, and to assess a wide range of consequences from those interventions. The successful participants seem to take small, reversible steps, or to see the full set of effects at once, and thus to protect themselves against major blunders. When people are not successful, it is because they fail to see that risks are parts of systems.188 
How would the precautionary principle operate if invoked in Dorner’s experiments? It should be easy to see that while the weaker version might provide some assistance, the stronger versions offer no help at all. There are simply too many risks against which one might take precautions. Precautions cannot be taken against all risks, not for the important but less interesting reason that resources are limited, but simply because efforts to redress any set of risks might produce risks of their own. The real world of risk regulation offers many analogues.189 To the extent that the precautionary principle appears to offer guidance, it is often because adverse systemic effects, and the need to take precautions against them, are simply being neglected. 
Howard Margolis has used a related point to explain why experts have different risk judgments from ordinary people, and he has done so in a particular effort to explain why and when ordinary people will think, “Better safe than sorry.”190 Margolis thus offers some cognitive foundations for the precautionary principle, without explicitly discussing the idea. Margolis’ goal is to cast light on some apparent anomalies in ordinary thinking about risks: Why do people believe that small risks from pesticides should be regulated, if comparatively small risks from X-rays are quite tolerable? Why are people so concerned about the risks of nuclear power, when experts tend to believe 187 Id. at 6-11. 188 For some real world analogues to Dorner’s experiments, see James Scott, Seeing Like A State (1999). 189See Wiener, supra note. 190 See Margolis, supra note. that the risks are quite low—lower, in fact, than the risks from competing energy sources, such as coal-fired power plants, which produce relatively little public objection? 
Margolis suggests that people are sometimes subject to a kind of optical illusion, in which they see the harms associated with some activity or process, but fail to see the benefits. If so, they will tend to think, “better safe they sorry.”191 If not, they will see some “fungibility” between both harms and benefits, and engage in the kind of tradeoff analysis that is more typical for experts.192 Margolis offers a nice example to support this suggestion.193 The removal of asbestos from schools in New York City was initially quite popular, indeed demanded by parents, even though experts believed that the risks were statistically small. (As it happens, the risk of a child getting cancer from asbestos insulation was about 1/3 the risk of being struck by lightning.) But when it emerged that the removal would cause schools to be closed for a period of weeks, and when the closing caused parents to become greatly inconvenienced, parental attitudes turned right around, and asbestos removal seemed like a really bad idea. When the costs of the removal came on-screen, parents thought much more like experts, and the risks of asbestos seemed well worth tolerating: Statistically small, and on balance worth incurring. The precautionary principle often operates because of the visibility of only one side of the ledger, so that people think that parents in advance of asbestos removal, seeing the possibility of hazard without confronting the problems introducing by reducing it. 
For an especially vivid example, consider the apparent views of Americans in the late 1990s. About 63 percent of Americans agreed with the statement: “Protecting the environment is so important that requirements and standards cannot be too high and continuing environmental improvements must be made regardless of cost.”194 In the same general vein, 59 percent supported the Kyoto Treaty on global warming, with only 21 percent opposed.195 But in the same period, 52 percent of Americans said that they would 191 Id. at 75-81. 192 Id. at 75-92. 193 Id. at 124-28. 194 See The Program on International Policy Attitudes, Americans on the Global Warming Treaty, available at http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/GlobalWarming/glob_warm_treaty.html at Box 15. 195 Id. refuse to support the Kyoto Treaty on global warming if “it would cost an extra $50 per month for an average American household.”196 In fact only 11 percent of Americans would support the Kyoto Treaty if the monthly expense were $100 or more.197 How can we explain strong majority support for “environmental improvements . . . regardless of cost” and strong majority rejection of environmental improvements when the cost if high? The answer lies in the fact that people are not, in fact, willing to spend an infinite amount for environmental improvements, and that when the costs are squarely placed “on screen,” people begin to weigh both costs and benefits. 
There are many other examples. People seem quite concerned about the risks associated with dioxin, a real candidate for use of the precautionary principle, but far less concerned about the statistically equivalent risks associated with aflatoxin, a carcinogen found in peanut butter.198 When aflatoxin does not trigger public concern, a large part of the reason is that the burdens of banning aflatoxin seem high and indeed intolerable; too many people would object to heavy regulation of peanut butter, a staple of school lunches and many diets for generations. In this light it is both mildly counterintuitive and reasonable, for example, to predict that people would be willing to pay less, in terms of dollars and waiting time, to reduce low-probability risks of an airplane disaster if they are frequent travellers. An intriguing study finds exactly that effect.199 It is also safe to predict that if people were told, by a reliable source, that eliminating pesticides would lead to serious health problems—for example, because pesticide-free fruits and vegetables carried special dangers200—the perceived risk of pesticides would decline dramatically, and it would be difficult to invoke the precautionary principle as a basis for stringent regulation of pesticides.201 Indeed I predict that if people were informed that eliminating pesticides would lead to a significant cost in the price of applies and oranges, the perceived risk would go down as well.202 196 Id. at Box 16. 197 Id. 198 Id. at 136-37. 199 See Matthew Harrington (unpublished manuscript). 200 See the discussion of organic food in McHughen, supra note, at 232-37. 201 Carolyn Raffensperger, The Precautionary Principle as Forecaring: Hopeful Work for the Environmental Health Movement (2000), available at http://www.biotech-info.net/forecaring.html 202 For evidence of the general phenomenon, see Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 
The conclusion is that the precautionary principle often seems helpful because analysts are focussing on the “target” risk, and not on the systemic, risk-related effects of being precautionary, or even on the risk-related consequences of risk reduction. Rational regulators, of course, think about systems, not snapshots.203 And once we see that risks are inevitably parts of systems, the precautionary principle will become far less helpful. 
In this Article I have argued not that the precautionary principle leads in the wrong directions, but that if it is taken for all that it is worth, it leads in no direction at all. The reason is that risks of one kind or another are on all sides of regulatory choices, and it is therefore impossible, in most real-world cases, to avoid running afoul of the principle. Frequently risk regulation creates a (speculative) risk from substitute risks or from foregone risk-reduction opportunities. And because of the (speculative) mortality and morbidity effects of costly regulation, any regulation, if it is costly, threatens to run afoul of the precautionary principle. We have seen that both regulation and nonregulation seem to be forbidden in cases involving nuclear power, arsenic, global warming, and genetic modification of food. The precautionary principle seems to offer guidance only because people blind themselves to certain aspects of the risk situation, focusing on a mere subset of the hazards that are at stake. 
To some extent, those who endorse the precautionary principle seem to be responding to salutary political or moral motivations that the principle might be thought to embody. Well-organized private groups sometimes demand conclusive proof of harm 203 There might seem to be some tension between the plea for wide viewscreens and my (qualified) argument for a form of judicial minimalism, in Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). But there is no tension. Minimalism is a form of incrementalism, arguing on behalf of “small steps” in part because of the risk that large-scale interventions into systems will have unanticipated adverse consequences. See id. at 52-53. Indeed, Dorner himself suggests that small steps are a desirable approach to the risk of system neglect. See The Logic of Failure, supra, at 166-81. By endorsing a wide viewscreen, I do not mean to challenge small steps, but instead to urge that in taking any step at all, officials should look at the range of likely consequences. Of course it is possible that a full assessment of such consequences will be beyond existing capacities. In such cases simplifying devices might be helpful. See Goklany, supra note, at 9-10, for some suggestions. as a precondition for regulation; the demand should be firmly resisted, because a probability of harm is, under many circumstances, a sufficient reason to act. Both individuals and societies have a tendency to neglect the future; the precautionary principle might be understood as a warning against that form of neglect. There are extremely good reasons to incorporate distributional considerations into risk regulation, and the precautionary principle seems, some of the time, to be a way to protect the most disadvantaged against risks of illness, accident, and death. Sometimes people try to reduce dissonance by thinking that actual risks are trivial; the precautionary principle might work as a helpful counterweight to this mechanism. The problem is that the precautionary principle, as applied, is a crude and sometimes perverse way to promote these various goals, not least because it might be, and has been, urged in situations in which the principle threatens to injure future generations and to harm rather than to help those who are most disadvantaged. 
I have also urged that the precautionary principle can be made operational only because of identifiable cognitive mechanisms. Often loss aversion is at work. The benefits of certain practices are less salient than the costs, simply because the costs would, along an important dimension, represent a deterioration from the status quo. When loss aversion is involved, it might be thought, wrongly, that natural processes are always safer, and better for the environment, than processes that involve human intervention. Sometimes the precautionary principle works by exploiting the availability heuristic, because the risks that matter are cognitively accessible, whereas the risks that are ignored are far less so. Frequently the precautionary principle is underwritten by probability neglect. Highly speculative harms are emphasized by those who focus on the badness of the relevant outcomes, rather than the likelihood that they will occur. Most generally, the precautionary principle sometimes gives an illusion of guidance because people focus on the immediate risk while disregarding the systemic effects of one-shot interventions, even though those interventions can give rise to risks of their own. 
I have not suggested any particular substitute for the precautionary principle. But I do not endorse the suggestion of Aaron Wildavsky, a political scientist with a special interest in risk regulation, who also rejects the precautionary principle.204 In Wildavsky’s view, the notion of “precaution” should be abandoned and replaced with a principle of “resilience,” based on an understanding that nature, and society, are quite able to incorporate even strong shocks, and that the ultimate dangers are therefore smaller than we are likely to fear. It would follow from the “resilience” principle that a nation should be less concerned than it now is with the risks associated with (for example) arsenic, global warming, and destruction of the ozone layer. Unfortunately, the principle of “resilience” is no better than that of “precaution.” Some systems are resilient, but many are not. Whether an ecosystem, or a society, is “resilent” cannot be decided in the abstract. In any case resilience is a matter of degree. Everything depends on the facts. The “resilience principle” should be understood as a heuristic, one that favors inaction in the face of possibly damaging technological change. Like most heuristics, the resilience principle will work well in many circumstances, but it can also lead to systematic and even deadly errors.205 
A better approach would acknowledge that a wide variety of adverse effects may come from inaction, regulation, and everything between. Such an approach would attempt to consider all of those adverse effects, not simply a subset.206 When existing knowledge does not allow clear assessments of the full range of adverse effects, such an approach would develop simplifying devices, helping to show the appropriate course of action in the face of uncertainty.207 Such an approach would pursue distributional goals 204 See Aaron Wildavsky, But Is It True? A Citizen’s Guide to Environmental Health and Safety Issues 433 (1995). 205 Cf. See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in Judgment and Decision Making: A Interdisciplinary Reader 38, 55 (Hal Arkes and Kenneth Hammond). (emphasizing that heuristic can lead to systematic mistakes). The resilience principle might well be taken as a reflection of optimistic bias. See Neil Weinstein, Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events, 39 J. Personality and Soc Psych. 806 (1980); Shelly Taylor, Positive Illusions (1991). 206 See Wiener, supra note; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (forthcoming 2002). 207 See Goklany, supra note, at 9-10. Instead of advocating full-fledged balancing of relevant variables, Goklany proposes that regulators look at a list of criteria, including “the human mortality criterion” (valuing human life over that of members of other species), “the immediacy criterion” (giving priority to immediate threats), “the uncertainty criterion” (giving priority to risks with a higher probability of occurring), and “the irreversibility criterion” (giving priority to risks that are likely to be permanent or persistent). Some of these criteria seem to me doubtful; a less immediate threat might, for example, deserve priority if its magnitude so suggests, and it is unclear that a small number of human lives deserve priority directly by, for example, requiring wealthy countries, major contributors to the problem of global warming, to pay poor countries to reduce greenhouse gases or to prepare themselves for the relevant risks. And such an approach would attempt to counteract, rather than to embody, the various cognitive limitations that people face in thinking about risks. An appreciation of the difficulties with the precautionary principle suggests the importance of overcoming cognitive limitations by ensuring that people have a full, rather than limited, sense of what is at stake. The result should be to help with cognitive distortions and to produce sensible priority-setting. An effort to produce a fair accounting of the universe of dangers should also help to diminish the danger of interest-group manipulation. 
To be sure, public alarm, even if ill-informed, is itself a harm, and it is likely to lead to additional harms, perhaps in the form of large-scale “ripple effects.”208 A sensible approach to risk will attempt to reduce public fear even if it is baseless. My goal here has been not to deny that point, but to explain the otherwise puzzling appeal of the precautionary principle and to isolate the strategies that help make it operational. At the individual level, these strategies are hardly senseless, especially for people who lack much information or who do the best they can by focussing on only one aspect of the situation at hand.209 But for governments, the precautionary principle is not sensible, for the simple reason that once the viewscreen is widened, it become clear that the principle provides no guidance at all. A rational system of risk regulation certainly takes precautions. But it does not adopt the precautionary principle. over a large number of lives of members of other species. But Goklany is correct to seek an approach that helps in making decisions under uncertainty. Wiener, supra note, offers some valuable suggestions, involving in partcular the need to ensure “risk-superior moves,” meaning approaches that reduce overall risks. (Unpublished manuscript at 16.) The problem with this approach is that sometimes we will lack sufficient information to identify such moves, because regulation must proceed in the face of uncertainty rather than risk. See above. 208 See the discussion of the social amplification of risk in Slovic, supra note. 209 See Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999). 
Readers with comments may address them to: 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997)49. Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999)71. 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000) Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000) Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes, The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 2000) Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System (November 2000) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care: Vicarious Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art: An Economic Approach (December 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis: A Positive Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale? Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended 
Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Conformity and Dissent" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 164, 2002). 
Conformity and Dissent 
Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
Much of the time, human beings do what others do. This is perfectly sensible, because the actions and statements of other people convey valuable information about what should be done. In addition, most people want the good opinion of others, and this desire promotes conformity. But conformity can lead both groups and institutions in unfortunate and even catastrophic directions. The most serious problem is that by following others, people fail to disclose what they know and believe, thus depriving society of important information. Those who dissent, and who reject the pressures imposed by others, perform valuable social functions, often at their own expense, material or nonmaterial. These points are illustrated by reference to theoretical and empirical work on conformity, cascades, and group polarization. An understanding of the role of conformity and dissent casts new light on a variety of legal issues, including the expressive function of law; the institutions of the American constitution; the functions of free speech in wartime; the debate over the composition of the federal judiciary; and affirmative action in higher education. 
“If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedom of expression, but not having the right myself, or enjoying the right in a society which does not have it, I would have no hesitation in judging that my own personal interest is better served by the first option.”1 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For valuable comments, I am grateful to Jacob Gersen, Reid Hastie, David Hirshleifer, Christine Jolls, Catharine MacKinnon, Martha Nussbaum, Susan Moller Okin, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Lior Strahilevitz, Adrian Vermeule, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1 Joseph Raz, Ethics in the Public Domain 39 (1994). 
“As soon as a person is in the midst of a group he is no longer indifferent to it. He may stand in a wholly unequivocal relation to an object when alone; but as soon as a group and its direction are present he ceases to be determined solely by his own coordinates. In some way he refers the group to himself and himself to the group. He might react to the group in many different ways; he might adopt its direction, compromise with it, or oppose it; he might even decide to disregard it. But even in the latter instance (which superficially seems to be an ‘absence of group influence’) there is a clear and determined reference to the group as fully as in the preceding cases.”2 
“Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the mouth of a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . I have been perhaps most personally affected by Justice Marshall as a raconteur . . . . Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly for his raised brow and his twinkling eye, hoping to hear, just once more, another story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world.”3 “A child, however, who had no important job and could only see things as his eyes showed them to him, went up to the carriage. ‘The Emperor is naked,’ he said.”4 
“[W]hile individual ideology and panel composition both have important effects on a judge’s vote, the ideology of one’s colleagues is a better predictor of one’s vote than one’s own ideology.”5 
How do people influence each other? What are the social functions of dissenters, malcontents, and skeptics? How do the answers to these questions bear on law and policy, and on the design of private and public institutions? 
2 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 483 (1952). 3 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Raconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). 4 See Hans Christian Anderson, The Emperor’s New Suit, in Hans Christian Anderson, Shorter Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 5 Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 1764 (1997). —A large number of judicial votes and decisions were investigated to see if it matters whether a panel, on a federal court of appeals, includes two judges, or instead three, appointed by a President of the same party.6 It is tempting to suggest that this should not matter at all; two judges, after all, are able to produce a majority decision. But this suggestion turns out to be wrong. A panel with three judges appointed by Republican presidents is much more likely than a panel with two to reverse an environmental decision at the behest of an industry challenger.7 A group of three like-minded judges behaves very differently from a group with more diverse views. No less remarkably, a single Democratic judge, sitting with two Republicans, turns out to be more likely to vote in favor of an industry challenge to a regulation than a single Republican, sitting with two Democrats.8 It is not entirely wrong to conclude that when sitting with Republicans, Democratic judges vote like Republicans, and that when sitting with Democrats, Republican judges vote like Democrats. But this conclusion is itself misleading, because how Democrats vote, and how Republicans vote, is very much dependent on whether they are sitting with one or two judges appointed by presidents of the same party.9 
—Ordinary citizens were asked to say, as individuals, how much a defendant should be punished for specified misconduct.10 Their responses were measured on a scale of 0 to 8, where 0 meant no punishment at all and 8 meant “extremely severe” punishment.11 After recording their individual judgments, people were sorted into six-person juries, which were asked to deliberate and to reach unanimous verdicts. When the individual jurors favored little punishment, the group showed a "leniency shift," meaning a rating that was systematically lower than the median rating of individual members before they started to talk 6 The statements in this paragraph are based on my independent research, presented below, and on Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 1755 (1997). To the same effect, see Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine, 107 Yale LJ 2155 (1998) (finding that a panel of three Republican judges is far more likely to reject agency action, in order to reach a conclusion that would be predicted of that panel on political grounds, than a panel of two Republicans and one Democrat). 7 See the data discussed below; see also Revesz, supra note, at 1754-55 (also finding that a panel of three judges appointed by the president of the same party behaves differently from a panel with judges appointed by presidents of different parties) . 8 See id. at 1752. 9 Id. at 1752, 1754. 10 See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating About Dollars, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 (2001). 11 Id. at 1150. with one another.12 But when individual jurors favored strong punishment, the group as a whole produced a "severity shift," meaning a rating that was systematically higher than the median rating of individual members before they started to talk.13 The direction and the extent of the shift were determined by the median ranking of individual jurors, and because one or two dissenters from the majority view could shift the median, they could make a significant difference. 
My principal claim in this Article is that for each of us, conformity is often a rational course of action, but when all or most of us conform, society can end up making large mistakes. One reason we conform is that we often lack much information of our own, and the decisions of others provide the best available information about what should be done.14 The central problem is that widespread conformity deprives the public of information that it needs to have. Conformists are often thought to be protective of social interests, keeping quiet for the sake of the group, while dissenters tend to be seen as selfish individualists, embarking on projects of their own. But in an important sense, the opposite is closer to the truth. In many situations, dissenters benefit others, while conformists benefit themselves. 
In a well-functioning democracy, institutions reduce the risks that accompany conformity, in part because they meet conformity with dissent, and hence increase the likelihood that more information will emerge, to the benefit of all. A high-level official during World War II attributed the successes of the Allies, and the failures of Hitler and the other Axis powers, to the greater ability of citizens in democracies to scrutinize and dissent, and hence to improve past and proposed courses of action.15 Dissent and scrutiny were possible because skeptics were not punished by the law and because informal punishments, in the form of social pressures, were relatively weak. I will suggest that an understanding of group influences, and their potentially harmful effects, casts new light on a wide range of issues, including the nature of the American 12 Id. at 1152, 1154-55. 13 Id. 14 See the discussion of imitation as a fast and frugal heuristic in Joseph Henrich et al., What Is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 343, 344 (Gerd Gigerenzer and Richard Selten eds. 2002) (“Cultural transmission capacities allow individuals to shortcut the costs of search, experimentation, and data processing algorithms, and instead benefit from the cumulative experience stored in the minds (and observed in the behavior) of others.”). 15 See Luther Gulick, Administrative Reflections from World War II (1948). Irving Janis, Groupthink (2d ed. 1985), can be seen as a generalization of this theme. constitutional structure; the functions of bicameralism; the sources of ethnic hostility and political radicalism; the importance of civil liberties in wartime and during social panics and witch-hunts; the performance of juries; the effects of diversity on the federal judiciary; affirmative action in higher education; and the potentially large consequences of law even when it is never enforced. 
Throughout I focus on two influences on individual belief and behavior. The first involves the information conveyed by the actions and statements of other people. If a number of people seem to believe that some proposition is true, there is reason to believe that that proposition is in fact true. Most of what we think—about facts, morality, and law—is a product not of first-hand knowledge, but of what we learn from what others do and think. This is true even though they too may be merely following the crowd. As we shall see, this phenomenon can create serious problems for the system of precedent, as when courts of appeals follow previous courts that are in turn following their predecessors, creating a danger of widespread, self-perpetuating error. And of course some people have more influence than others, simply because the decisions of those people convey more information; we are especially likely to follow those who have special expertise, those who seem most like us, those who fare best, or those whom we otherwise have reason to trust.16 
The second influence is the pervasive human desire to have and to retain the good opinion of others. If a number of people seem to believe something, there is reason not to disagree with them, at least not in public. The desire to maintain the good opinion of others breeds conformity and squelches dissent, especially but not only in groups that are connected by bonds of affection, which can therefore impair group performance. We shall see that close-knit groups, discouraging conflict and disagreement, often do badly for that very reason. In any case much of human behavior is a product of social influences. For example, employees are far more likely to file suit if members of the same workgroup have also done so17; teenage girls who see that other teenagers are having children are more likely to become pregnant themselves18; the perceived behavior of others 16 See Daniel Goldstein et al., Why and When Do Simple Heuristics Work?, in Bounded Rationality, note supra, at 174–76; Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson, Norms and Bounded Rationality, in id. at 284–87. 17 See Harold H. Gardner, Nathan L. Kleinman, and Richard J. Butler, Workers’ Compensation and Family and Medical Leave Act Claim Contagion, 20 J Risk and Uncertainty 89, 101–110 (2000) 18 See, e.g., George A. Akerlof, Janet L. Yellen & Michael L. Katz, An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in the United States, 111 Q.J. Econ. 277 (1996). has a large effect on the level of violent crime19; broadcasters mimic one another, producing otherwise inexplicable fads in programming20; lower courts sometimes do the same, especially in highly technical areas, and hence judicial mistakes may never be corrected.21 
We should not lament social influences or wish them away. Much of the time, people do better when they take close account of what others do. Some of the time, we even do best to follow others blindly. But social influences also diminish the total level of information within any group, and they threaten, much of the time, to lead individuals and institutions in the wrong directions. Dissent can be an important corrective; many groups and institutions have too little of it.22 As we shall see, conformists are free-riders, whereas dissenters often confer benefits on others; and it is tempting to free-ride. As we shall also see, social pressures are likely to lead groups of like-minded people to extreme positions. When groups become caught up in hatred and violence, it is rarely because of economic deprivation23 or primordial suspicions24; it is far more often a product of the informational and reputational influences discussed here.25 Indeed, unjustified extremism frequently results from a “crippled epistemology,” in which extremists react to a small subset of relevant information, coming mostly from one another.26 19 See Edward Glaeser, E. Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman, Crime and Social Interactions, 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 507 (1996). 20 See Robert Kennedy, Strategy Fads and Strategic Positioning: An Empirical Test for Herd Behavior in Prime-Time Television Programming, J. Industrial Economics (2002). 21 See Andrew F. Daughtety and Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment, 1 Am Law and Ec. Rev. 158 (1999). 22 Hence Mill’s claim that “the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, stil more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.” John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government 85 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972) 23 See Alan B. Krueger and Jitka Maleckova, Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism: Is There a Causal Connection? (unpublished manuscript 2002). 24 See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cascades, 27 J Legal Stud 623, 648 (1998). 25 See Cass R. Sunstein, Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics, 25 Harv J Law and Public Policy 429 (2002). 26 See Russell Hardin, The Crippled Epistemology of Extremism, in Political Rationality and Extremism 3, 16 (Albert Breton et al. eds. 2002). 
Similar processes occur in less dramatic forms. Many large-scale shifts within legislatures, bureaucracies, and courts are best explained by reference to social influences. When a legislature suddenly shows concern with some formerly neglected problem—for example, hazardous waste dumps or corporate misconduct—the concern is often a product of conformity effects, not of real engagement with the problem. Of course the new concern might be justified. But if social influences are encouraging people to conceal information that they have, or if the blind are leading the blind, serious problems are likely. There is a further point. With relatively small "shocks," similar groups can be lead, by social pressures, to dramatically different beliefs and actions. When societies differ, or when large-scale changes occur over time, the reason often lies not where we usually look, but in small and sometimes elusive factors.27 
An appreciation of informational influences, and of people’s concern for the good opinion of others, helps to show how, and when, law can alter behavior without being enforced—and merely by virtue of the signal that it provides.28 The central point here is that law can provide reliable evidence both about what should be done and about what most people think should be done. In either case, it can convey a great deal of relevant information.29 Consider bans on public smoking and on sexual harassment. If people think that the law is speaking for the view of most or all, potential violators are less likely to engage in smoke or to engage in sexual harassment. Potential victims are also more likely to take the steps to enforce the law privately, as, for example, through reminding people of their legal responsibilities, and insisting that violators come into compliance. In this light we can better understand the much-disputed claim that the law has an “expressive function.”30 By virtue of that function, law can even stop or 27 See Joseph Henrich, What is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 353-54 (2001), for an entertaining outline in connection with food choice decisions. For example: “Many Germans believe that drinking water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that putting ice in soft drinks is unhealthy. The English, however, rather enjoy a cold drink of water after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments. ” Id. at 353. See also Paul Omerod, Butterfly Economics (1993), for a popular account. 28 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking Policy (Robert Rabin and Stephen Sugarman eds.) (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 29 See Richard McAdams, Norms Theory: An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive Law, 79 Oregon L. Rev. 339 (2000). 30 Mathew Adler, Expressivist Theories of Law: A Skeptical Overview, 148 U Pa L Rev 1363 (2000); Symposium, The Expressive Dimension of Governmental Action: Philosophical and Legal Perspectives, 60 Maryland L. Rev. 465 (2001). accelerate a social cascade.31 Here too the areas of cigarette smoking and sexual harassment are relevant examples. But if would-be violators are part of a dissident subcommunity, they might well be able to resist law’s expressive effect; fellow dissidents can band together and encourage one another to violate the law. Indeed, informational and reputational factors can even encourage widespread noncompliance, as, for example, in drug use and failure to comply with the tax laws.32 The law’s expressive power is partly a function of its moral authority, and when law lacks that authority within a subcommunity, its signal may be irrelevant or even counterproductive. 
This Article is divided into seven parts. Parts II, III, and IV investigate social science evidence involving, respectively, conformity, cascades, and group polarization. A unifying theme is that in all three contexts, individuals are suppressing their private signals—about what is true and what is right—and that this suppression can cause significant social harm. Groups of like-minded people are especially vulnerable on this count. Part V focuses on the expressive function of law and in particular on the phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement.” Part VI catalogues some implications of social influences for constitutionalism, judicial confirmations, and affirmative action in higher education. Here I urge that the principal contribution of the framers of the American Constitution lay not in their endorsement of deliberative democracy, but in their insistence that diversity is an affirmative good, likely to improve deliberation. This enthusiasm for diversity helps account for the systems of checks and balances and federalism. I also suggest that it is important to attempt to provide a mix of views on the federal bench; indeed, consideration should be given to increasing the likelihood that panels, on courts of appeals, contain judges appointed by president of different parties. I urge as well that in those cases in which racial diversity will improve discussion, it is entirely legitimate for colleges and universities to attempt to promote racial diversity. Part VII is a brief conclusion. 
II. 
Why, and when, do people do what others do? To answer this question, we need to distinguish between hard questions and easy ones. Intuition suggests 31 See Dan Kahan, Gentle Nudges vs. Hard Shoves: Solving the Sticky Norms Problem, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev 607 (2000). 32 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, in Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking Policy: Law, Politics, and Culture 78 (Robert Radin ed. 1999). that when people are confident that they are right, they will be more willing to do what they think best and to reject the views of the crowd. Several sets of experiments confirm this intuition, but they also offer some significant twists. Most important, they suggest three points that I will emphasize throughout: otherwise identical groups in dramatically different directions.33 a single dissenter, or voice of sanity, is likely to have a huge impact.34 likely to influence us, even on the simplest questions.35 And if people are part of a group to which we also belong, they are far more likely to influence us, on both easy and hard questions.36 
My ultimate goal is to see how these points bear on the behavior of those involved in making, enforcing, and interpreting law. But let us begin by reviewing some classic studies. 
In the 1930s, the psychologist Muzafer Sherif conducted some simple experiments on sensory perception.37 Subjects were placed in a very dark room and a small pinpoint of light was positioned at some distance in front of them. Because of a perceptual illusion, the light, which was actually stationary, appeared to move. On each of several trials, Sherif asked people to estimate the distance that the light had moved. When polled individually, subjects did not agree with one another, and their answers varied from one trial to another. This is not surprising; because the light did not move, any judgment about distance was a stab in the dark. But Sherif found some striking results when subjects were 33 See p. below. 34 See p. below. Note a parallel finding: A minority is especially likely to have influence if it consists of more than one person and if all members of the minority group are in basic agreement. See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 81-82 (1999). 35 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What to think By Knowing Who You Are: Self-Categorization and he Nature of Norm Formation, Conformity, and Group Polarization, 29 British J. Soc. Psych. 97 (1990). Group membership and self-categorization are emphasized in John Turner et al., Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory 42-67 (1987). 36 Dominic Abrams et al., supra note, at 97-110. 37 Muzafer Sherif, An Experimental Approach to the Study of Attitudes, 1 Sociometry 90 (1937). A good outline can be found in Lee Ross and Richard Nisbet, The Person and the Situation 28-30 (1991). asked to act in small groups. Here the individual judgments converged and a group norm, establishing the right distance, quickly developed. Indeed, the norm remained stable within groups across different trials, thus leading to a situation in which different groups made, and were committed to, quite different judgments.38 There is an important clue here about how similar groups, indeed similar nations, can converge on very different beliefs and actions simply because of modest and even arbitrary variations in starting points. 
When Sherif added a confederate—his own ally, unbeknownst to subjects—something else happened.39 The judgment of the confederate, typically much higher or much lower than those made by individual subjects, helped produced correspondingly higher or lower judgments within the group. The large lesson is that at least in cases involving difficult questions of fact, judgments “could be imposed by an individual who had no coercive power and no special claim to expertise, only a willingness to be consistent and unwavering in the face of others’ uncertainty.”40 Perhaps more remarkable still, the group’s judgments became thoroughly internalized, so that subjects would adhere to them even when reporting on their own, even a year later, and even when participating in new groups whose members offered different judgments.41 The initial judgments were also found to have effects across “generations.” In an experiment in which fresh subjects were introduced and others retired, so that eventually all participants were new to the situation, the original group judgment tended to stick, even after the person who was originally responsible for it had been long gone.42 
What accounts for these results? The most obvious answer points to the informational influences produced by other people’s judgments. After all, the apparent movements are a perceptual illusion, and the system of perception does not readily assign distances to those movements. In those circumstances, people are especially likely to be swayed by a confident and consistent group member. This finding has implications outside of the laboratory and for classrooms, courtrooms, bureaucracies, and legislatures. If uninformed people are trying to decide whether global warming is a serious problem, or whether they should be 38 Id. at 29. 39 Id. 40 Id. 41 Id. 42 Id. at 29-30. concerned about existing levels of arsenic in drinking water, they are likely to be responsive to the views of confident and consistent others.43 
What is true for factual issues is true for moral, political, and legal issues as well. Suppose that a group of legislators is trying to decide how to handle a highly technical issue. If a “confederate” is planted among the group, showing considerable confidence, she is highly likely to be able to move the group in his preferred direction. So too if she is not a confederate at all, but simply an ordinary legislator with great confidence on the issue at hand. If judges are trying to resolve a complex issue on which they lack certainty, they too are vulnerable to conformity effects.44 And for judicial panels as well, Sherif-type effects can be expected on technical matters if one judge is confident and seems expert. The problem is that the so-called specialists may have biases and agendas of their own, leading to large errors. Note that there is an important qualification to these claims, to which I will return: Sherif’s conformity findings significantly decrease if the experimenter uses a confederate whose membership in a different social group is made salient to subjects.45 
But what if perception does provide reliable guidance? What if people have good reason to know the right answer? The leading experiments, conducted by Solomon Asch, explored whether people would be willing to overlook the apparently unambiguous evidence of their own senses.46 In these experiments, the subject was placed into a group of seven to nine people who seemed to be other subjects in the experiment but who were actually Asch’s confederates. The simple task was to “match” a particular line, shown on a large white card, to one of the three “comparison lines” that was identical to it in length. The two nonmatching lines were substantially different, with the differential varying from an inch and three quarters to three quarters of an inch. 43 See the discussion of authority in Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion 20836 (1993). For evidence that minority views can be influential if they are held by consistent, confident people, see Robert Bray et al., Social Influence By Group Members With Minority Opinions, 43 J Personality and Social Psych. 78 (1982). 44 See section below. 45 Abrams, supra note, at 99-104. 46 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995). 
In the first two rounds of the Asch experiments, everyone agrees about the right answer. “The discriminations are simple; each individual monotonously calls out the same judgment.”47 But “suddenly this harmony is disturbed at the third round.”48 All other group members make what is obviously, to the subject and to any reasonable person, a clear error, matching the line at issue to one that is conspicuously longer or shorter. In these circumstances, the subject, in all cases showing initial confusion and disbelief at the apparent mistakes of others, has a choice: He can maintain his independent judgment or instead accept the view of the unanimous majority. A large number of people end up yielding at least once in a series of trials. When asked to decide on their own, subjects erred less than 1% of the time; but in rounds in which group pressure supported the incorrect answer, subjects erred 36.8% of the time.49 Indeed, in a series of twelve questions, no less than 70% of subjects went along with the group, and defied the evidence of their own senses, at least once.50 Conformity experiments of this kind have now produced 133 total sets of results from seventeen countries, including Zaire, Germany, France, Japan, Lebanon, and Kuwait.51 A meta-analysis of these studies uncovers a variety of refinements on Asch’s basic findings, but his basic conclusion has held up. For all results, the mean percentage error is 29%.52 People in some nations, with “conformist” cultures, do err more than people in other nations, with more “individualist” cultures.53 The variations are real, but the overall pattern of errors—with subjects conforming between 20% and 40% of the time—does not show huge differences across nations. 
Note that Asch’s findings contain two conflicting lessons. First, a significant number of people are independent all or much of the time. About 25% of people are consistently independent,54 and about two-thirds of total individual answers do not conform. Hence “there is evidence of extreme individual differences” in susceptibility to group influences, with some subjects remaining completely independent, and others “going with the majority without exception.”55 While independent subjects “present a striking spectacle to an 47 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 453 (1952). 48 Asch, Opinion and Social Pressures, supra note, at 13. 49 Id. at 16. 50 Id. 51 See Rod Bond and Peter Smith, Culture and Conformity: A Meta-Analysis of Studies Using Asch’s Line Judgment Task, 119 Psych. Bulletin 111, 116 (1996). 52 Id. at 118. 53 Id. at 128. 54 Ronald Friend et al., A Puzzling Misinterpretation of the Asch “Conformity” Study, 20 European J of Social Psych 29, 37 (1990). 55 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology, supra note, at 457-58. observer,” giving “the appearance of being unshakable,”56 other people show a great deal of anxiety and confusion.57 Second, most subjects, at least some of the time, are willing to yield to the group even on an apparently easy question on which they have direct and unambiguous evidence. For present purposes, the latter finding is the most important. 
Why do people sometimes ignore the evidence of their own senses? The two principal explanations involve information and peer pressure. Some of Asch’s subjects seem to have thought that the unanimous confederates must be right; but other people, though believing that group members were unaccountably mistaken, were unwilling to make, in public, what those members would see as an error. In Asch’s own studies, several conformists said, in private interviews, that their own opinions must have been wrong58—a point that suggests that information, rather than peer pressure, is what was moving them.59 This informational account is strengthened by one study in which people recorded their answers anonymously but gave nearly as many wrong answers as they had under Asch’s own conditions.60 A similar study finds that conformity is not lower when the subject’s response is unavailable to the majority.61 On the other hand, these are unusual results, and experimenters generally find significantly reduced error, in the same basic circumstances as Asch’s experiments, when the subject is asked to give a purely private answer.62 In the same way, easily identifiable conformity or deviation has been found to produce higher conformity.63 These findings suggest that peer pressure matters as well. 
Asch’s own conclusion was that his results raised the possibility that “the social process is polluted” by the “dominance of conformity.”64 He added, “That we have found the tendency to conformity in our society so strong that reasonably intelligent and well-meaning young people are willing to call white 56 Id. at 466. 57 Id. at 470. 58 See Asch, supra. 59 It would be possible to question this explanation, however, on the ground that some of these conformists might have been embarrassed to admit that they were vulnerable to peer influence, entirely apart from a belief that the peers might have been right. 60 See Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance 149-50 (2000). 61 Bond and Smith, supra note, at 124. 62 See Aronson, supra note, at 23-24. 63 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 64 Asch, supra note, at 21. black is a matter of concern.”65 As I have noted, Asch’s experiments produce broadly similar findings across nations, and so in Asch’s sentence just quoted, the word “society” could well be replaced with the word “world.” But I want to stress another point here: Many people are not willing to disclose their own information to the group, even though it is in the group’s interest, most of the time, to learn what it is known or thought by individual members. To see this point, imagine a group almost all of whose members believe something to be true even though it is false. Imagine too that one member of the group, or a very few members of the group, know the truth. Are they likely to correct the dominant view? If Asch’s findings generalize, the answer is that they may not be. They are not reticent because they are irrational. They are making is a perfectly sensible response to the simple fact that the dominant view is otherwise—a fact that suggests either that the small minority is wrong or that they are likely to risk their own reputations if they insist that they are right. As we shall see, Asch’s findings help explain why groups can end up making unfortunate and even selfdestructive decisions. 
Would those findings apply to judgments about morality, policy, and law? It seems jarring to think that people would yield to a unanimous group when the question involves a moral, political, or legal issue on which they have great confidence. But if Asch is correct, such yielding should be expected, at least some of the time. We will find powerful evidence that this happens within federal courts of appeals.66 The deadening effect of public opinion was of course a central concern of John Stuart Mill, who insisted that protection “against the tyranny of the magistrate is not enough,” and that it was also important to protect “against the tyranny of the prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by other mans than civil penalties, its own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them . . .”67 Mill’s focus here is on the adverse effects of coerced conformity not only on the individuals who are thus tyrannized, but also on society itself, which is deprived of important information.68 65 Id. 66 See below. 67 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government 73 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972). 68 See id. at 72-76. 
What factors increase or decrease conformity? Consistent with Sherif’s findings, people are less likely to conform if they have high social status or are extremely confident about their own views.69 They are more likely to conform if the task is difficult or if they are frightened.70 Consider also the following: different ways.71 When people stand to make money if they are right, the rate of conformity is significantly decreased in the same basic condition as the Asch experiments, if the task is easy. People are less willing to follow group members when they stand to profit from a correct answer. But there is a striking difference when the experiments are altered to make the underlying task difficult. In that event, a financial incentive, rewarding correct answers, actually increases conformity. People are more willing to follow to crowd when they stand to profit from a correct answer if the question is hard. Perhaps most strikingly, the level of conformity is about the same, when financial incentives were absent, in lowdifficulty and high-difficulty tasks—but the introduction of financial rewards splits the results on those tasks dramatically apart, with significantly decreased conformity for low-difficulty tasks and significantly-increased conformity for high-difficulty tasks.72 
These results have simple explanations. A certain number of people, in the Asch experiments, actually know the right answer, and give conforming answers only because it is not worthwhile to reject the shared view of others in public. But when a financial incentive is offered, peer pressure is outweighed by the possibility of material gain. The simple lesson here is that an economic reward can counteract the effects of social pressures. By contrast, difficult tasks leave people with a great deal of uncertainty about whether they are right. In such circumstances, people are all the more likely to give weight to the views of others, simply because those views are the most reliable source of information. Consider in this regard the parallel finding that people’s confidence in their own judgments is directly related to the confidence shown by the experimenter’s confederates.73 When the confederates act with confidence and enthusiasm, 69 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 70 Id. 71 See Robert Baron et al., The Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact of Task Importance on Social Influence, 71 J Personality and Social Psych. 915 (1996). 72 Id. at 923. 73 Id. subjects also show heightened confidence in their judgments, even when they were simply following the crowd. Consider also the general claim that imitation of most other people can operate as a kind of fast and frugal heuristic, one that works well for many creatures, including human beings, in a wide variety of settings.74 Like most heuristics, the imitation heuristic, while generally sensible and often the best available, also produces errors in many situations.75 
There is a disturbing implication. A “majority consensus” is “often capable of misleading individuals into inaccurate, irrational, or unjustified judgments.” Such a consensus “can also produce heightened confidence in such judgments as well.” 76 It follows that “so long as the judgments are difficult or ambiguous, and the influencing agents are united and confident, increasing the importance of accuracy will heighten confidence as well as conformity—a dangerous combination.”77 The point very much bears on the sources of unjustified extremism, especially under circumstances in which countervailing information is unavailable.78 The same point helps explain group influences within the federal courts.79 
confederates, unanimously making the erroneous decision, mattered only up to a number of three; increases from that point had little effect.80 Using one confederate did not increase subjects’ errors at all; using two confederates increased errors to 13.6%; and using from three confederates increased error to 31.8%, not substantially different from the level that emerged from further increases in group size. But Asch’s own findings appear unusual on this count. Subsequent studies have found that, contrary to Asch’s own findings, increases in the size of the group of confederates usually do increase conformity.81 
More significantly, a modest variation in the experimental conditions made all the difference: the existence of at least one compatriot, or voice of sanity, dramatically reduced both conformity and error. When one confederate 74 See Daniel Goldstein et al., Why and When Do Simple Heuristics Work?, in Bounded Rationality, supra note, at 174. 75 See id. 76 Baron et al., supra note, at 925. 77 Id. at 925. 78 See Hardin, supra note. 79 See below. 80 Asch, supra note. 81 Baron, supra note, at 119-20. made a correct match, errors were reduced by three-quarters, even if there was a strong majority the other way.82 There is a clear implication here: If a group is embarking on an unfortunate course of action, a single dissenter might be able to turn it around, by energizing ambivalent group members who would otherwise follow the crowd. It follows that affective ties among members, making even a single dissent less likely, might well undermine the performance of groups and institutions. Consider here a study of the performance of investment clubs— small groups of people who pool their money to make joint decisions about stock market investments.83 The worst-performing clubs were built on affective ties and primarily social; the best-performing clubs limited social connections and were focused on increasing returns. Dissent was far more frequent in the highperforming clubs. The low performers usually had unanimous votes, with little open debate. The problem is that the votes in low performing groups were “cast to build social cohesion rather than to make the best financial choice.”84 In short, conformity resulted in significantly lower returns. 
experimenters’ confederates and in particular on whether the subject considers himself part of the same group in which those confederates fall. If the subject identified himself as a member of a different group from the majority, the conformity effect is greatly reduced.85 People are especially likely to conform when the group consists of people whom subjects like or admire, or otherwise identify with.86 The general point explains why group membership is often emphasized by those who seek to increase or decrease the influence of a certain point of view. Perhaps an advocate can be discredited, without the relevant group, by showing that he is a “conservative” or a “liberal,” prone to offer unacceptable views. 
Thus conformity—and hence error—is dramatically increased, in public statements, when the subject perceives himself as part of a reasonably discrete 82 Id. at 18. The finding here is reminiscent of the tale of The Emperor’s New Clothes, in which a single voice of sanity was necessary and sufficient to expose the truth. See Hans Christian Anderson, The Emperor’s New Suit, in Hans Christian Anderson, Shorter Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 83 Brooke Harrington, Cohesion, Conflict and Group Demography (unpublished manuscript 2000), 84 Id. 85 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 97, 104-110 (1990). 86 Baron et al., supra, at 66. The point is stressed at various places in Turner, supra note; see, e.g., pp. 151-170. group that includes the experimenter’s confederates (all, like himself, psychology majors, for example).87 By contrast, conformity is dramatically decreased, and hence error is also dramatically decreased, in public statements when the subject perceives himself as in a different group from the experimenter’s confederates (all but himself ancient history majors, for example).88 Notably, private opinions, expressed anonymously afterwards, were about the same whether or not the subject perceived himself as a member of the same group as others in the experiment. And people who thought that they were members of the same group as the experimenter’s confederates gave far more accurate answers, and far less conforming answers, when they were speaking privately.89 In the real world, would-be dissenters might silence themselves partly when and because they trust group members to be right, partly because they do not want to risk the opprobrium of like-minded others, and partly because they fear that they will, through their dissent, weaken the effectiveness and reputation of the group to which they belong. There is a large lesson here. Publicly expressed statements, showing agreement with a majority view, may be both wrong and insincere, especially when relevant speakers identify themselves as members of the same group as the majority.90 The finding of heightened conformity is linked with evidence of poor performance by groups whose members are connected by 87 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 97, 106-08 (1990). 88 Id. 89 See Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. By contrast, people who thought that they were members of a different group actually gave more accurate, nonconforming answers when speaking publicly, which creates an interesting puzzle: Why was there more accuracy in public than in private statements? The puzzle is solved if we consider the likelihood that subjects could consider it an affirmative good to disagree with people from another group (even if they secretly suspected that those people might be right). In the real world, this effect may well be heightened when people are asked whether they agree with opponents or antagonists; they might well say “no” even when the answer is “yes,” simply because agreement carries costs, either to reputation or to self-conception. 
There is a noteworthy finding about the nature of minority influences: They have a larger impact on people’s privately expressed views than on their publicly expressed views. See Baron et al., supra note, at 79-80. For example, minority members who express enthusiasm for gay rights, or opposition to gay rights, affect anonymous opinions more than publicly stated opinions. See id. at 80. This point has obvious implications for the effects of secret votes and ballots. 90 Consider the fact that the least conformity, and the greatest accuracy, was found when people who thought of themselves in a different group were speaking publicly. At the same time, the largest number of conforming, inaccurate responses came when people thought of themselves in the same group and were speaking publicly -- even though the number of inaccurate private responses in that experimental condition was not notably higher than in other conditions. See Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. arguments from both sides, and polarization followed this presentation, as it has elsewhere.355 Notice in this regard that for polarization hypothesis to hold, it is not necessary to know whether judges spend a great deal of time offering reasons to one another. Mere exposure to a conclusion is enough.356 A system of simple votes, unaccompanied by reasons, should incline judges to polarize. Of course reasons, if they are good ones, are likely to make those votes especially persuasive. 
like-minded judges go to extremes, should we be troubled? Is it good if a large effect is found from a single judge from a different party? More generally: Is there reason to attempt to ensure diversity on the federal courts? To promote a degree of diversity on panels? There is a widespread view that judges appointed by presidents of different political parties are not fundamentally different and that once on the bench, judges frequently surprise those who nominated them.357 The view is not entirely baseless, but it is misleading. Some appointees do disappoint the Presidents who nominated them, but the availability heuristic should not fool us into thinking that these examples are typical. Judges appointed by Republican presidents are quite different from judges appointed by Democratic presidents. “Partisanship clearly affects how appellate courts review agency discretion.”358 
But it seems difficult to evaluate the underlying issues without taking a stand on the merits—without knowing what we want judges to do. Suppose that three Republican judges are especially likely to uphold criminal convictions, and that three Democratic judges are especially likely to reverse those convictions. At first glance, one or the other is troubling only if we know whether we approve of one or another set of results. In the punitive damage study discussed above, the movement toward increased awards might be something to celebrate, not to deplore, if we conclude that the median of predeliberation awards is too low and that the increase, produced by group discussion, ensures more sensible awards. And if a view about what judges should do is the only possible basis for evaluation, we might conclude that those who prefer judges of a particular party should seek judges of that party, and that group influences are essentially beside the point. 355 Schkade, supra note, at 1150 and 1150 n. 44. 356 See Robert Baron et al., supra note, at 74. 357 See, e.g., Jeffrey Rosen, New York Times Magazine; others. 358 See Revesz, supra note, at 2175. 
But the conclusion is too strong. In some cases, the law, properly interpreted, really does argue strongly for one or another view. The existence of diversity on a panel is likely to bring that fact to light and perhaps to move the panel’s decision in the direction of what the law requires. The existence of politically diverse judges, and of a potential dissent, increases the probability that the law will be followed. The Chevron study, referred to above, strongly supports this point.359 The presence of a potential dissenter—in the form of a judge appointed by a president from another political party—creates a possible whistleblower who can reduce the likelihood of an incorrect or lawless decision.360 Through an appreciation of the nature of group influences, we can see the wisdom in an old idea: A decision is more likely to be right, and less likely to be political in a pejorative sense, if it is supported by judges with different predilections. 
There is a further point. Suppose that in many areas, it is not clear, in advance, whether the appointees of Democratic or Republican presidents are correct. Suppose that we are genuinely uncertain. If so, there is reason to favor a situation in which the legal system has both, simply on the ground that through that route, more (reasonable) opinions are likely to be heard. And if we are genuinely uncertain, there is reason to favor a mix of views merely by virtue of its moderating effect. In the face of uncertainty, sensible people choose between the poles.361 
by independent regulatory commissions, such as the Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, and the Federal Communications Commission. Much of the time, such agencies act through adjudication. They function in the same fashion as federal courts. And under federal statutes, Congress has attempted to ensure that these agencies are not monopolized by either Democrats or Republicans. The law requires that no more than a bare majority of agency members may be from a single party.362 An understanding of group influences helps explain this requirement. An independent agency that is all-Democratic, or all-Republican, might move toward an extreme position, indeed a position that is more extreme than that of 359 See Cross and Tiller, supra note. 360 This is the explanation in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2173. 361 For evidence, see Mark Kelman et al., Context-Independence in Legal Decisionmaking, in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 362 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 78d (1994). the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any agency official standing alone. A requirement of bipartisan membership can operate as a check against movements of this kind. Congress was apparently aware of this general point. Closely attuned to the policymaking functions of the relevant institutions, it was careful to provide a safeguard against extreme movements. 
Why do we fail to create similar safeguards for courts? Part of the answer must lie in a belief that unlike heads of independent regulatory commissions, judges are not policymakers. Their duty is to follow the law, not to make policy. An attempt to ensure bipartisan composition would seem inconsistent with the commitment to this belief. But the evidence I have discussed shows judges are policymakers of an important kind, and that their political commitments very much influence their votes. In principle, there is good reason to attempt to ensure a mix of perspectives within courts of appeals. 
Of course the idea of diversity, or of a mix of perspectives, is hardly selfdefining. It would not be appropriate to say that the federal judges should include people who refuse to obey the Constitution, or who refuse to exercise the power of judicial review, or who think that the Constitution allows suppression of political dissent and racial segregation. Here as elsewhere, the domain of appropriate diversity is limited. What is necessary is reasonable diversity, or diversity of reasonable views, and not diversity as such. People can certainly disagree about what reasonable diversity entails in this context. All that I am suggesting here is that there is such a thing as reasonable diversity, and that it is important to ensure that judges, no less than anyone else, are exposed to it, and not merely through the arguments of advocates. 
issue: the legitimate role of the Senate in giving “advice and consent” to presidential appointments to the federal judiciary. Above all, an understanding of social influences suggests that the Senate has a responsibility to exercise its constitutional authority in order to ensure a reasonable diversity of view. The Constitution’s history fully contemplates an independent role for the Senate in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.363 That independent role certainly authorizes the Senate to consider the general approach, and likely pattern of votes, of potential judges. There can be no doubt that the President considers the 363 See David A. Strauss and Cass R. Sunstein, The Senate, the Constitution, and the Confirmation Process, 101 Yale L.J. 1491 (1992). general approach of his nominees; the Senate is entitled to do so as well. Under good conditions, these simultaneous powers would bring about a healthy form of checks and balances, permitting each branch to counter the other. Indeed, that system is part and parcel of social deliberation about the direction of the federal judiciary. 
Why might this view be rejected? It could be urged that there is only one legitimate approach to constitutional or statutory interpretation—that, for example, some version of originalism or textualism is the only such approach, and that anyone who rejects that view is unreasonable. For true believers, it is pointless to argue for diverse views.364 Diversity is not necessary, or even valuable, if we already know what should be done, and if competing views would simply cloud the issue. (In a scientific dispute, it is not helpful to include those who believe that the earth is flat.) Or it might be urged that a deferential role for the Senate, combined with natural political competition and cycles, will produce a sensible mix over time. I do not deny this possibility. My only suggestions are that a high degree of diversity on the federal judiciary is desirable, that the Senate is entitled to pursue diversity, and that without such diversity, judicial panels are will inevitably go in unjustified directions. 
Countless educational institutions pursue the goal of diversity. Most of America’s large private and public institutions seek a wide range of views, faculty, and students. There are some prominent exceptions; some institutions pride themselves on a high degree of homogeneity.365 And here as elsewhere, the idea of diversity needs to be clarified. Colleges and universities do not make special efforts to include students who collect Britney Spears memorabilia, hate America, smell bad, or have low SAT’s. Such institutions are committed to diversity, but only to a certain degree and of a certain kind. It remains possible to urge, as many do, that they give excessive attention to diversity of some kinds and insufficient attention to diversity of other kinds. The only point I am making here is that they tend to be committed to diversity of a recognizable sort. 364 Note, however, that even if it would be appropriate for all judges to share a certain approach, it is also desirable to have diversity with respect to the application of that approach. Textualists do not all agree with one another; there is internal diversity in the world of originalism. Diversity is appropriate here to ensure an airing of reasonable views. 365 See the discussion of Brigham Young University in Martha Nussbaum, Cultivating Humanity (1999). 
There are many reasons for this commitment. One involves simple market pressures; a school that has different sorts of students is more likely to be able to attract good faculty and good students.366 Of course people’s preferences and values vary, and some people want to go to places that are relatively homogeneous. But this seems to be the exception rather than the rule.367 And there is another justification for diversity, one that has received considerable attention within courts368 and that is closely related to my topic here. The idea is that education is simply likely to be better if the school has people with different views, perspectives, and experiences. In the context of affirmative action, this justification was approved in Justice Powell’s decisive opinion in the Bakke case,369 an opinion that has the unusual distinction of having settled, for a period of decades, the constitutionality of affirmative action in higher education without having been embraced by any other justice on the Supreme Court. My goal here is to offer a qualified defense of Justice Powell’s view. I urge that in some educational settings, racial diversity is important for ensuring a broad array of experiences and ideas, and that in those settings, narrowly tailored affirmative action programs should be constitutionally permissible. 
Justice Powell insisted that a diverse student body is a constitutionally acceptable goal for higher education.370 The central reason is that universities should be allowed to ensure a “robust exchange of ideas,” an interest connected with the first amendment itself.371 Justice Powell acknowledged that this interest seemed strongest in the context of undergraduate education, where views are formed on a large number of topics. But even in a medical school, “the contribution of diversity is substantial.”372 A medical student having a particular background, including a particular ethnic background, “may bring to a 366 Note that this justification is most unlikely to be legitimate as a constitutional matter. A public institution is not permitted to justify discrimination by claiming, or even showing, that many of its constituents call for it. Brown v. Bd. of Education itself requires that conclusion; see also Palmore v. Sadoti, 466 US 429, 441 (1984), suggesting that private “biases may be outside the reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them effect.” 367 Recall the prior qualifications about the definition of diversity. Even apparently diverse institutions are homogenous in certain ways and along certain dimensions, and this is what students and faculty seem to prefer. 368 See Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 944 (5th Cir. 1996); Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 369 See 438 US 265 (1978 (opinion of Powell, J.). 370 438 US at 311-12. 371 Id. at 313. 372 Id. professional school of medicine experiences, outlooks, and ideas that enrich the training of its student body and better equip its graduates to render with understanding their vital service to humanity.”373 Justice Powell also emphasized that doctors “serve a heterogeneous population,” and suggested that graduate admissions decisions are concerned with contributions that follow formal education.374 
Thus Justice Powell concluded that the crucial question was whether a race-conscious admission program, giving benefits to people because they are members of racial minority groups, was a necessary means of promoting the legitimate goal of diversity. Here he reached his famous conclusion that racial or ethnic background could be a “plus” in the admissions decision, though quotas would not be allowed.375 For Justice Powell, a legitimate admissions program should be “flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of diversity in light of the particular qualifications of the applicant, and to place them on the same footing for consideration, although not necessarily according to them the same weight.”376 Thus it would be acceptable to promote “beneficial educational pluralism” by considering a range of factors, including “demonstrated compassion, a history of overcoming disadvantage, ability to communicate with the poor, or other qualifications deemed important.”377 
My central concern here is the principal378 basis for Justice Powell’s conclusion: the value of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas” in the classroom, and the legitimacy of promoting racial diversity in order to ensure that exchange. To understand the contemporary relevance of Justice Powell’s opinion, it is necessary to outline the recent developments in the constitutional principles governing affirmative action programs. The Court has now settled on the view that affirmative action programs, like all other programs embodying racial discrimination, should be subject to “strict scrutiny” from courts, and invalidated unless they are the least restrictive means of achieving a compelling state 373 Id. at 314. 374 Id. 375 Id. at 316-320. 376 Id. at 317. 377 Id. 378 This is not the exclusive basis for Justice Powell’s opinion; he was also concerned with what will happen after graduation – with the possibility that members of minority groups will serve their communities, in a way that confers significant social benefits on populations that might otherwise be underserved. Id. For evidence that this does happen, see John Bowen and Derek Bok, The Shape of the River (1998). interest.379 It is also clear that past “societal discrimination,” meaning discrimination in the nation’s past, is not a legitimate basis for discrimination against whites.380 It is equally clear that narrow, remedial affirmative action programs are acceptable if they are specifically designed to correct for proven past discrimination by the institution that is acting affirmatively.381 
What remains unclear is when, if ever, a public institution is permitted to justify affirmative action by reference to “forward-looking” justifications, not involving a remedy for past discrimination.382 A state might, for example, try to defend affirmative action in hiring police by urging that a police force will simply be more effective if it contains African-Americans among others— especially in a community that contains people of multiple races.383 Justice Powell was really offering a similar claim about higher education: Whether or not a college or university has itself discriminated against African-Americans or others, it should permitted to discriminate in favor of them if it is doing so as a means of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas.” But current justices have given conflicting signals about the legitimacy and strength of forward-looking justifications.384 379 See, e.g., City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469 (1989); Adarand Constructors v. Pena, 515 US 200 (1995). 380 City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469, 477 (1989). 381 United States v. Paradise, 480 US 149 (1987); Local No. 93, International Association of Firefighters v. Cleveland, 478 US 616 (1987). 382 For general discussion, see Kathleen M. Sullivan, Sins of Discrimination: Last Term's Affirmative Action Cases, 100 Harv. L. Rev. 78, 96 (1986): "Public and private employers might choose to implement affirmative action for many reasons other than to purge their own past sins of discrimination. The Jackson school board, for example, said it had done so in part to improve the quality of education in Jackson -- whether by improving black students' performance or by dispelling for black and white students alike any idea that white supremacy governs our social institutions. Other employers might advance different forward-looking reasons for affirmative action: improving their services to black constituencies, averting racial tension over the allocation of jobs in a community, or increasing the diversity of a work force, to name but a few examples. Or they might adopt affirmative action simply to eliminate from their operations all de facto embodiment of a system of racial caste. All of these reasons aspire to a racially integrated future, but none reduces to 'racial balancing for its own sake.'" 383 Id. 384 For one view, see Johnson v. Transportation Agency, 480 U.S. 616, 647 (1987) (Stevens, concurring): “Instead of retroactively scrutinizing his own or society's possible exclusions of minorities in the past to determine the outer limits of a valid affirmative-action program -- or indeed, any particular affirmative-action decision -- in many cases the employer will find it more appropriate to consider other legitimate reasons to give preferences to members of underrepresented groups. Statutes enacted for the benefit of minority groups should not block these forward-looking considerations.” For a contrasting view, see Justice O'Connor, in Metro 
There can be no doubt that universities are permitted to promote diversity and dissent by seeking a mix of faculty and students. Efforts of this kind are pervasive; this is what most admissions offices try to do. To be sure, some serious free speech issues might be raised if an admissions office discriminates in favor of, or against, particular points of view.385 But even if public institutions are barred from pursuing diversity of ideas by discriminating directly against some points of view, such institutions are surely permitted, without offending the first amendment, to seek a variety of backgrounds and experiences, in the hope that better discussions will result. If Justice Powell is right, affirmative action programs can be similarly justified. The simple idea here is that diverse populations are likely to increase the range of thoughts and perspectives, and to reduce the risks of conformity, cascades, and polarization associated with group influences.386 We have seen that on the judiciary, judges with diverse views can act as “whistleblowers,” correcting ill-considered views of the law. In educational institutions, a high degree of diversity, including racial diversity, often has the same effect. A racially uniform class is all too likely to polarize to an unjustified position, simply because students’ antecedent views are not subject to critical scrutiny. 
For example, we can easily imagine all-white classrooms, discussing the issue of racial profiling, in which the absence of racial diversity is a serious problem. Those who have not had bad experiences, as a result of such profiling, will lack crucial information. Return here to Justice O’Connor’s comments on Justice Marshall: “Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the mouth of a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 US 547, 612 (1990), joined by Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, and Kennedy: “Modern equal protection has recognized only one [compelling state] interest: remedying the effects of racial discrimination. The interest in increasing the diversity of broadcast viewpoints is clearly not a compelling interest. It is simply too amorphous, too insubstantial, and too unrelated to any legitimate basis for employing racial classifications.” 385 I am unaware of any first amendment challenge to a university’s efforts to promote diversity by promoting a range of views, even though such efforts would necessarily involve discrimination against some views and in favor of others. But there are some hard questions lurking here. One set of questions involve the sheer difficulty of proof: In a case in which a student is or is not denied admission, the applicant’s political view will undoubtedly be one of a range of factors, and it will be hard to isolate, in a challenge, point of view as the decisive factor. In a case of discharge or suspension as a result of political view, there would indeed be a constitutional problem. See Pickering v. Bd. of Educ., 391 US 563, 568 (1968). 386 For supportive evidence, see Patricia Gurin, Reports Submitted on Behalf of the University of Michigan: the Compelling Need for Diversity in Higher Education, 5 Mich J Race & Law 363 (1999). I have been perhaps most personally affected by Justice Marshall as a raconteur . . . . Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly for his raised brow and his twinkling eye, hoping to hear, just once more, another story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world.”387 What was true for Justice O’Connor is true for white students in many educational settings. In the context of racial profiling, and in many other imaginable cases, a degree of racial diversity is likely to bring to bear valuable information and perspectives. These may change how the group sees the world, whether or not it leads to a different conclusion on the merits. 
To say this is of course not to make the absurd claim that white people all agree with one another about racial profiling, or that African-Americans have the same experiences and opinions about that complex issue. And in light of the fact that members of all races contain people with a range of both favorable and unfavorable views about racial profiling, it would be possible to respond that any problem, if it exists, is not because the group is all-white, but if and because its members begin with a uniform view of racial profiling. And if this is so, what, if anything, is added by promoting diversity not of views but of racial background? The answer must be that African-Americans, by virtue of their experience, are able to add something to the discussion as such. And this seems far from implausible. If students need to know something about the magnitude and the experience of racial profiling, those who have been subject to such profiling will be able to offer novel insights. And if African-Americans do, in fact, have an unusually high degree of hostility to racial profiling, that is by itself a point worthwhile to know and to try to understand. So too if they do not show such hostility. Of course supplemental readings could be used to expose people to diverse views. The value of diversity lies not simply in learning about facts, but also in seeing a range of perspectives, including the emotions attached to them—and in being in the actual physical presence of those who have those perspectives, and perhaps cannot be easily dismissed. 
These points might be used by a purportedly nondiscriminatory institution to defend a set of policies designed to ensure a reasonable diversity of view in classroom discussions. Because of the importance of a wide range of ideas to the educational enterprise, the goal seems both legitimate and compelling. Are affirmative action programs the least restrictive means of promoting that goal? The answer depends on the nature of those programs. It is easy to imagine 387 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Reconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). cautious efforts, using race as a factor, in which the “least restrictive means” test is indeed satisfied.388 And that point is sufficient to suggest that Justice Powell’s approach is essentially correct. 
To be sure, the same arguments about the importance of diverse views might be enlisted very broadly, and in circumstances that might seem unattractive. Imagine, for example, an effort, by a mostly African-American university, to point to the need for diversity as a way of defending discrimination against African-Americans and in favor of whites. Such a university might claim that it wants significant representation by whites in order to reduce the risks from group influences and to improve the quality of discussion. It does indeed follow, from what I have said thus far, that this argument is legitimate. A classroom that is entirely African-American might well suffer from conformity effects and polarization; and a educational institution might want to correct the situation. If courts should be suspicious of the argument in this context, it is because they do not trust the sincerity of those who make it. Courts might believe that the reference to diversity is actually a pretext for an illicit discriminatory motive. But it is easy to imagine cases in which diversity is the real concern and no pretext is involved. 
There is a further complexity. Suppose that a university claims that it is pursuing the goal of high-quality education. Suppose that it insists that its admissions policies, which place a premium on many forms of diversity, are a legitimate means of pursuing that goal. Such a university might well be willing to discriminate in favor of members of racial minorities—and might well claim that this form of discrimination is part of the neutral pursuit of high-quality education. Is this illegitimate? Outside the context of affirmative action, the Court has come very close to holding that it is.389 In making decisions about child custody, courts are prohibited from taking account of the possible prejudice to be faced by children of racially mixed couples. The prohibition applies even if it is defended as part of a neutral mechanism for promoting the welfare of the child.390 A racially-based system of child custody cannot be justified on the ground that in light of existing social values, children do better in a family that is all-white or all-African-American. This decision suggests that an institution is not permitted to defend otherwise illegitimate discrimination by suggesting that it is 388 This was the conclusion of the court of appeals about the program used by the University of Michigan Law School. See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 389 See Palmore v. Sadoti, 466 US 429 (1984). 390 See id. neutrally pursuing a more abstract goal.391 But I am not claiming here that affirmative action fails to count as discrimination. I am urging instead that affirmative action can be adequately justified, in some contexts, as a way of ensuring that educational institutions do what they are supposed to do. 
It is important to emphasize the narrowness of the argument I am making. In some cases, racial diversity is important for improving the educational process within the relevant school. But in some cases, the claim seems extremely weak. Would a mathematics class, or a course in physics, be improved if it contained a degree of racial diversity? This seems unlikely. In principle, I do not believe that courts should use the Constitution to scrutinize affirmative action programs with great care.392 But the law is otherwise, and if courts are going to do so, they should not offer a blanket ruling for or against a diversity rationale in higher education. They should accept that rationale in the context of undergraduate education, but not for programs for which racial diversity is not necessary to promote a “robust exchange of ideas.” In the context of law school, the centrality of racial issues to important aspects of legal education should be enough to allow narrowly tailored affirmative action programs to survive constitutional scrutiny.393 
Human beings pay close attention to the informational and reputational signals sent by others. These signals produce conformity, even in cases in which many people have reason to believe, on the basis of their private information, that others are mistaken or worse. Informational and reputational influences also produce cascades, in which people do not rely on, and fail to disclose, the information that they themselves have. Cascades and errors occur spontaneously when people rationally take account of the decisions and statements of their predecessors. Errors are magnified when people are rewarded for conformity— and minimized when people are rewarded, not for correct individual decisions, but for correct decisions at the group level. 
Cascades, like conformity, are not a problem in themselves. Sometimes cascades produce good outcomes, at least compared to a situation in which 391 On some of the complexities here, see David A. Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Supreme Court Review 99. 392 See Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy: What Constitutions Do (2002). 393 See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). people rely solely on their own information. The real problem is that when cascades are occurring, people do not disclose information from which others would benefit. The result is that both individuals and groups can blunder, sometimes catastrophically. Institutions involved in making, enforcing, and interpreting the law are subject to conformity and cascade effects. The executive branch has been shown to blunder as a result.394 We have seen that within courts, precedential cascades are highly likely, especially in complex areas; and in such areas, cascades tend to be both self-perpetuating and self-insulating. 
The general lesson is clear. It is extremely important to devise institutions that attempt to promote disclosure of private views and private information. Institutions that reward conformity are prone to failure to the extent that they do not do that; institutions are far more likely to prosper if they create a norm of openness and dissent. The point very much bears on the risks of group polarization. Groups of like-minded people are likely to go to extremes, simply because of limited argument pools and reputational considerations. The danger is that the resulting movements in opinion will be unjustified. It is extremely important to create “circuit breakers”395 and to devise institutional arrangements that will serve to counteract movements that could not be supported if people had a wider range of information. 
These points have implications for numerous issues in law and policy. I have focused on a small subset of those issues here. We have seen that an appreciation of social influences casts new light on the expressive function of law. Simply by virtue of what it says, and even if it is rarely enforced, law can affect the behavior of those who are unsure whether to engage in certain conduct—and also the behavior of those who are unsure whether to challenge those who engage in that conduct. Bans on smoking in public and on sexual harassment are cases in point. Law’s effectiveness, in this regard, lies in its power to give a signal about what it is right to do, and also to dissipate pluralistic ignorance, by providing information about what other people think that it is right to do. A legal enactment can operate in the same fashion as Asch’s confederates and Milgram’s experimenter. Because people care about the reactions of others, law’s expressive function will be heightened if the relevant conduct is visible; bans on smoking in public places are an obvious example. For the same reason, that function will be weakened if prospective law-breakers live in a supportive subcommunity; consider bans on the use of narcotics. With an 394 See Janis, Groupthink, supra note, for a collection of examples. 395 See Eric Posner, supra note. understanding of social influences, we can therefore make some predictions about when law is likely to be effective merely by virtue of what it says—and about when law will be ineffective unless it is accompanied by vigorous enforcement activity. 
I have suggested that many of the Constitution’s institutions serve to reduce the likelihood of bad consequences from conformity, cascades, and group polarization. Such institutions increase the likelihood that important information, and alternative points of view, will receive a public airing. The system of bicameralism is the most obvious example, producing a system in which lawmaking is done by two institutions with different cultures, thus creating a potential check on unjustified movements. I have also urged that the framers’ most distinctive contribution consisted not in their endorsement of deliberative democracy, which was uncontroversial, but in their commitment to heterogeneity in government, seeing (in Hamilton’s words) the “jarring of parties” as a method for “promoting deliberation.” 
More controversially, I have suggested that an understanding of social influences suggests the importance of ensuring a high degree of diversity on the federal bench. It is foolish to pretend that Republican appointees do not, as a class, differ from Democratic appointees; and we have reason to appreciate the value, on any panel, of having a potential “whistleblower,” in the form of one judge of a different party from the other two. Of course judges are rarely lawless, but a group of like-minded judges is prone to go to extremes. An appreciation of social influences on belief and behavior also supports the legitimacy of efforts to promote racial diversity in higher education, at least where such diversity is likely to improve learning. 
Even if occasionally alarming, much of the behavior discussed here attests to the reasonableness and good sense of ordinary people. In the face of doubt, we do well to pay attention to the views of others.396 After all, they might know better than we do. It is prudent to be cautious about challenging other people, not only because they might be right, but also because people do not always like to be challenged. Even in the most freedom-loving societies, people dissent at their peril. A reluctance to disagree is not merely prudent; it is often courteous too. But conformity creates serious dangers. Behavior that is sensible, prudent, 396 Note the suggestion, in Goldstein et al., supra note, at 174, that conformity operates as a sensible heuristic, one that often works well but that sometimes misfires, see Henrich et al., supra note, at 356–57. and courteous is likely to lead individuals and societies to blunder, simply because people fail to learn about facts or opinions from which they would benefit. 
It is usual to think that those who conform are serving the general interest and that dissenters are antisocial, even selfish. In a way this is true. In some settings, conformists strengthen social bonds, whereas dissenters imperil them, or at least introduce tension. But in an important respect, the usual thought has things backwards. Much of the time, it is in the individual’s interest to follow the crowd, but in the social interest for the individual to say and do what he thinks best. Well-functioning systems of law and politics take steps to discourage conformity and to promote dissent, partly to protect the rights of dissenters, but mostly to protect interests of their own. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 161 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
ENFORCING EXISTING RIGHTS 
By 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
For those interested in expanding rights of any kind, there are two historically honored strategies. One is to enlarge the category of rights beyond what the legal system now recognizes. You might think of Thurgood Marshall, the great civil rights lawyer who argued Brown v. Boardof Education1, as having that strategy. He really wanted to enlarge the category of rights enjoyed by African-Americans. Another strategy is just to try to ensure that the rights that are now on the books actually exist in the world. Martin Luther King Jr., much of the time, had that strategy-not the enlarging-rights, but enforcing-rights strategy-insisting, as King did, "we just want you (meaning white America) to be faithful to the rights you recognize on paper." With respect to animals, there is a great deal of work to be done in the Thurgood Marshall direction-to expand the category of rights by ensuring that animals are used less cruelly, or less frequently, or maybe much less, as food, in entertainment, or in scientific experiments. But what I am going to try to explore here is the Martin Luther King strategy-that is, to see what might be done to try to ensure that such rights, as are now recognized on paper, are actually enjoyed by animals in the world. I will try to make a few suggestions for how we might go about doing that. 
* Mr. Sunstein is the Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago Law School, and also a member of the Department of Political Science. He graduated from both Harvard College and Harvard Law School, after which he clerked for Justice Benjamin Kaplan of the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts and then for Justice Thurgood Marshall of the United States Supreme Court. This essay is a mild revision of oral remarks made in October of 2001 at the Ninth Annual Animal Law Conference at Northwestern School of Law of Levis & Clark College. Readers are asked to make allowances for the informality of the presentation. 
1 Brown v. Bd. of Educ. of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954). 
My first observation is that the panoply of rights that animals now have at both the state and federal levels is much more expansive than outside observers acknowledge-both observers who are skeptical of the idea of animal rights and observers who are enthusiastic about the idea of animal rights. That is to say, that at the state and federal levels there is a lot of raw material that has not been used very much. If one investigates the laws of almost every state, one finds that that states protect animals-domestic animals certainly-and to a significant degree non-domestic or wild animals too. They protect them against human cruelty, which is defined broadly most of the time to include not only cruel acts such as torture and infliction of pain, but also omission. Thus, people are under an obligation most of the time, in most states, to ensure that their animals are well-fed, that they are wellnourished, that they receive veterinary care, and much more. Hence domestic animals to a large degree have protection of safety and security, which includes protections against welfare deprivation of the kind that human beings actually lack at the state level, as most Americans do not have this degree of protection. 
At the federal level, there is also a great deal of legislation protecting animals against suffering and neglect. A statute that is dear to my heart, although I do not believe it means a great deal in the world, protects horses from cruel treatment and particularly protects injured horses from human exploitation. 2 The Horse Protection Act is a statute that, my guess is, was pressed by a few members of the House or the Senate who were really interested in this, and no one stood against it-though it has not meant very much in the real world. The federal Animal Welfare Act creates something like an incipient federal Bill of Rights for animals, providing protection against suffering and abuse and also creating affirmative obligations of humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals-not only by exhibitors, but also by research facilities and dealers.3 The upshot is that federal and state law recognize a great deal in the way of rights for animals, not only against torture and abuse, but also against neglect. 
There is an unfortunate qualification here. All of us who have investigated the area, even a little bit, are aware that the federal government devotes very little in the way of resources to the protection of animals against suffering and abuse. The Animal Welfare Act is badly underfunded and, to say the least, is not a high priority in the Department of Agriculture, which is, in any case, subject to intense lobbying pressure from those who do not want greater protection given to animals. But if the Animal Welfare Act were taken seriously, we could accomplish a great deal to reduce animal suffering. 
I have four simple suggestions designed to make the law on the books mean something actual and true in the real world. The suggestions are going to start modest and will get more and more ambitious. 2 Horse Protection Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1821-1831 (2000). 3 7 U.S.C. § 2131 et seq. (2000). My claim is that, for those of you who are interested in animal rights, there is really an enormous amount that actually can be done through creative lawyering. It is just starting to be done-what is missing is enough people really dedicated to ensuring enforcement of the law. 
The first suggestion, and the simplest one, is that human beings should be able to bring suit in federal court, if they (that is, human beings) suffer some kind of injury as a result of a violation done to animals. I say this is the modest suggestion because there are already cases tending to recognize this right.4 The notion is that human beings who go to zoos, or own animals, or who enjoy seeing animals in one place or another, ought to be allowed to bring suit to protect animals from injury, if the injury to the animals inflicts harm on human beings. I hope it is clear that this is a very modest suggestion, as it does not recognize rights in animals as such. It recognizes rights in human beings who are injured if their animals are hurt. Only slightly more controversially, millions of people enjoy seeing animals that are not their own and are miserable upon seeing those animals suffering. These people ought to have a right to bring suit in federal court, if the law is being violated, to ensure that the law is respected. There is a pocket of cases, some involving the Animal Legal Defense Fund, that are starting to recognize this very limited right on the part of human beings to bring suit.5 
My second suggestion is also modest, but slightly less so, and I really hope some work will be done to see how feasible the idea is. It used to be, about thirty years ago, that there was a federal law that prohibited certain conduct, such as securities fraud, if the individuals who were subject to securities fraud could bring an implied cause of action against the person who was violating the law, even if the Securities and Exchange Commission was just sitting on its hands. The idea was that if there was a violation of the law by some company-which, for example, lies in its prospectus or commits fraud-there could be an implied cause of action against the violator, even if the government did not have the resources or the inclination to act. One of the most regrettable developments of the last 25 years is that the Supreme Court of the United States has cut back on this notion of implied causes of action. It is not so willing to allow private persons to sue admitted violators of the law if the federal agency is sitting on its hands. 
Now, here's the thought: What the Supreme Court says about these implied causes of action is not binding on state courts. I have done some preliminary investigation and in many states there is a real interest in allowing human beings (we are still talking about human beings) to bring suit against violators of the law, if the enforcement authority of the state has not done anything. And what these states tend to say is, "Look, our state has forbidden certain misconduct. It is against the law and we will allow a kind of supplement to the state prohibition, enforceable by the state agency-a supplement by individuals who are affected by the prohibition." This idea is a little more ambitious than the first. There are not any cases yet involving the anti-cruelty provisions, but there ought to be. Some state courts should be interested in expanding their implied cause of action idea to bring in these cases so that we break the prosecutor's monopoly on the animal cruelty law. 
The reason we want to break the monopoly is not because the prosecutors are necessarily bad, but because they have tons and tons of things to do, and sometimes prosecuting animal crimes is just not a high priority for them. Even if it is not a high priority for them, it is an illegality. Why not allow affected private human beings to help out the prosecutor by picking up some of the slack? I bet some state courts would be receptive to this argument. What little research has been done thus far-maybe some of you will do some more-suggests that there is a real opportunity in this and it would be a great thing for animals, a good thing for human beings, and probably a heroic thing for some states to do. 
The third idea is a little more ambitious and complex. It begins with the fact that state courts, unlike federal courts, often do not have a constitutional limit on who can sue; they certainly are not constrained by the limitations of Article III of the Constitution, which applies only to federal courts. The third idea continues to observe that some state courts, unlike federal courts, just allow citizens to sue as citizens against private people who violate the law, or against the government for failing to enforce the law. The latter case is called a mandamus action, and it requires the government to enforce the law. Now it might be that, in some states, new legislative action would be needed to confer a right on the part of citizens, as such, to bring actions in a court 1) to prosecute law violators; 2) to get an injunction; or 3) to obtain damages. Or it might be that legislation is needed to allow people to mandamus the prosecutor to enforce the law in cases where there has been a clear violation. On the other hand, it may well be, in some states, that new legislation is not needed, and that the citizen suits are available under these old things, called prerogative writs-of which mandamus is the most famous. 
This idea is a little more ambitious because I am talking, in this third suggestion, about citizen suits, not about suits by an affected human being. My only suggestion is that on animals' behalf, there ought to be an ability to build on what some state courts have already recognized-that is, citizen's suits in certain circumstances. 
Thus far, I have suggested three ideas in decreasing order of modesty. The first is that human beings should be allowed to bring suit in federal court if they have been injured as a result of violations of the law by private or public actors. The second suggestion is that there should be, and might well be, an implied cause of action in state court for violations of the anti-cruelty law. The third suggestion is that citizen suits in state court ought to be available, and ought to be brought, either against the violators or against the government, for failing to enforce the law. 
The fourth suggestion is the most ambitious. It is that some states and the federal government, in the next twenty years, should create a private right of action on the part of animals, who would be the main plaintiffs, to vindicate their rights (and they are rights, as a matter of current state and federal law) against those who have violated them. In a way, this seems like a radical idea because now we are talking about suits by animals in their own name. But it may not be as radical as it seems. Of course, it is the case that human beings would be something like trustees on the behalf of animals. In the days of slavery, lawsuits were available not only by slave holders, but also by slaves against people who had behaved illegally or cruelly toward them. It is true that the category of illegality was limited-they were slaves after all, without a lot of rights. But it was also the case that slaves had protection against certain infliction of suffering by owners and others against them. My suggestion is that we ought to recognize for animals at least what was recognized for slaves-that is, a private cause of action that animals enjoy as themselves in their own rights against violations of the law. 
We are talking here about an idea that is in one sense radical because these are suits by animals, but in another sense it is very mundane because the suits that animals would bring would be to prevent conduct that is recognized under state or federal law already to be illegal. If the idea seems radical, just notice for a moment that almost every federal environmental statute creates a citizen suit to supplement the enforcement authority of the Environmental Protection Agency. This is, in a way, a more modest suggestion than that because the idea is that animals who are actually injured or at risk would bring the suit, not citizens who have no palpable stake in the outcome (held to be unlawful under Article H6). If the idea continues to seem radical, we should just notice that for centuries the Anglo-American system has had parallel criminal and civil remedies-our tort system parallels our criminal justice system. I am merely suggesting that we expand that idea of parallel tort remedies to the domain of animal welfare. 
I want to make a few closing remarks about these four suggestions. One thing that those of us interested in protecting animal wellbeing might focus on is what types of objections would be made against these suggestions. My field of vision is undoubtedly limited by my own imagination, but I have difficulty seeing what objections-what reasonable objections-would be made to an effort to ensure enforcement of laws that are already on the books and that are pitifully under-enforced. Perhaps the most effective objection would be that giving the government a monopoly on the animal cruelty legislation, either at the 6 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992). federal level or at the state level, is necessary to prevent frivolous, harassing, or baseless litigation. The state of California, for example, might think that if we allow any affected person, or any affected animal, to bring suit for what are alleged to be violations, then we are going to get, in practice, a lot of frivolous or baseless actions. This is, in the abstract, an obviously plausible objection, but I have a couple of things to say about it. 
One thing is that under the state laws creating citizen suits to protect the environment, there has not been a torrent of frivolous litigation. On the contrary, there have been very few lawsuits and they have not been frivolous. Maybe that is not so surprising if we consider the fact that bringing a lawsuit is expensive and not a lot of fun, even for people who are committed to the underlying cause. So given the fact that a lawsuit is expensive and usually not fun to bring, it is probably just not true that the remedies I am suggesting would give rise to a lot of baseless lawsuits. The second response to this concern is that our legal system has strategies to filter out frivolous or baseless actions. If we think those strategies do not work here, or would not work here, it would be very surprising if we did not have the creativity to think of ways to be more firm in filtering out frivolous or baseless actions under the rubrics I am describing. 
I want to conclude with some brief remarks about broader issues. I have been speaking of animal welfare and animal well-being, and not much about animal rights. Is there a connection between the ideas I have offered today and ideas about animal rights, and about whether animals are property? Here we can begin by taking a little bit of Martin Luther King's strategy first-trying to ensure that the world conforms to what is said on paper. Consider some analogies, designed to suggest that objects with the status of property can also be protected through the law. 
For example, it is not odd for the legal system both to offer protection for a pristine area where the air quality is very high and to say human beings are allowed to bring suit to ensure that the air quality remains very high. It is clear that art and other cultural treasures can be protected, and are protected, against human depredation, even if those things are owned and do not have the status of persons. If the government wants to protect, for example, a painting of Leonardo DaVinci against injury, even from the owner of the painting, that would be just fine. We can find many parallels where owners do not have unlimited rights over the things that they own. As a matter of tort law, every homeowner's rights are sharply limited, even over what he or she owns. The ownership limitation applies not just by allowing the prosecutor to sue to prevent or punish crimes, but also by allowing ordinary people to sue to prevent or punish torts. So, my simplest suggestion is that things that have the status of property could, in principle, also have rights. In fact, our legal system is not so far from that in respect to animals because there is a panoply of protections at both the state and federal level that creates rights for things with the status of property. However, we must acknowledge that, in this domain, Thurgood Marshall's strategy of enlarging rights rather than merely enforcing them, has some serious advantages over Martin Luther King's strategy. 
Most people, on reflection, do not consider animals that they "own" to be things or objects. People who have dogs, or horses, or cats are most unlikely to have the same attitude toward living creatures that they have toward books, tables, and chairs. So the rhetoric of ownership really does misdescribe people's conceptions of and relationships to other living beings. There is probably a sense in which they do not really consider their cats, their dogs, or their horses "theirs"-at least they do not on reflection. It is not merely the case that the rhetoric of property misdescribes people's relationship toward animals. The same rhetoric probably damages their relationship too. In the end, I believe that Steven Wise, Gary Francione, and others are correct to reject the rhetoric of property. I do not entirely accept the reasons they give; they tend to think, in my view wrongly, that "property" cannot have rights. I suggest instead that the rhetoric of property tends to undermine and devalue the interests that human beings, on reflection, acknowledge that animals possess. 
The four suggestions I have made are intended as a limited step toward the redescription of the relationship between human beings and other animals-steps that by themselves do not repudiate the notion of property, but maybe go a long way within the legal system toward changing that notion. Ultimately, then, I believe the legal system should not recognize animals as objects or things. It should see them as creatures, like human beings, with interests and concerns of their own. But the project I have tried to describe is not nearly as ambitious as that. All I have tried to suggest is that an enormous amount of good can come from enforcing existing laws and from making sure that what happens in the world conforms to what we say on paper. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Hazardous Heuristics" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 165, 2002). 
Hazardous Heuristics 
Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
New work on heuristics and biases has explored the role of emotions and affect; the idea of “dual processing”; the place of heuristics and biases outside of the laboratory; and the implications of heuristics and biases for policy and law. This review-essay focuses on certain aspects of Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. An understanding of heuristics and biases casts light on many issues in law, involving jury awards, risk regulation, and political economy in general. Some attention is given to the possibility of “moral heuristics”—rules of thumb, for purposes of morality, that generally work well but that also systematically misfire. 
In the early 1970s, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky produced a series of pathbreaking papers about decisions under uncertainty.1 Their basic claim was that in assessing probabilities, “people rely on a limited number of heuristic principles which reduce the complex tasks of assessing probabilities and predicting values to simpler judgmental operations.”2 Kahneman and Tversky did not argue that it is irrational for people to use the relevant heuristics. On the contrary, they claimed that as a general rule, the heuristics are quite valuable. The problem is that in some cases, their use leads “to severe and systematic errors.”3 It is worth emphasizing the word “systematic.” One of the most striking features of their argument was that the errors were not random -- that they could be described and even predicted. 
*Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Reid Hastie, Daniel Kahneman, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments on a previous draft. 
1The key papers can be found in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (1982). The heuristics-and-biases literature should be distinguished from the literature on prospect theory, which involves the nature of people’s utility functions under conditions of risk, not mental shortcuts under conditions of uncertainty. See Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Choices, Values, and Frames (2001). 
2See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in id. at 3. 
3Id. 
The resulting arguments have proved highly influential in many fields, including law,4 where the influence has stemmed from the effort to connect legal analysis to a realistic, rather than hypothetical, understanding of how human beings think and behave. If human beings use identifiable heuristics, and if they are prone to systematic errors, we might be able to have a better understanding of why law is as it is, and we might be able to generate better strategies for ensuring that law actually promotes social goals. Most provocatively, an understanding of heuristics and biases should improve our understanding of the legitimate role of paternalism in law. If people make systematic errors, perhaps government has, more often than antipaternalists think, good reason to override their choices. 
The influence of the heuristics-and-biases literature also stemmed from its obvious connection with particular problems with which lawyers and policymakers are concerned, including risk regulation, litigation behavior, and discrimination. For example, the system of risk regulation has been said to show a combination of “paranoia and neglect.”5 An understanding of systematic errors might help show how and why this is so, and give a sense of what might be done by way of response. In fact the heuristics-and-biases literature cuts across many contemporary issues, including global warming, tobacco regulation, punitive damage reform, racial profiling, and responses to terrorism. Many other issues might also be illuminated. Do heuristics and biases account for the decision whether to bring suit at all? Might jury behavior, or even legislative and judicial behavior, be illuminated by a better understanding of intuitive judgment? 
Kahneman and Tversky emphasized three general-purpose heuristics: representativeness, availability, and anchoring. The availability heuristic has probably become the most well-known in law.6 When people use this heuristic, they answer a question of probability by asking whether examples come readily to mind.7 How likely is a flood, an earthquake, an airplane crash, a traffic jam, a terrorist attack, or a disaster at a nuclear power plant? Lacking statistical knowledge, people try to think of illustrations. Thus, “a class whose instances are easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable.”8 This is a point about how familiarity can affect the availability of instances. But salience is important as well. “The impact of seeing a house burning on the subjective probability of such accidents is probably greater than the impact of reading about a fire in the local paper.”9 For people without statistical knowledge, it is far from irrational to use the availability heuristic; the problem is that this heuristic can lead to serious errors of fact, in the form of excessive fear of small risks and neglect of large ones.10 And undoubtedly the availability heuristic underlies much ethnic and racial discrimination. While such discrimination is frequently rational as a statistical matter, it is also undoubtedly true that some of the time, people overlook statistical reality, and rely on easily accessible incidents, in thinking that people of a certain racial or ethnic group are prone to certain behavior. 
Kahneman and Tversky also suggested that in the face of uncertainty, estimates are often made from an initial value, or “anchor,” which is then adjusted to produce a final answer. The initial value seems to have undue influence. What percentage of African countries are in the United Nations? In one study, Kahneman and Tversky spun a wheel of fortune to obtain a number between 0 and 100, and asked subjects to say whether the number that emerged from the wheel was higher or lower than the relevant percentage. It turned out that the starting point, though clearly random, greatly affected people’s answers. If the starting point was 65, the median estimate was 45%; if the starting point was 10, the median estimate was 25%. The process of anchoring-and-adjustment has an obvious application to many legal issues, including the setting of damage awards.11 
When the representativeness heuristic is involved, people answer a question of probability or causation—for example, how likely is it that object A belongs to class B?—by asking about the extent to which A resembles B. Suppose, for example, that the question is whether some person, Nick, is a librarian or a farmer. If Nick is described as shy and withdrawn, and as having a passion for detail, most people will think that he is likely to be a librarian—and to ignore the “base-rate,” that is, the fact that the population has far more farmers than librarians. It should be readily apparent that the representativeness heuristic will produce problems whenever people are ignoring base-rates, as they are prone to do. In one study, a majority of judges, in assessing probabilities, fell prey to the representativeness heuristic.12 The representativeness heuristic also appears to underlie as serious misunderstanding of probability theory in the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.13 
Since the early discussions of heuristics and biases, there has been an explosion of further work, sometimes contesting the basic claims of Kahneman and Tversky,14 but usually offering more applications, an improved understanding of how the heuristics work, and a discovery of many other heuristics and biases. Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment offers a massive, state-of-the-art treatment of the literature, supplementing a similar book published two decades ago.15 The book, consisting of forty-two chapters, is divided into three parts. The first, called Theoretical and Empirical Extensions, elaborates on the three main heuristics and on several related heuristics and biases, including optimistic bias. The second part, called New Theoretical Directions, discusses the role of emotions and affect, support theory, and alternative perspectives on heuristics, including the view, set forth most prominently by Gerd Gigerenzer, that outside the laboratory, our “fast and frugal” heuristics work very well (p. 559). Part III, called Real-World Applications, offers a range of cases in which intuitive judgments goes wrong, including those of ordinary people (falsely believing, for example, in the “hot hand” phenomenon in basketball; p. 601) and those of experts (whose clinical judgments of dangerousness, for example, are far less accurate than actuarial judgments—a point with many legal applications16). 
12Id. 
13See id. Under that doctrine, a jury is permitted to infer that the defendant is negligent from the occurrence of an event that is "of a kind which ordinarily does not occur in the absence of negligence." As Guthrie et al. explain, the appeal of this inference comes from the representativeness heuristic. But the inference is false: An event that does not ordinarily occur when negligence is absent may nonetheless be more likely to be the product of non-negligence than negligence. 
14See Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999). 15See Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky, supra note. 16See William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts, Duke LJ (2002). 
This is an extremely impressive and important book, and it is full of implications for law and policy. The collection also covers an extraordinary range of problems. I will not be able to come close to doing justice to it here. Instead I have a much narrower purpose: to connect some of the recent research with a set of legal problems, and in particular the law relating to risk and litigation behavior. In that connection, two aspects of the book deserve emphasis. The first involves a shift from the strictly cognitive focus of the early work to an effort to see how emotions affect decision and judgment. The second is the emphasis, in several of the papers, on “dual process” approaches to human thinking. According to these approaches, people have two systems for making decisions. One of these is rapid, intuitive, but sometimes error-prone; the other is slower, reflective, and more statistical. One of the pervasive themes in this collection is that heuristics and biases can be connected with the intuitive system—and that the slower, more reflective system might be able to make corrections.17 This emphasis on correction raises the possibility of “debiasing,” on which several of the papers also focus. 
17The papers do not discuss the nature of the brain, but suggestive research tends to be supportive of the dual-process idea. Some research suggests that the brain has special sectors for emotions, and that some types of emotions, including some fear-type reactions, can be triggered before the more cognitive sectors become involved at all. See Joseph LeDoux, The Emotional Brain 157–69, 172–73, 283–96 (1996). A small, almond-shaped region of the forebrain, the amygdala, appears to play a distinctive role in registering fear, with more reflective checks coming from the cerebral cortex. See id. at 172-73, suggesting that stimulation of the amygdala produces “a sense of foreboding danger, or fear,” and that “studies of humans with amygdala damage also suggest that it plays a special role in fear .” Those who hear sudden, unexplained noises are fearful before they are able to identify the source of the noise. R.B. Zajonc, On the Primacy of Affect, 39 Am Psych 117 (1984); R.B. Zajonc, Feeling and Thinking: Preferences Need No Inferences, 35 Am Psych 151 (1980). People who have been given intravenous injections of procaine, which stimulates the amygdala, report panic sensations. Servan-Schreiber and Perlstein, Selective Limbic Activation and its Relevance to Emotional Disorders, 12 Cognition & Emotion 331 (1998). In research with human beings, electrical stimulation of the amygdala leads to reported feelings of fear and foreboding, even without any reason for these things, leading people to say, for example, that they feel as if someone were chasing them. J. Panksepp, Mood Changes, in Handbook of Clinical Neurology (P.J. Vinken et al. eds. 1985). 
Indeed, some “emotional responses can occur without the involvement of the higher processing systems of the brain, systems believed to be involved in thinking, reasoning, and consciousness.” Ledoux, supra, at 161. The sectors of the brain that “cannot make fine distinctions” also have a strong advantage in speed. Id. at 163. The thalamic pathway, involving the amygdala, “can provide a fast signal that warns that something dangerous may be there. It is a quick and dirty processing system.” Id. at 163. An especially interesting finding: A patient with amygdala damage was asked to detect emotional expression on faces, and she succeeded in identifying “most classes of expressions, except when the faces showed fear.” Id. at 173. 
The essay comes in six parts. Part I discusses some real-world effects of availability and anchoring and brings that discussion to bear on a common criticism of the heuristics-and-biases literature: that heuristics and errors do not play a significant role outside of the laboratory. Part II examines one of the most important and interesting papers in the book, in which Daniel Kahneman and Shane Frederick offer a rethinking and generalization of the whole idea of heuristics. Part III explores the role of emotions and affect. Part IV investigates optimistic bias and its relationship to legal regulation. Part V goes beyond the book under review to offer some speculative remarks about the possibility of “normative heuristics” mental shortcuts that generally work well, but that lead to systematic errors in thinking about morality and law. 
The early work on heuristics and biases raised a natural set of doubts18: Are these phenomena important in the real world? Are people really likely to make systematic errors? On one view, the mistakes, often made by undergraduate subjects, are a product of clever manipulations by psychologists, and in daily life, or in markets, people do much better.19 These issues receive some helpful attention in the introduction (pp. 7–15) and elsewhere, but they are not the book’s explicit focus. To answer them, it is important to emphasize that the goal of the heuristics-and-biases literature is emphatically not to show that people are fools, or that they are systematically irrational. On the contrary, Kahneman and Tversky emphasized that the relevant heuristics are efficient and generally work well.20 But in the laboratory, at least, people who use the heuristics sometimes blunder, and it is the blundering that has attracted the most academic attention. Consider, for example, the fact that when asked how many words, on four pages of a novel, end in “ing,” people will give a larger number than when asked how many words have “n” as their second-to-last letter (p. 21) - a clear laboratory illustration of the availability heuristic. Several of the papers go well beyond the laboratory and demonstrate that heuristics lead to significant errors in the real world. 
A. Availability and Risk judgments about health and safety risks would be affected by the availability heuristic, and Baruch Fischhoff offers some striking illustrations (p. 730). Should women offer physical resistance in cases of assault? In popular publications, experts offer contradictory advice (p. 733). Those who claim that it is a serious mistake consist disproportionately of people from law enforcement sources, who mostly see bad outcomes from those who resisted physically. Hence police officers may well be victims of the availability heuristic, at least “ if they remembered what they had seen and heard, but lacked an appreciation of what they were not seeing” (p. 733). More generally, Fischhoff discusses lay estimates of the frequency of forty-one causes of death in the United States. He finds that the errors in these estimates are consistent with the availability heuristic (and hence the errors were predicted before the data were seen; p. 737). Highly publicized causes of death, such as floods and tornadoes, are overestimated, whereas quieter killers, such as strokes and diabetes, are underestimated (p. 738). Other studies show a similar pattern.21 
Apart from surveys, is actual behavior affected by the availability heuristic? There is evidence to believe that it is. Whether people will buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experiences.22 If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase insurance.23 In the aftermath of an earthquake, insurance for earthquakes rises sharply—but it declines steadily from that point, as vivid 21See W. Kip Viscusi, Jurors, Judges, and the Mistreatment of Risk by the Courts, 30 J Legal Stud 107 (2001). A possible criticism of these findings is that they might show the effect of anchoring. In the relevant surveys, people are typically given a starting number, such as the number of deaths from motor vehicle accidents each year (around 40,000). That starting number is necessary to ensure that numbers, for imperfectly informed respondents, will not be all over the lot. But the starting number, as an anchor, might also compress the range of answers, making high numbers lower and low numbers higher than they would otherwise be. It is possible that a general finding—that people overestimate low risks and underestimate high ones—is partly a product of this anchoring effect. 
22For a vivid demonstration in the context of catastrophes, see Jacob Gersen, Strategy and Cognition: Regulatory Catastrophic Risk (unpublished manuscript 2001). See also Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 40 (2000). 
23Id. memories recede.24 Notice that the use of the availability heuristic, in these contexts, strongly suggests that the heuristics operate even when the stakes are large. Insurance decisions involve significant amounts of money. And it is even possible that the use of the availability heuristic, in such contexts, is fully rational for people who lack statistical knowledge. Perhaps use of that heuristic is the best way of minimizing the sum of decision costs and error costs.25 But it seems less useful to debate the rationality of the availability heuristic than simply to observe that it has a significant effect on behavior even when significant sums of money are involved. 
An interesting essay attempts to test the effects of ease of imagery on perceived judgments of risk (p. 98). The study asked subjects to read about an illness (Hyposcenia-B) that “was becoming increasingly prevalent” (p. 99) on the local campus. In one condition, the symptoms were concrete and easy to imagine -involving muscle aches, low energy, and frequent severe headaches. In another condition, the symptoms were vague and hard to imagine, involving an inflamed liver, a malfunctioning nervous system, and a vague sense of disorientation. Subjects in both conditions were asked both to imagine a three-week period in which they had the disease and to write a detailed description of what they imagined. After doing so, subjects were asked to assess, on a ten-point scale, their likelihood of contracting the disease. The basic finding was that likelihood judgments were very different in the two conditions, with easily-imagined symptoms making people far more inclined to believe that they were likely to get the disease. 
The implications for law and policy should not be obscure. Consider positive issues first: Why is law as it is? The public demand for law will be much higher if people can easily imagine the harm in question; in such cases, the law might well reflect a kind of hysteria. But if the harm is difficult to imagine, we might well see a pattern of neglect.26 We would therefore predict that easily 24Id. 
25It is reasonable, however, to read Kahneman and Tversky as suggesting that the heuristics cannot entirely be defended in this way—that some of the time, at least, the heuristics operate even though a little thought would improve judgments. Consider the discussion of “ing” as possible to “n” as the next-to-last letter, above, and consider also the Linda problem, discussed below. 
26Compare the finding that teens’ rates of risk behaviors—smoking, driving after drinking, unsafe sex—can be reduced by addressing heuristics and biases, in part by explaining that the imaginable harms would lead to relatively greater private precautions and relatively greater governmental concern.27 Well-organized private groups should, and do, take advantage of this fact, attempting to publicize visible examples of harms to which they seek to draw attention.28 The point has prescriptive implications for law as well, offering implications, for example, about the appropriate design of public informational campaigns. If government wants to encourage people to take protective steps, it should provide information about symptoms in a vivid rather than statistical way (p. 102), relying on examples that can later be brought to mind. (Terrorists appear to show a good intuitive understanding of the availability heuristic.) And there is a normative problem as well: If people use the availability heuristic, and if officials are subject to the public demand for law, it is to be expected that the law will impose stringent controls on some small risks, and weak controls on some serious ones. 
But there is an interesting puzzle for those interested in the real-world uses of this heuristic: In many contexts, multiple images are literally “available.” Consider the problem of gun violence. It is not hard to find cases in which the presence of guns led to many deaths, and also cases in which the presence of guns allowed law-abiding citizens to protect themselves against criminals.29 In the face of conflicting instances, which cases are especially available, and to whom? The same question can be raised in the environmental setting. We can find cases in which serious harm resulted from a failure to heed early warnings, suggesting the need for aggressive regulatory protection against risks that cannot yet be shown to be serious30; but we can also find cases in which the government expended a great deal to reduce risks that turned out, on reflection, to be small or illusory.31 The former cases are available to some people and the latter to others. Why should one or another kind of case be available? 
The behavior of the media, and of relevant interest groups, is undoubtedly important here. Many perceived “epidemics” are in reality no such thing, but availability heuristic leads teens to overestimate the risk behavior of their peers. See Baruch Fischhoff, Heuristics and Biases in Application, in id. at 730, 747, 27 See Noll and Krier, supra note; Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 28 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note (discussing availability campaigns). 
29 Se Donald Braman and Dan M. Kahan, More Statistics, Less Persuasion: A Cultural Theory of Gun-Risk Perceptions (unpublished manuscript 2002). 
30 The Precautionary Principle in the 20th Century: Late Lessons from Early Warnings (Poul Harremoes et al. eds. 2002). 
31 For a catalogue, see Adam Wildavsky, But Is It True? (1996). instead a product of media coverage of gripping, unrepresentative incidents.32 But this does not provide all of the picture. Beliefs and orientations are a product of availability, to be sure; but what is available is also a product of beliefs and orientations. In other words, availability may be endogenous to individual predispositions. Social processes are quite important here, for apparently representative anecdotes and gripping examples can move rapidly from one person to another.33 Once several people start to take an example as probative, many people may come to be influenced by their opinion, giving rise of cascade effects.34 
In the domain of risks, “availability cascades” help to account for many social beliefs, and here local variations are likely, with different examples becoming salient in different communities. With respect to risks, religious, racial, and ethnic variations can be explained partly in this way, as different instances become available to diverse groups of like-minded people. Indeed, processes of 32 See Howard Kurtz, The 'Crime Wave' Against Girls, available at washingtonpost.com: “If you were watching cable yesterday, you know that two teenage girls were kidnapped at gunpoint in Lancaster, Calif. A frightening story, to be sure. Especially after all the hours of coverage, with police news conferences, grieving relatives, ex-detectives and FBI profilers. Most other news was obliterated (except for a brief interlude with John Ashcroft announcing the WorldCom arrests). There was even, like a recycled script, a white Bronco. By mid-afternoon, police rescued the teenagers and shot the suspect dead—just in time for the evening wrap-ups. 
“Is it getting more dangerous out there for young girls? Ever since Chandra Levy and Elizabeth Smart, it seems that television is obsessing on some crime story involving girls. Could the saturation coverage be painting a distorted picture, like the great shark scare last summer? Northeastern University criminologist James Fox told us on CNN last weekend that ‘in a typical year, we have 50 to 100 kids who are abducted by strangers and murdered. This year's no different. . . .There's no epidemic. . . . Your child's chance of being killed by an abductor and by a stranger is significantly less than the chance that they'll, for example, die by falling off their bicycle and hitting their head.’ 
“But that's not the impression left by the media machine these days. . . [T]ake these muchhyped abductions, add in the half dozen other cases mentioned by the national media since the first of the year . . . [it] still doesn't qualify as a new crime wave.” 
33 Chip Heath et al., Emotional Selection in Memes: The Case of Urban Legends, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (2001); Chip Heath, Do People Prefer to Pass Along Good or Bad News? Valence and Relevance as Predictors of Transmission Propensity," 68 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes (1996). 
34 See Shiller, supra note, at 148-68; Sushil Biikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, J. Econ. Persp., Summer 1998, at 151; Lisa Anderson and Charles Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory, 87 Am. Econ. Rev. 847 (1997); David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188, 190–95 (Marianno Tommasi and Kathryn Ierulli eds.,1995); Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683, 691–703 (1999). deliberation typically lead like-minded people to accept a more extreme version of their original views,35 making it likely that the effects of certain available examples will become greatly amplified through group discussion. And undoubtedly different cultural orientations play a large role in determining what turns out to be available.36 People are often predisposed to take one or another case as an illustration of a general phenomenon, and predispositions matter a great deal in determining what is available. A great deal of work, normative and empirical, remains to be done on this topic. 
The original studies of anchoring-and-adjustment were memorable in part because they were so amusing. They suggested that when people lack information about an appropriate value, they are highly suggestible, even by apparently irrelevant numbers.37 But the original studies left open many questions about the necessary conditions for anchoring, and also about the role of anchoring outside of the laboratory.38 
Gretchen Chapman and Eric Johnson offer a great deal of help in answering these questions (p. 120). Their most general lesson is that anchors, even irrelevant and extreme ones, have large effects. Chapman and Johnson show that for an anchor to have an effect, people need not be aware of its influence (p. 125); that an anchor is often operating even when people think that it is not (id); that anchors have effects even when people believe, and say they believe, that the anchor is uninformative; and that making people aware of an anchor’s effect does not reduce anchoring (id.). It follows that “debiasing” is very difficult in this context. Very extreme or ludicrously implausible anchors also seem to have an effect: Estimates of the year that Albert Einstein first visited the United States are greatly affected by asking people to begin by considering anchors of 1215 or 1992 (p. 124). Chapman and Johnson also show that that economic incentives do not eliminate the effects of anchors (p. 125); hence anchoring is not a result of casualness about the underlying task. 
Anchors have major effects on legal outcomes. The plaintiff’s demand influences jury verdicts, in terms of both liability judgments and amounts 35See Cass R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go To Extremes, Yale LJ (2000). 36See Braman and Kahan, supra note. 37See Tversky and Kahneman, supra note, at 14–16. 38For discussion of market behavior and anchoring, see Shiller, supra note, at 135–42. awarded (p. 137). In one study, a request for $500,000 produced a median mock jury award of $300,000, whereas a request of $100,000, in the identical case, produced a median award of $90,000.39 Even implausibly low and implausibly high demands operate as anchors (id.) Opening offers in negotiation have a significant influence on settlements. An ingenious study finds that anchors affect judges too. Judges were asked to come up with appropriate awards in a personal injury case.40 The study involved two conditions. The “no anchor” condition involved a simple statement of the facts. The “anchor” condition was the same as the first, but with one critical difference: The defendant filed an obviously meritless motion to dismiss the case on the ground that the $75,000 jurisdictional minimum had not been met. Almost all of the judges denied the motion, which nonetheless served as an anchor, with large effects on ultimate judgments. In the no anchor condition, the average award was $1.24 million, while it was $882,000 in the anchor condition.41 
Anchors also play a role in “contingent valuation” studies, an influential method of valuing regulatory goods, such as increased safety and environmental protection.42 Initially stated values, in studies of people’s willingness to pay to save offshore birds, have a large effect on people’s answers (p. 137). Perhaps the most striking, and in a way hilarious, evidence to this effect comes from a study of willingness to pay to reduce annual risks of death and injury in motor vehicles.43 The authors attempted to elicit both maximum and minimum willingness to pay for safety improvements. People were presented with a risk and an initial amount, and asked whether they were definitely willing or definitely unwilling to pay that amount to eliminate the risk, or “not sure.” If they were definitely willing, the amount displayed was increased until they said that they were definitely unwilling; if they were unsure, the number was moved up and down until people could identify the minimum and maximum. 39See XX. 40See Guthrie et al., supra note. 
41Id. at. There is a possible response to the authors’ claim to have shown the effects of anchoring: Perhaps the motion to dismiss suggested that the injury was less serious than was apparent. Why would a lawyer file a totally frivolous motion to dismiss? But the abundant evidence of effects from anchors suggests that this is unlikely to explain all or even much of the authors’ finding. See also W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, Stan L Rev (finding an anchoring effect from monetary value of life on jury awards, so much so that companies that placed a high value on human life ended up paying higher punitive awards!). 
42See, e.g., George Tolley et al., Valuing Health For Policy (1995); Valuing Environmental Preferences (Ian Bateman & K. G. Willis eds., 1999). 
43See Michael Jones-Lee and Graham Loomes, Private Values and Public Policy, in Conflict and Tradeoffs in Decision Making 205, 210–12 (Elke Weber et al. eds. 2000). 
The authors were not attempting to test the effects of anchors; on the contrary, they were alert to anchoring only because they “had been warned” of a possible problem with their procedure, in which people “might be unduly influenced by the first amount of money that they saw displayed.”44 To solve that problem, the authors allocated people randomly to two subsamples, one with an initial display of 25 pounds, the other with an initial display of 75 pounds. The authors hoped that the anchoring effect would be small, with no significant consequences for minimum and maximum values. But their hope was dashed. For every level of risk, the minimum willingness to pay was higher, with the 75 pound starting point, than the maximum willingness to pay with the 25 pound starting point!45 For example, a reduction in the annual risk of death by 4 in 100,000 produced a maximum willingness to pay of 149 pounds, with the 25 pound starting value, but a minimum willingness to pay of 232 pounds, with the 75 pound starting value (and a maximum, in that case, of 350 pounds).46 
The most sensible conclusion is that whenever people are uncertain about appropriate values, anchors have a significant effect, and sometimes a startlingly large one. Clever negotiators, lawyers, and policymakers should be able to exploit those effects, sometimes even by providing an outlandish or apparently irrelevant anchor. There is a real opportunity for legal reform here, in part because anchors might well produce results that are not easy to defend, and in part because different anchors will ensure that similarly situated people are not treated similarly. Perhaps lawyers should not be permitted to inform jurors of potentially effective anchors, such as the annual profits of the firm or even the plaintiff’s demand, at least in cases involving punitive awards or hard-tomonetize compensatory awards. Or perhaps judges should be asked to review jury awards carefully and by reference to comparison cases, so as to weaken the effect of arbitrary anchors. In any case we now know that the effects of anchoring are hardly limited to the laboratory. 
This point raises a related one: Are groups able to avoid the judgment errors made by individuals? The evidence is mixed.47 In general, groups tend to polarize: They tend up in a more extreme position in line with their 44Id. at 210. 45Id. at 211. 46Id. 
47See Norbert Kerr et al., Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individuals and Groups, 103 Psych. Rev. 687 (1996). predeliberation tendencies.48 At the same time, groups have been found to make better decisions than individuals with respect to certain statistical problems.49 There is some evidence that groups are slightly better at avoiding the problems created by use of the availability heuristic.50 On the other hand, some evidence suggests that the use of the representativeness heuristic is actually amplified in groups.51 It seems clear that group processes do not eliminate the use of heuristics, and it remains to be found whether and when they reduce or increase the resulting errors. 
What, exactly, is a heuristic? When will a heuristic be overridden by cognitive processes that produce a more accurate understanding of the problem in question? In a highlight of this collection, Daniel Kahneman and Shane Frederick make real progress on these questions (p. 49). Their narrow goal is to revisit the representativeness heuristic, but they also have a broader ambition— to rethink and to generalize the whole idea of heuristics and biases. Their discussion is packed with new material, and I touch here only on the points of particular relevance for policy and law. 
Much of their argument turns on drawing a connection between heuristics and dual-process theories.52 Recall that those theories distinguish between two families of cognitive operations, sometimes labeled System 1 and System II. System I is intuitive; it is rapid, automatic, and effortless. System II, by contrast, is reflective; it is slower, self-aware, and deductive. Kahneman and Frederick are careful to disclaim the views that the two systems operate as “autonomous homunculi,” but represent “collections of processes that are distinguished by their speed, controllability, and the contents on which they operate” (p. 51). They suggest that System 1 proposes quick answers to problems of judgment, and that System 2 operates as a monitor, confirming or overriding those judgments.53 Consider, for example, someone who is flying from Chicago to New York in the month after an airplane crash. This person might make a rapid, barely conscious judgment, rooted in System I, that the flight is quite risky, but there might well be a System II override, bringing a more realistic assessment to bear. Or consider someone, bitten by a German Shepherd dog as a child, who encounters a German Shepherd at a neighbor’s house. The immediate intuitive reaction might be fear, but System II might well provide a corrective. In making a distinction between System 1 and System II, Kahneman and Frederick announce a theme that plays a significant role in this book.54 
Kahneman and Frederick also offer a general claim about the nature of heuristics: That they operate through a process of attribute substitution (p. 53). In this process, people are interested in assessing a “target attribute,” and they do so by substituting a “heuristic attribute” of the object, which is easier to handle. Consider the question whether more people die from suicides or homicides. Lacking statistical information, people might respond by asking whether it is easier to recall cases in either class (the availability heuristic). As it happens, this is how most people proceed, and as a result they tend to give the incorrect answer that more people die from homicides.55 But it is easy to see that much of the time, the process of attribute substitution will lead in the right directions, or at least toward the best possible answer for people who lack specialized knowledge. 
With an understanding of heuristics as attribute substitution, Kahneman and Frederick offer some significant amendments to the original presentation by Kahneman and Tversky. They suggest that anchoring should not be seen as a heuristic at all; anchoring operates not by substituting an attribute, but by making a particular value seem more plausible (p. 56). They also argue that the third general-purpose heuristic, to replace anchoring, is the affect heuristic (id). I discuss the affect heuristic in more detail below. For the moment, note that Kahneman and Frederick urge that punitive damage awards are mediated by an outrage heuristic (p. 63), which we might see as an example of the affect heuristic 53Do Systems I and II have physical locations in the human brain? There is some evidence that they do. See note supra. 
54See, e.g, Steven Sloman, Two Systems of Reasoning, p. 379; Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic, . 397; Robyn Dawes et al., Clinical Versus Actuarial Judgment, p. 716. 55See Paul Slovic, supra note X. in action. Jurors do not have a good sense of how to set punitive damage awards (a hard question), and they begin the process by asking about the outrageousness of the defendant’s conduct (an easier question).56 Something like an outrage heuristic undoubtedly plays a role in punishment judgments of many different kinds; there is a large research agenda here. 
Now turn to the authors’ focus, the representativeness heuristic, which has lead to some large controversies.57 The most famous of these involves questions about the likely career of a hypothetical woman named Linda (p. 62), described as follows: “Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice and also participated in antinuclear demonstrations.” Subjects were asked to rank, in order of probability, eight possible futures for Linda. Six of these were fillers (psychiatric social worker, elementary school teacher); the two crucial ones were “bank teller” and “bank teller and active in the feminist movement.” Most people said that Linda was less likely to be a bank teller than to be a bank teller and active in the feminist movement. This is an obvious logical mistake, called a conjunction error, in which characteristics A and B are thought to be more likely than characteristic A alone. The error stems from the representativeness heuristic: Linda’s description seems to match “bank teller and active in the feminist movement” far better than “bank teller.” To the great surprise of Kahneman and Tversky, 80% of undergraduates made a conjunction error when asked directly, without fillers, whether Linda is more likely to be a “bank teller” or “bank teller and active in the feminist movement” (p. 66). 
As Kahneman and Frederick note, people’s answers to the Linda problem have been explained on numerous grounds (p. 67), with critics arguing that the structure of the problem increased or perhaps even generated logical mistakes. Indeed, the Linda problem can be redescribed in ways that will prevent people from erring. Kahneman and Frederick urge that this point should be taken not as a challenge to the claim that people use the representativeness heuristic, but as evidence that under certain circumstances, people will overcome the errors produced by that heuristic (including the conjunction fallacy and neglect of base56Here Kahneman and Frederick draw on work on which I have been involved, see, e.g., Daniel Kahneman et al., Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, J Risk & Uncertainty; Cass R. Sunstein et al., Predictably Incoherent Judgments, Stan L Rev (2002). 
57For a treatment of the representativeness heuristic and investment behavior, see Schiller, supra note, at 144. rates). Kahneman and Frederick suggest that when these problems are overcome, it is often because of the operations of System II, which works as a kind of supervisor or monitor. Hence intelligent people, and those with statistical sophistication, are less likely to err (p. 68); for such people, System II is especially active.58 
For law and policy, the general lesson is simple: Whenever possible, institutionalize System II, at least when questions of fact are involved. Frequently the legal system disregards this advice, relying on juries and hence on ordinary intuitions about probability and causation. The twentieth century movement toward greater reliance on technical expertise, and actual data, might well be seen as an implicit recognition of the unreliability of ordinary intuitions. Indeed, there is reason to think that experts themselves are vulnerable to heuristics, and that reliance on actuarial data could lead to substantial improvements in accuracy.59 In the domain of regulation, quantitative risk analysis is the most straightforward way of overcoming the errors that sometimes accompany heuristics. Consider the controversy over regulation of arsenic in drinking water.60 The availability and representativeness heuristics ensure that many people will be quite frightened of arsenic, even in extremely low doses. Quantitative risk analysis can work as a kind of System II check on potential errors. 
Kahneman and Tversky also suggest that judgment heuristics, understood as attribute substitution, operate not only to answer questions about uncertain events, but also in a diverse class of judgments. In making judgments of fact and value, we often substitute a simple question for a hard one. (In asking about the meaning of the Constitution in a difficult case, we might think that the best approach is simply to investigate the view of people with whom we generally agree; we ask not, “what does the Constitution mean here?” but instead “what does Judge X or Professor Y think the Constitution means here?”) Indeed availability, representativeness, and affect might be seen as “general purpose” heuristics in the sense that they are not limited to issues of probability. People seem to be more convinced, for example, by messages with many arguments 58With respect to intelligence, there is a nice qualification: When the problem is very hard for everyone, intelligent respondents are most likely to err, because they “are more likely to agree on a plausible error than to respond randomly” (p. 68). 
59See Robyn Dawes et al., Clinical versus Actuarial Judgment, p. 716. 60See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, Geo. L.J. (2002). (rather than few), by arguments that are relatively long, and by messages with statistics or supported by credible experts; these patterns seem to show the representativeness heuristic in action.61 And it is easy to see how affect might be a kind of all-purpose heuristic for assessments of objects and their attributes—a point suggesting the likely importance of initial reactions, by judges and juries alike, to cases presented to them. Kahneman and Frederick go so far as to urge that a modest generalization of the representativeness heuristic helps to explain strikingly similar biases in economic valuations of public goods and retrospective evaluations of past events. In particular, Kahneman and Tversky emphasize the crucial role of prototypes, or representative exemplars, in making complex judgments. 
How much are people willing to pay to save animals? It turns out that people are highly sensitive to the prototypes involved and highly insensitive to the numbers of animals at stake. A program that involves members of a popular species will produce a much higher willingness to pay than a program that involves members of an unpopular species (p. 71). At the same time, people’s willingness to pay does not differ greatly with large variations in the numbers involved; their willingness to pay is about the same to save 2,000, 20,000, and 200,000 birds (p. 75). There is a clear parallel here to people’s neglect of base-rates in using the representativeness heuristic to make probability judgments. Kahneman and Frederick also show that in evaluating past experiences, such as exposure to unpleasant noises, painful medical procedures, or horrific film clips, people show duration neglect (p. 77). In one experiment, for example, people’s evaluations of horrific movies were largely unaffected by substantial variations in their length (id.). In another experiments, people’s evaluations of colonoscopies were greatly influenced by the highest level of pain involved and also by the level of pain at the end, but not much by significant variations in the duration of the procedure (from 4 to 69 minutes). Here too Kahneman and Frederick urge that the prototype, captured in the Peak Affect and the End Affect, dominates evaluation. The finding seems in light with more casual empiricism: People’s retrospective judgments, of very good times and very bad times, seem to have little to do with the duration of those times, and a great deal to do with Peak and End. 
With respect to law and policy, an intriguing implication here is that people’s use of prototypes will crowd out variables that, on reflection, have clear importance. There is a serious problem with contingent valuation studies if people’s affective response will improve their judgments of all dimensions of those products and activities. A closely related experiment shows that when people are inadequately informed, they tend to think that stocks that are “good” have both high return and low risk, whereas stocks that are “bad” are judges to have low return and high risk (p. 413). In the presence of a high level of information, analysts distinguish perceived risk and return, and their judgments are not produced by a global attitude (id.). 
The second study asked people to make decisions under time pressure (p. 412). The motivating claim is that the affect heuristic is more efficient than analytic processing in the sense that it permits especially rapid assessments. Under time pressure, Slovic et al. hypothesize that there would be an unusually strong inverse correlation between judged risk and judged benefit, because affect will be the determinant of assessment, and people will have less time to undertake the kind of analysis that could begin to pull the two apart (p. 412). In other words, System I is most important when time is scarce, and in such circumstances, System II will be a less effective monitor. The hypothesis is confirmed: Under time pressure, the inverse correlation is even stronger than without time pressure. 
mood, for example, influences decisions and reactions in many domains.75 Consider the remarkable fact that stock prices increase significantly on sunny days, a fact that is hard to explain in terms that do not rely on affect.76 One study urges that people are more vulnerable to the use of simple cues when their emotions are aroused and particularly when they are under conditions of stress; in such circumstances, intense indoctrination, in which people do not process systematically, is especially likely.77 A related study suggests that when people are anxious and fearful, they are less likely to engage in systematic processing, 75See Alice Isen, Positive Affect and Decision Making, in Research on Judgment and Decision Making 509 research indicates that even mild and even positive affective states can markedly influence everyday thought processes, and do so regularly.” Id. But the evidence is inconclusive on whether positive affect increases or decrease the use of heuristics or instead more systematic forms of reasoning. Id. at 526—27. 
76See David Hirschleifer and Tyler Shumway, Good Day Sunshine: Stock Returns and the Weather , available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/results.cfm. 
77See Robert Baron, Arousal, Capacity, and Intense Indoctrination, 4 Personality and Social Psych. Review 238, 243–44 (2000). and hence System II is especially unreliable.78 Note here that there is an evident relationship between social influences and the emotions: if emotions weaken systematic processing, they simultaneously increase susceptibility to the apparent views of others.79 Fear itself is likely to make people susceptible to the acceptance of faulty logic and to pressure to conform.80 As a vivid example, consider the widespread panic, involving millions of people, caused by the radio broadcast of “Invaders From Mars” in 1938; a study suggests that people do have a critical ability that protects against panic, but that the ability can be “overpowered either by an individual’s own susceptible personality or by emotions generated in him by an unusual listening situation.”81 Social interactions, spreading the news of the invasion, played a crucial role here.82 Fear of an invasion by Martians is an exotic case from which general lessons perhaps cannot be drawn, but the example might well be seen as an extreme illustration of a common process by which affect, alongside and fueled by social interactions, can induce widespread fear. 
If the affect heuristic seriously influences people’s judgments, it should be possible to manipulate those judgments simply by altering affect, and by associating the altered affect with a commodity, person, or experience.83 Background music in movies, smiling faces in mail order catalogues, name changes by entertainers, and advertisements that link smoking to rugged cowboys and lush waterfalls make a good deal of sense in this light (pp. 417-18). In the case of smoking, the authors think that the possibility of manipulation through “affective tags” creates serious problems. In their view, people who start smoking, especially when young, may have some understanding of the associated risks,84 but their behavior is governed by “the affective impulses of the 78See Chaiken, supra note, at 19–20. Chaiken notes that “people who are anxious about or vulnerable to a health threat, or otherwise experiencing stress may engage in less careful or less extensive processing of health-relevant information.” Id. at 20. 
79Baron, supra note, at 244–46. 80Id. at 244–46. 
81See Joseph Bulgatz, Ponzi Schemes, Invaders from Mars, and More Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds 134 (1992). 
82Id. at 128-36. 
83Note that the alteration of affect might come through information alone. In the risk experiments mentioned above, information about risks altered affect, as did information about benefits. I do not discuss the relationship between emotions and cognition here, and simply note that on any view of emotions, cognition plays a large role, at least most of the time. See Ledoux, supra note; Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of Thought (2002); Jon Elster, Alchemies of the Mind (2001). 
84See W. Kip Viscusi, Smoke-Filled Rooms (2002). moment, enjoying smoking as something new and exciting, a way to have fun with their friends” (p. 418). The authors think that smoking decisions reflect a failure of rationality, producing by a failure of the experiential system; this is a case in which the affect heuristic misfires. The point very much bears on public education campaigns decided to reduce smoking,85 and also on the question whether government has sufficient reason, in this context, for paternalism. 
The authors emphasize another point with important implications for risk regulation: When an outcome is accompanied by strong emotions, variations in probability have surprisingly little weight on people’s decisions.86 What matters are the images associated with the result. The point has received empirical confirmation in a study of people’s willingness to pay to avoid electric shocks, or to be able to kiss favorite movie stars.87 In one study, people’s willingness to pay to avoid an electric shock varied little, depending on whether its probability was 1% or 99%!88 This point helps explain “why societal concerns about hazards such as nuclear power and exposure to extremely small amounts of toxic chemicals fail to recede in response to information about the very small probabilities of the feared consequences from such hazards” (p. xxx). With respect to hope, those who operate gambling casinos and state lotteries are well-aware of the underlying mechanisms. They play on people’s emotions in the particular sense that they conjure up palpable pictures of victory and easy living. With respect to risks, insurance companies and environmental groups do exactly the same.89 85Of special interest is a project, run by high-school students in Illinois, designed to prevent young people from smoking. Their extremely successful advertising campaign was designed not to focus on the health risks associated with smoking, but to portray, in very vivid terms, the stupidity and self-destructiveness of smokers, not least in romantic settings. An unanticipated effect of the campaign was to lead smokers to quit, not merely to prevent them from starting. Christi Parsons, State dashes teens' edgy anti-smoking ad campaign, Chicago Tribune, June 25, 2002, p.1. Their motto: “Smoking Makes You Look Dumb.” For general information, see http://www.idecide4me.com/ 
86I discuss some implications of this point in Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and the Law, Yale LJ (forthcoming 2002). 
87Yuval Rottenstreich and Christopher Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Probability Weighting, supra, at 176–88. 
88See id. at 188, showing a willingness to pay $7 to avoid a 1% risk and $10 to avoid a 99% risk. Note that there was a large spread, on the basis of probability, for the less “affect-rich” loss of $20, where the median willingness to pay was $1 for a 1% chance of loss and $18 for a 99% of loss. Id. at 188 
89 Slovc notes that with respect to products of all kinds, advertisers try to produce a good affect to steer consumers into a certain direction, often through the use of appealing celebrities, through cheerful scenes, or through the creation of an association between the product and the consumer’s preferred self-image. See Slovic, The Affect Heuristic, supra. 
It follows that if government is seeking to encourage people to avoid large risks, and to worry less over small risks, it might well attempt to appeal to their emotions, perhaps by emphasizing the worst-case scenario. With respect to a cigarette smoking, abuse of alcohol, reckless driving, and abuse of drugs, this is exactly what government occasionally attempts to do. It should be no surprise that some of the most effective efforts to control cigarette smoking appeal to people’s emotions, by making them feel that if they smoke, they will be dupes of the tobacco companies or imposing harms on innocent third parties.90 There is also an opportunity here to try to activate System II, by promoting critical scrutiny of reactions that are based on “affective ties” in cases in which people are neglecting serious risks or exaggerating them. Note here that “the latent anxieties conducive to panic may nevertheless be minimized if the critical abilities of people can be increased,” and that education is “one of the greatest preventives of panic behavior.”91 
Thus far I have emphasized heuristics, which can lead to predictable errors, and which have accompanying biases. “Availability bias” exists, for example, when recall of examples makes people toward unrealistically high and unrealistically low assessments of risks. But the heuristics-and-biases literature also explores “pure” biases, in the form of tendencies to err that do not involve attribute substitution. An example is self-serving bias: People care about fairness, but their judgments about fairness are systematically biased in their own direction—a finding that helps to explain litigation behavior, including failures to settle.92 One of the most intriguing and complex biases involves optimism.93 With respect to most of the hazards of life, people appear to be unrealistically optimistic. This claim is closely related to the suggestive, with prominent advocates in economics, that people may attempt to reduce cognitive dissonance by thinking that the risks they face are lower than they are in fact.94 If people systematically understate risks, there is a serious problem for law and policy, and a serious problem too for those who accept the rational actor model in the social sciences. At a minimum, efforts should be able to increase information, so that when people run risks, they do so with knowledge of what they are doing. And if such efforts are unsuccessful, and if optimistic bias is intransigent, perhaps people should be blocked from running certain risks entirely. 
The most well-documented findings of optimism involve relative (as opposed to absolute) risk. About 90% of drivers think that they are safer than the average driver and less likely to be involved in a serious accident.95 People generally think that they are less likely than other people to be divorced, to have heart disease, to be fired from a job, to be divorced, and much more.96 At first glance, a belief in relative immunity from risk seems disturbing, but by itself this finding does not establish that people underestimate the risks that they actually face. Perhaps people have an accurate understanding of their own statistical risks even if they believe, wrongly, that other people are more vulnerable than they are. The “above average” effect might well coexist with largely accurate assessments of abilities and susceptibilities.97 With respect to absolute risk, the evidence for unrealistic optimism is less clear, as Daniel Armor and Shelley Taylor show in their contribution to this collection. For significant and personally relevant events, including unwanted pregnancy, people show an accurate understanding of their susceptibility (p. 335). With respect to some lowprobability events, including life-threatening risks such as AIDS, people actually tend to overestimate their own susceptibility, and in that sense seem to show pessimistic bias (id.).98 One survey finds general overestimates of personal risk levels for such hazards as breast cancer (where women rate their actual risk as 40%, with the actual risk being roughly 10%); prostate cancer (where men rank their actual risk as 40%, with the actual risk again being roughly 10%); lung cancer (estimated at 35%, compared to an actual risk of under 20%); and stroke (estimated at 45%, compared to an actual risk of roughly 20%).99 
But in many domains, people do underestimate their statistical risk. For example, professional financial experts consistently overestimate likely earnings, and business school students overestimate their likely starting salary and the number of offers that they will receive (pp. 334-35). People also underestimate their own likelihood of being involved in a serious automobile accident,100 and their own failure to buy insurance for floods and earthquakes is at least consistent with the view that people are excessively optimistic.101 The evidence of optimistic bias, both relative and absolute, is sufficient to raise questions about informational and regulatory interventions. 
Neil Weinstein and William Klein explore a variety of apparently promising strategies to reduce optimistic bias with respect to relative risk.102 The punch line? None of these strategies worked, not even a little. One study, for example, asked people to generate their own list of personal “factors” that might either increase or decrease their risk of developing a weight problem or a drinking problem. The authors hypothesized that an identification of factors would decrease optimistic bias in many cases; but no such effect was observed. Nor was optimistic bias reduced by asking participants to read about major risk factors for certain hazards, to report their standing with respect to these factors, and to offer an overall risk estimate after responding to the list of factors. The authors conclude that “health campaigns emphasizing high-risk targets (such as smoking interventions that show unattractive pictures of smokers) and campaigns conveying information about undesirable actions (as with pamphlets listing factors that raise the risk for a particular health problem) may unwittingly worsen the very biases they are designed to reduce” (p. 323). 
As the authors note, one intervention has been found to reduce optimistic bias: Giving people information about their own standing on risk factors or about their peers’ standing on risk factors. But they observe, sensibly enough, 99See Humphrey Taylor, Perceptions of Risks, available at http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=44. 
100Jolls, supra note, at 291. 101Id. 
102Neil D. Weinstein and William Klein, Resistance of Personal Risk Perceptions to Debiasing Intervention, p. 313. that it is not easy to adapt this information to media campaigns designed to improve human health. This is a valuable paper, in part because it adds to stillemerging literature on the possibility of debiasing (or the activation of System II). But because the focus is on the “above average” effect, the findings do not offer clear guidance about campaigns designed to give people a better sense of the statistical reality. It would be valuable to learn much more about that topic. 
In their extremely illuminating paper, David Armour and Shelley Taylor are concerned with some obvious puzzles: If people are excessively optimistic, why don’t they pursue ambitious goals recklessly, and blunder? Why don’t alert people—psychologists? entrepreneurs?—take systematic advantage of human optimism? This is what Armor and Taylor see as the “dilemma of unrealistic optimism”—the likelihood that if real, this bias would produce extremely serious harmful effects. Perhaps unrealistic optimism does lead to real-world harms.103 But if optimism were as widespread as some research, we should probably see far more recklessness and failure than we generally observe. 
The authors resolve the dilemma by giving a more refined sense of the nature of optimistic bias. In their view, people are not indiscriminately or blindly optimistic. Their predictions are usually within reasonable bounds (p. 346). People are less likely to be optimistic when the consequences of error are severe (p. 339)—suggesting that people may not, because of optimistic bias, risk their lives and their health. In addition, optimism decreases if the outcome will be known in the near future; when performance will occur and be evaluated quickly, people’s predictions become more accurate (id.). Optimism also decreases when people are in a predecisional state of deliberation. When people are choosing among goals, or among possible courses of action, the bias is attenuated, and it increases again only after people have selected goals and begin to implement their plans (p. 340). There is also evidence that optimistic bias, when it exists, can be adaptive,104 leading to (almost) self-fulfilling policies, increasing the likelihood of success (p. 341). 
These claims very much bear on the role of law, and provide good reason to question the view that optimistic bias provides a good reason for paternalistic interventions. To be sure, we know enough about optimistic bias to give serious consideration to informational campaigns to ensure that people will not have an inflated belief in their own immunity. In the context of smoking, statistical knowledge of risks105 might be inadequate if people believe themselves relatively immune.106 But in view of the arguments by Armor and Taylor, the idea that paternalism is generally justified by optimistic bias must be regarded as an unproven speculation. If people are not excessively optimistic when the consequences of error are severe, if the bias is small or nonexistent when decisions are actually being made, and if people overstate low-probability risks, there may be no problem for the law to correct. 
The chapters in this book are almost entirely concerned with how people resolve questions of fact. This should not be surprising. The heuristics-and-biases literature was originally focused on issues of probability, and while many of the chapters go beyond that topic, they do not much deal with normative question— with the role of heuristics in informing judgments about morality and politics.107 It is natural to wonder whether the rules of morality also have heuristics (isn’t that inevitable?), and whether the normative judgments involved in law and politics are also prone to heuristics, or to rapid System I assessments and to possible System II override. 
We can imagine some very ambitious claims here. On one view, much of everyday morality, nominally concerned with fairness, should be seen a set of heuristics for the real issue, which is how to promote utility.108 Armed with psychological findings, utilitarians might be tempted to claim that ordinary moral commitments are a set of mental shortcuts that generally work well, but 105See Viscusi, supra note. 
106See J.Z. Ayanian and P.D. Cleary, Perceived Risks of Heart Disease and Cancer Among Cigarette Smokers, 281 JAMA 1019, 1020–21 (1999) (finding that most smokers think that their risks are average or below average). Optimistic bias is raised in this context in Paul Slovic, Smoking; but see Viscusi, supra note. 
107An exception is the suggestive discussion by Philip Tetlock, who urges that many people believe in “taboo tradeoffs,” and that we might see such people not as defective intuitive economists, but as defenders of sacred values. See Philip Tetlock, Intuitive Politicians, Theologians, and Prosecutors, 582, 596–98. 
108See Jonathan Baron, Judgment Misguided: Intuition and Error in Public Decision Making (1998). that also produce severe and systematic errors. (Is retribution a cognitive error? Is Kantianism?) For their part, deontologists could easily turn the tables. Deontologists might well claim that the rules recommended by utilitarians are consistent, much of the time, with what morality requires -- but also that utilitarianism, taken seriously, produces bad mistakes in some cases. And indeed, many debates about deontologists and utilitarians involve claims, by one or another side, that the opposing view leads to results that are inconsistent with widespread intuitions and should be rejected for that reason. Unfortunately, these large debates are unlikely to be tractable, simply because utilitarians and deontologists are most likely to be unconvinced by the suggestion that their defining commitments are biases or mere heuristics. But in some particular cases, we might be able to make some progress by entertaining the hypothesis that some widely accepted rules of morality are heuristics. Consider, for example, the idea that one should “never lie” or “never steal”—good rules of thumb, certainly, but injunctions that badly misfire when the lie, or the theft, is needed to protect the deaths of innocent people.109 I deal here with several possibilities that relate directly to law. 
disconnected with the consequences of punishment, in a way that suggests a moral heuristic may well be at work. Consider, for example, an intriguing study of people’s judgments about penalties in cases involving harms from vaccines and birth control pills.110 In one case, subjects were told that the result of a higher penalty would be to make companies try harder to make safer products. In an adjacent case, subjects were told that the consequence of a higher penalty would be to make the company more likely to stop making the product, with the result that less safe products would be on the market. Most subjects, including a group of judges, gave the same penalties in both cases. Can this outcome be defended in principle? Perhaps it can, but I think it is far more sensible to think that people are operating under a heuristic, to the effect that penalties should be a 109Note rule-utilitarian defense of these ideas: They might misfire in particular cases, but it might be best for people to treat them as firm rules, because a case-by-case inquiry would prove even more errors. If people ask whether the circumstances warrant an exception to the prohibition on lying or stealing, there might well be excessive or self-serving lying and stealing. The strong voice of conscience—calling for adherence to what I am calling moral heuristics even in cases in which they badly misfire—probably serves some valuable social functions. For human beings, a decision to go right to the issue of consequences, without firm moral rules of thumb, would likely produce serious problems. 
110Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, Intuitions About Penalties and Compensation in the Context of Tort Law, 7 J Risk and Uncertainty 17 (1993) proportional response to the outrageousness of the act, and should not be based on consequential considerations. 
If this claim seems too adventurous, consider a similar test of punishment judgments, which asked subjects, including judges and legislators, to choose penalties for dumping hazardous waste.111 In one case, the penalty would make companies try harder to avoid waste. In another, the penalty would lead companies to cease making a beneficial product. Most people did not penalize companies differently in the two cases. Perhaps most strikingly, people preferred to require companies to clean up their own waste, even if the waste did not threaten anyone, instead of spending the same amount to clean up far more dangerous waste produced by another, now-defunct company. It is at least plausible to think that in thinking about punishment, people use a simple heuristic, the now-familiar outrage heuristic. This heuristic produces reasonable results in most circumstances, but in some cases, it seems to me to lead to systematic errors. 
whether to take certain safety precautions for its cars. In deciding whether to do so, it conducts a cost-benefit analysis, in which it concludes that certain precautions are not justified—because, say, they would cost $100 million and save only four lives, and because the company has a “ceiling” of $10 million per lives saved (a ceiling that is, by the way, significantly higher than the amount the Environmental Protection Agency uses for a statistical life). How will ordinary people react to this decision? The answer is that they will not react favorably.112 In fact they tend to punish companies that base their decisions on cost-benefit analysis, even if a high valuation is placed on human life. By contrast, they do not much punish companies that are willing to impose a “risk” on people.113 What underlies these moral judgments? 
A careful look raises the possibility that when people disapprove of trading money for risks, they are generalizing from a set of moral principles that are generally sound, and even useful, but that work poorly in some cases. Consider the following moral principle: Do not knowingly cause a human death. 
111Jonathan Baron et al., Attitudes Toward Managing Hazardous Waste, 13 Risk Analysis 183 (1993). 
112See W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, Stan L Rev (2000). 113See id. See also See Philip Tetlock, Coping With Tradeoffs, in Elements of Reason: Cognition, Choice, and the Bounds of Rationality 239, Arthur Lupia et al. eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000) People disapprove of companies that fail to improve safety when they are fully aware that deaths will result—whereas people do not disapprove of those who fail to improve safety while appearing not to know, for certain, that deaths will ensue. When people object to risky action taken after cost-benefit analysis, it seems to be partly because that very analysis puts the number of expected deaths squarely “on screen.”114 Companies that fail to do such analysis, but that are aware that a “risk” exists, do not make clear, to themselves or to jurors, that they caused deaths with full knowledge that this was what they were going to do. People disapprove, above all, of companies that cause death knowingly. 
I suggest, then, that a genuine heuristic is at work, one that imposes moral condemnation on those who knowingly engage in acts that will result in human deaths. The problem is that it is not always unacceptable to cause death knowingly, at least if the deaths are relatively few and an unintended byproduct of generally desirable activity. If government allows new highways to be built, it will know that people will die on those highways; if government allows new power plants to be built, it will know that some people will die from the resulting pollution; if companies produce tobacco products, and if government does not ban those products, hundreds of thousands of people will die; the same is true for alcohol. Much of what is done, by both industry and government, is likely to result in one or more deaths. Of course it would make sense, in most or all of these domains, to take extra steps to reduce risks. But that proposition does not support the implausible claim that we should disapprove, from the moral point of view, of any action taken when deaths are foreseeable. 
I do believe that it is impossible to vindicate, in principle, the widespread social antipathy to cost-benefit balancing. But to adapt a claim about the representativeness heuristic by Stephen Jay Gould (p. 68), “a little homunculus in my head continues to jump up and down, shouting at me” that corporate costbenefit analysis, trading dollars for a known number of deaths, is morally unacceptable. The voice of the homunculus, I am suggesting, is not the result of conscience, but instead of a crude but quite tenacious moral heuristic. 
why the distinction between acts and omissions might matter for law and policy. In one case, for example, a patient might ask a doctor not to provide life114It is also the case that explicit trading of money for lives is strongly disfavored, see Tetlock, supra note. I am hypothesizing that some of this effect, and possibly a great deal of it, comes from the fact that someone has knowingly engaged in action that will result in deaths. sustaining equipment, thus ensuring the patient’s death. In another case, a patient might ask a doctor to inject a substance that will immediately end the patient’s life. People seem to have a strong moral intuition that the failure to provide life-sustaining equipment, and even the withdrawal of such equipment, is acceptable and legitimate -- but that the injection is morally abhorrent. And indeed constitutional law reflects judgments to this effect.115 But what is the morally relevant difference? 
It is worth considering the possibility that the action-omission distinction operates as a heuristic for the more complex and difficult assessment of the moral issues at stake. From the moral point of view, harmful acts are generally worse than harmful omissions, in terms of both the state of mind of the wrongdoer and the likely consequences of the wrong. But harmful acts are not always worse than harmful omissions, and the moral puzzles arise when life, or a clever interlocutor, comes up with a case in which there is no morally relevant distinction between acts and omissions, but when moral intuitions strongly suggest that there must be such a difference. In such cases, we might hypothesize that moral intuitions reflect an overgeneralization of principles that usually make sense—but that fail to make sense in the particular case.116 In other words, moral intuitions reflect System I and they need to be corrected by System II. I believe that the persistent acceptance of withdrawal of life-saving equipment, alongside persistent doubts about euthanasia, is a demonstration of the point. 
Consider in this regard the dispute over two well-known problems in moral philosophy.117 The first, called the trolley problem, asks people to suppose that a runaway trolley is headed for five people, who will be killed if the trolley continues on its current course. The question is whether you would throw a switch that would move the trolley onto another set of tracks, killing one person rather than five. Most people would throw the switch. The second, called the footbridge problem, is the same as that just given, but with one difference: the only way to save the five is to throw a stranger, now on a footbridge that spans the tracks, into the path of the trolley, killing that stranger but preventing the trolley from reaching the others. Most people will not kill the stranger. But what is the difference between the two cases, if any? A great deal of philosophical work has been done on this question, much of it trying to suggest that our firm 115See Washington v. Glucksberg. 
116See Jonathan Baron, Nonconsequentialist Decisions, in 17 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 (1994). 
117See Joshua Greene et al., An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment, 293 Science 2105 (2001). intuitions can indeed be defended in principle. Let me suggest a simpler answer. As a matter of principle, there is no difference between the two cases. People’s different reactions are based on moral heuristics which condemn the throwing of the stranger but support the throwing of the switch. These heuristics generally point in the right direction. But they misfire in drawing a distinction between the two cases. In this sense, the action-omission distinction leads to systematic errors. 
Is there anything to be said to those who believe that their moral judgments, distinguishing the trolley and footbridge problems, are entirely reflective, and reflect no heuristic at all? Consider an intriguing experiment, designed to see how the human brain responds to the two problems. The authors do not attempt to answer the moral questions in principle, but they find “that there are systematic variations in the engagement of emotions in moral judgment,”118 and that brain areas associated with emotion are far more active in contemplating the footbridge problem than in contemplating the trolley problem.119 As in the case of fear, where an identifiable region of the brain makes helpfully immediate but not entirely reliable judgments,120 and where other, also identifiable regions can supply correctives, so too, perhaps, in the context of morality and law. 
of trust is likely to produce a great deal of outrage. If a babysitter neglects a child, or if a security guard steals from his employer, people will be angrier than if the identical acts were performed by someone in whom trust has not been reposed. So far, perhaps, so good. And it should not be surprising that people will favor greater punishment for betrayals than for otherwise identical crimes.121 Perhaps the disparity could be justified on the ground that the betrayal of trust is an independent harm, one that warrants greater deterrence and retribution—a point that draws strength from the fact that trust, once lost, is not easily regained. But consider a finding that is harder to explain: People are especially averse to risks of death that come from products designed to promote safety, so much so that people have been found to prefer a greater chance of dying, as a result of accidents from a crash, to a significantly lower chance of dying in a crash as a result of a malfunctioning air bag.122 Indeed, “most people are willing to double 118Id. at 2106, 119Id. 120See Ledoux, supra note. 121See Jonathan Koehler and Andrew Gershoff, Betrayal Aversion (2000). 122Id. their chance of dying to avoid incurring a very small chance of dying via betrayal.”123 
What explains this seemingly bizarre and self-destructive preference? I suggest that a heuristic is at work: Punish, and never reward, betrayals of trust. The heuristic generally works well. But it misfires in some cases, as when those who deploy it end up increasing the risks they themselves face. An air bag is not a security guard or a babysitter, endangering those whom they have been hired to protect. It is a product, to be chosen if it decreases aggregate risks. If an air bag makes people safer on balance, it should be used, even if in a tiny percentage of cases it will create a risk that would not otherwise exist. To reject air bags on grounds of betrayal is irrational—irrational but understandable, the sort of mistake to which heuristics often lead human beings. The distinctive feature of the anti-betrayal heuristic is that it involves moral and legal judgments rather than judgments of fact. 
These are speculative remarks on some complex subjects. But if heuristics play a role in factual judgments, and sometimes lead people to make systematic errors, there is every reason to believe that heuristics also help produce normative judgments, both moral and legal, and sometimes produce errors there as well. If this is harder to demonstrate, it is largely because we are able to agree, in the relevant cases, about what constitutes error in the domain of facts, and often less able to agree about what constitutes error in the domain of values. I have suggested here that an understanding of heuristics and biases has many implications for legal problems, and I believe that Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment will illuminate problems of law and policy for many years to come. But we should not be surprised if the ideas of attribute substitution, and of the correction of rapid, intuitive assessments by more reflective processes, have analogues in moral and legal intuitions as well. 123 Id. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 161 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
Inequality and Indignation Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=301110 Inequalities often persist because both the advantaged and the disadvantaged stand to lose from change. Despite the probability of loss, moral indignation can lead the disadvantaged to seek to alter the status quo, by encouraging them to sacrifice their material self-interest for the sake of equality. Experimental research shows that moral indignation, understood as a willingness to suffer in order to punish unfair treatment by others, is widespread. It also indicates that a propensity to apparently self-defeating moral indignation can turn out to promote people’s material self-interest, if and because others will anticipate their actions. But potential rebels face collective action problems. Some of these can be reduced through the acts of “indignation entrepreneurs,” giving appropriate signals, organizing discussions by like-minded people, and engaging in acts of self-sacrifice. Law is relevant as well. By legitimating moral indignation and dissipating pluralistic ignorance, law can intensify and spread that indignation, thus increasing its expression. Alternatively, law can delegitimate moral indignation, or at least raise the cost of its expression, thus stabilizing a status quo of inequality. But the effects of law are unpredictable, in part because it will have moral authority for some but not for others; here too heterogeneity is an issue both for indignation entrepreneurs and their opponents. Examples are given from a range of areas, including labor-management relations, sexual harassment, civil rights, and domestic violence. 
Every society contains countless inequalities. Some people have more money than others. Employers have authority over the livelihoods, and many daily decisions, of their workers. Some people are well educated, while others are not. In many nations, convicted felons are not allowed to vote. Many inequalities are found acceptable, but some produce indignation, which is a function of * Professor of Philosophy at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. **Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. We are grateful to Avishai Margalit, Eric Posner, Richard Posner and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments on a previous draft. perceived injustice. When inequalities do not seem unjust, they may be taken as unimportant, or else as natural, inevitable, responsive to “real differences” between groups, or in the interest of all sides. 
In this Essay we use some simple tools from game theory and behavioral economics to cast light on the maintenance and disruption of unequal relationships. We emphasize that such relationships are often sustained for a simple reason: It would be harmful, to the disadvantaged as well as the advantaged, to alter the status quo, and both sides are aware of that fact. Consider an imaginable system of sexual hierarchy, in which women are systematically subordinate to men, but which is to the benefit of women as well as men in the sense that both sides would lose if the status quo were changed. Or consider a system of labor-management relations in which a rebellion by lowincome workers would lead to depressed wages or unemployment. Or consider a capitalist economy, pervaded by large inequalities but complying with Rawls’ difference principle1: however large, the inequalities are (by hypothesis) part of a system that promotes the welfare, suitably defined, of the least advantaged. In situations of this kind, unequal relationships tend to be stable and selfsustaining. Members of disadvantaged groups would suffer from a change, and they know it. Equally important, members of advantaged groups are aware of these facts and behave accordingly. 
On reasonable assumptions, change seems quite impossible. What will nevertheless make it occur? As we shall show, change will result when the disadvantaged feel moral indignation, which will, under appropriate circumstances, lead them to disrupt an otherwise stable situation by sacrificing their material self-interest for the sake of increased equality.2 To clarify this point, we will take advantage of some striking empirical findings from behavioral economics. Moral indignation—a willingness to suffer material loss for the sake of ensuring fairer distributions - is widespread, and it turns out to be in people’s strategic advantage if one condition is met: it is anticipated. Experiments show that when the disadvantaged are thought likely to sacrifice in order to punish perceived unfairness, the advantaged are willing to take steps to increase fairness - thus ensuring more egalitarian divisions.3 1 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 75–80 (1971). 2 For an early treatment of this problem from a different angle, see Edna Ullmann-Margalit, The Emergence of Norms (Oxford: Oxford University Pres, 1977). 3 See Chaim Fershtman and Uri Gneezy, Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental Approach, Q J Econ 351 (2001). Of course moral indignation, and a willingness to act on it, will vary greatly across populations. As a result, rebels face some serious collective action problems. We show that “indignation entrepreneurs” help solve those problems by signaling the appropriateness of indignation and the importance of acting on it. We also show that law can help, above all by virtue of its expressive function.4 In exploring that expressive function, we emphasize four points. The first is that under circumstances of inequality, the reaction of the disadvantaged will not be uniform. Some people will be indignant, even outraged, and willing to act; others, while indignant, will be unwilling to incur the costs of rebellion; others will not be disturbed at all; others will be in between these various alternatives; and still others will be unsure about the appropriate attitude. The second point is that the beliefs and actions of members of disadvantaged groups will depend partly on the perceived beliefs and actions of other members. The third point is that different people will be willing to incur different costs for expressing moral indignation, partly but not only because of their uncertainty about whether an expression of indignation will be hopeless, in the long-run or the short-run. The fourth point is that in rebelling against inequality, members of disadvantaged groups face a collective action problem; some such members will be tempted to stay on the sidelines and to benefit from the rebellion of others. This problem is perhaps best solved through norms of solidarity by which indignation is brought to bear once more, in the form of moral pressure on free riders.5 Legal reform may be important here as well. 
Political actors on both sides know that law may help on all four counts, partly through what it does and, no less important, partly through what it signals. Law may, for example, dissipate pluralistic ignorance, fuel and legitimate indignation, and offer some hope for change in the future. Consider laws forbidding the discharge of union members or criminalizing acts of domestic violence: even if infrequently enforced, such laws can both fuel indignation and make people more willing to act on it. For their part, advantaged groups may enlist the law to offer the opposite signals and to produce contrary effects. Consider laws banning 4 See Amy Wax, Expressive Law and Oppressive Norms, 86 Virginia Law Review 1731 (2000). We owe a general debt to Wax’s treatment, which builds in turn on Ullmann-Margalit, supra note, as well as on Robert H. Frank, Passion within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions (New York; Norton, 1988). Our current emphases, however, are different from those in these other discussions. 5 On the willingness to punish free-riders, even at one’s own expense, and on the associated emotion of anger, see Ernst Fehr and Simon Gachter, Altruistic Punishment in Humans, 415 Nature 137 (2002). union members from requiring workers to join unions as a condition of employment. 
This essay comes in three parts. Part I shows why inequality is often stable and explains under what conditions people will rebel against it. Drawing on experimental evidence, Part II offers some remarks on moral indignation and spite and on the strategic aspects of the willingness to sacrifice material selfinterest for the sake of increased equality. Part III explores heterogeneity and the role of law. Here we move from the case of homogenous groups to that of heterogeneous groups, in which both moral indignation and the willingness to act on it are highly variable, and in which rebels face collective action problems. We explore in this connection the efforts of indignation entrepreneurs, the possibility of “indignation cascades,” and the potential role of law, showing that even without much in the way of enforcement, law can embolden members of disadvantaged groups and strengthen their resolve. We also show that, conversely, law can shore up the status quo of inequality, either by suggesting that moral indignation is unjustified or by raising the cost of acting on it. But all of these possibilities depend on the moral authority of law, and there are significant social heterogeneities here as well. We discuss some of the dilemmas here for those seeking to use the law to transform the status quo or instead to entrench it. Part IV offers a brief conclusion. 
Our starting point is the situation represented by the following array: There are two equilibrium points here, the top-left corner and the bottom-right corner. As equilibrium points they are stable: once one of them is reached, no party gains by deviating from it alone. At the same time, the equilibrium states involve inequality, and symmetrically so: the value of the top-left box for Row Chooser is 2, as compared with 1 for Column Chooser, and the reverse holds for the bottom-right box. It is a matter of indifference at this initial stage whether the array is interpreted in terms of payoffs or of utilities; we shall have occasions below to note where it does make a difference. 
(2;1) (0;0) (0;0) (1;2) figure 1 For purposes of analysis, we shall assume that rather than contemplating the ‘game’ represented by this array from the outside, the parties are already inside it, locked into one of its cells. Specifically, we shall assume that they are locked into the equilibrium that favors Row Chooser. The top-left cell, then, represents the status quo. We shall assume that while in the status quo, each party is aware of the larger picture. That is, each party is aware of the other three alternative states that could be reached were Row chooser, or Column Chooser, or both, to deviate from the status quo. In particular, they are both aware of the existence of an alternative, equilibrial status quo (represented by the bottom-right cell) in which their relative positions are reversed. This, as we shall see, bears on the strategic and manipulative aspects of the situation. 
From this simple description, and even with the stipulated information, it is not at all clear how the parties will perceive their situation. They might not see themselves in a conflict at all. Why? The answers are important because they shed light on the notion of indignation. Also, they help show how indignation might be stemmed when it starts to grow. There are several possibilities. parties, both parties may regard the inequality as trivial, negligible, not worth fussing about. 
This attitude toward the inequality may be highlighted if the array—now interpreted in terms of monetary payoffs—were, say, the following: (Note that the gap between 99 and 100 is bridged by an “add 1” operation, whereas bridging the gap between 1 and 2 is ambiguous between the operations of “add 1” and “multiply by of 2.”) In these circumstances, people are unlikely to protest or to rebel, simply because the stakes are so low. There is no occasion for indignation. Many kinds of inequalities are seen in these terms. In some situations the advantaged try to convince, or to manipulate, the disadvantaged to see the inequalities in these terms.6 payoffs are acceptable because they are a result of differences between them that are natural or otherwise real. Some people have unusual skills; they have benefited from the “natural lottery,” not itself taken as morally objectionable.7 Biological differences might account for inequalities between men and women. Many in India accept the caste system as part of the natural order. An author of an untouchable autobiography writes that many untouchables “accept the notion of ritual impurity, the defining element of their own inferiority.” And he adds, “Our fortunes, good or bad, were the will of God.”8 Even if differences are not natural, they might be taken to justify inequality. Famous basketball players and entertainers make far more money than janitors and secretaries, but perhaps the former have worked especially hard, or perhaps their relative wealth is justified in light of what they give to the millions of people who are willing to pay to see them.9 Inequalities might not seem so troubling if they are responsive to what are seen as real differences whose social consequences are not perceived in moral terms. Many people have, of course, argued for social and legal reform on the ground that morally irrelevant differences, whether or not natural, cannot justly be turned into sources of social disadvantage.10 These arguments can be taken as efforts to promote moral indignation when it would otherwise be absent. parties as trivial or a defensible outgrowth of real differences, may be taken by 6 We bracket here the question whether the absence of moral indignation, on this or other grounds, is a reflection of manipulation by the advantaged or instead “adaptive preferences,” that is, preferences that have adapted to the status quo. See Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983). 7 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 74 (1971). Rawls of course does challenge the justice of using the natural lottery as a basis for inequalities. 8 See Timur Kuran, Private Truths, Public Lies 198 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997). 9 This is of course the topic of lively debate. See G.A. Cohen, If You’re An Egalitarian, How Come You’re So Rich? (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000); Robert Nozick, Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1977). 10 See, eg, John Stuart Mill, The Subjection of Women, in On Liberty and Other Essays 471 (John Gray ed. 1991); Martha Minow, Making All the Difference (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993); Glenn Loury, The Anatomy of Racial Inequality (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001). them to be a matter of luck. Among the farmers in a village, some turn out to have the better plots; friends go together on a vacation in a resort and only some receive rooms with a view; some people do well in a market and others do not, for the simple reason that one set of commodities turns out to be popular in the relevant period; some people are drafted for military service and others are not. The parties may be well aware that the asymmetry could, in an obvious sense, have been the reverse. Still, their attitude to it is more appropriately captured by “tough luck” or ”too bad” than by “how unfair.” People perceive many real-life situations as if they result from blind lotteries, either natural or man-made. They often come to terms with the inequalities of their consequences, accept them and learn to live with them. Many disabled people, for example, come to see things in this way.11 But sometimes people do not find it easy to simply accept bad luck, and they become resentful. They may harbor ill feelings against the advantaged; they become bitter. Still, we take resentment as such to be free from moral underpinnings, and therefore to be kept distinct from indignation, which we take to have them. As we shall emphasize below, it is the indignant, not the resentful, who see the situation as unjust or morally wrong.12 Of course, resentment may, under certain conditions, turn into—or be manipulated into—indignation.13 regard it as unfair—but not permanently or irremediably so. Rather than become indignant, they undertake to do something about it. The simplest and most natural way of doing something about it is to take turns. Given that the parties are aware of the larger picture, they may arrange to switch at some point to the alternative equilibrium state, the one represented by the bottom-right cell of the original payoff array. But note that they can only do it by acting in concert. No one party acting alone can achieve this switch. 
It is worth recalling here that the original payoff array is in fact the one representing the well-known BoS game: the Battle of the Sexes (or: Ballet or 11 See Melvin Lerner, The Belief in a Just World (New York: Plenum, 1980). 12 The distinction we are making here between indignation and resentment, while on the whole compatible with common usage, is stipulative. We bracket altogether well known philosophical uses of resentment (or ‘resentiment’) such as those made by Nietzsche, Sartre, Strawson, and others. 13 For a series of case studies of this transformation, see Oppositional Consciousness (Jane Mansbridgeand Aldon Morris eds.) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001). Soccer?14). You enjoy it more when we go to the ballet; I enjoy it more when we go to a soccer match; but we both prefer to go together than to go alone. When the circumstances are right—a small number of participants, shared good will, and easy communication among them—then the parties may be motivated by the sentiments of fairness and reciprocity toward fixing the inequality inherent in their status quo. Such ideas as taking turns or switching roles are obvious solutions here. Within the family, strategies of this kind are familiar and have often been urged on equality grounds.15 Similar strategies have been suggested in the domain of political representation as well, with explicit reference to the notion of taking turns.16 Those who defend free markets sometimes argue that they produce a system, over time, of taking turns, with no entrenched inequalities, with widespread mobility, and with different people able to move toward the top of the social hierarchy.17 But of course here there is no explicit agreement between the parties to be taking turns: things just work out that way. situation, even if the two sides do not gain the same amount or in the same proportion. This may be the case when the disadvantaged see the present status quo as already an improvement, compared to a previous situation in which both parties were materially worse off (whether more equal or not). Workers may believe that their salaries, while far below those of managers, are made possible only by a cooperative arrangement from which, on the whole, they gain. Defenses of market economies, and challenges to legal efforts to increase equality within such economies, typically speak in terms of mutual advantage.18 Women may believe that they benefit less than men from a domestic arrangement, but that they still benefit, and that rebellion would be uncharitable, self-defeating, or worse. 
Of course situations of this sort may not remain stable in the long run. This point helps underline an important general aspect of the situations we are here concerned with, which is their dynamic nature. Our arrays “freeze” a time slice, and enable us to focus on its characteristics. But we should not be misled by the game-theoretic analysis and think of it as static; these time slices have a before and an after. Indignation first builds up, then leads to an explosive 14 Yet another playful alternative of this BoS game is ‘Bach or Stravinsky?’. See Ariel Rubinstein, A Course in Game Theory, Cambridge, mass: MIT press, 1994, p. 15. 15 See Susan Moller Okin, Justice, Gender, and the Family 170-86 (New York: Basic Books, 1989). 16 See Lani Guinier, The Tyranny of the Majority (New York: The Free Press, 1997). 17 See Seymour Martin Lipset, It Didn’t Happen Here (1999). 18 See e.g. Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of the Contract At Will, 51 U Chi L Rev 947 (1984). transformation, and the new situation that is regarded as a beneficial status quo of inequality today may breed indignation tomorrow. With time, the disadvantaged may come to focus on the indignity of their unequal situation rather than on the benefits it confers on them. We shall emphasize that if this does not come about spontaneously, rebels among the disadvantaged group may labor to stir up the feelings of the disadvantaged in this direction. 
We now come to consider the case where the party disadvantaged by the inequality of the status quo (but not the other party) does experience this inequality as objectionable, or at least comes to experience it as such over time. To preface this discussion, let us note that it is not always clear who is advantaged and who is disadvantaged by any particular status quo. Sometimes both sides to an issue consider themselves the underdogs under existing, or proposed, arrangements and laws. People disagree, for example, about whether and to what extent modern societies reflect sex equality. An especially vivid example comes from the affirmative action controversy. Some opponents of affirmative action consider themselves to be the disadvantaged, and of course many advocates of affirmative action think the opposite. Because judgments of unfairness are systematically self-serving, this should not be entirely surprising.19 For our purposes, it is important to note that understandings of who is disadvantaged are not uniform within the population, can shift over time, and are even subject to manipulation. 
Still, as familiar examples of the sorts of oppositions that we have in mind, consider the following: employees and employers, poor people and rich people within a single nation, people in poor nations and people in rich nations, handicapped and able-bodied, homosexuals and heterosexuals, AfricanAmericans and whites, Arab citizens and Jewish citizens of Israel, untouchables and upper-caste members in India, Catholics and Protestants in Northern Ireland. We posit that if the inequality of the situation persists over time, and is not acknowledged as such and remedied by the advantaged, then the situation may breed, in the disadvantaged, sentiments such as anger, outrage, jealousy, spite, envy, humiliation, and vengefulness. 19 See Linda Babcock and George Loewenstein, Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of SelfServing Biases, in Behavioral Law and Economics 255 (Cass R. Sunstein, ed.) (Cambridge: Cambrdge University Press, 2001). The term “indignation” is here designated to capture this constellation of sentiments. Understanding indignation as righteous anger produced by a sense of wrong to oneself and to others, we intend this term to signal a morally charged sentiment. This sentiment grows out of a felt insult to the dignity of the disadvantaged, which is sometimes perceived as humiliation.20 To flag the rise of the sentiment of moral indignation, we shall speak of the perceived partiality of the status quo, instead of using the more neutral “inequality.” The status quo, then, is perceived here not as neutrally unequal but as morally wrong.21 To help isolate the point we want to make, let us focus now on the following array (call it the extreme-case partiality array): This is not a coordination situation. There is here a single equilibrium point,22 namely the (unequal) status quo: it has no counterpart at the bottom-right corner. So the status quo appears, from the point of view of immediate self-interest, maximally robust: it looks like everyone’s best choice in the situation. There is seemingly no credible threat for the disadvantaged to make, nothing strategically for them to gain but only to lose from deviating from the status quo. Those who rebel will sacrifice what little they have. And yet it is possible that even in this situation, rebellion will nonetheless occur. The reason is that if the inequality produces indignation, the disadvantaged may come to perceive the situation as one in which they have ‘nothing to lose but their chains.’ Of course they have something else to lose—the material payoff of the status quo—but by hypothesis, that material pay-off, though not worthless, is worth less to them than the cost of remaining in a situation of perceived injustice. Note that this analysis of the extreme-case partiality array begins by depicting it in terms of material payoffs rather than utilities. When indignation builds up, the disadvantaged derive disutility from the fact that they receive less than the advantaged. If we are now to “translate” this array to utilities, the upper-left cell would “translate”, say, to (2;-2) and the upper-right cell would perhaps become (0;2). The disparity between the two arrays helps explain the rebellion of the indignant. 20 See Avishai Margalit, The Decent Society (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997). 21 See the treatment of the transformation of the Indian caste system in Kuran, supra note, at 323– 22 Or rather, only one strict equilibrium point. The bottom-right cell, with a payoff of (0;0), is a weak equilibrium: no one gains from deviating from it alone, but then no one loses either. What this means is that even though the status quo appears, from the point of view of material payoffs, strategically stable and robust, it might yet be vulnerable to what we might call a desperate rebellion. This rebellion, if it occurs, is driven by indignation, not by a belief that it will have strategic advantages, in the short run or the long run. This is so even when there is no alternative status quo that is attractive—in terms of absolute material position—to the presently disadvantaged. To the extent that the disadvantaged may come to prefer equality of (or in) misery to perpetual partiality, the threat exists that they will wish to drag the advantaged with them into the gutter (so to speak). Consider the possibility that workers will engage in strike activity, knowing that they might well lose as a result, but willing to face that risk because of moral indignation directed against what they perceive as an insufficiently equal division of profits with management.23 “Let my soul die with the Philistines,” cried the Biblical Samson, choosing to bring down the roof and kill his Philistine captors along with himself, rather than to stay alive in captivity.24 
Is it plausible to think that people will sacrifice their material self-interest for the sake of equality? Will this happen only under extreme and most extraordinary circumstances? Actually moral indignation frequently inclines people to sacrifice, by punishing, at their own expense, people who have behaved unfairly.25 This is a standard form of quasi-rationality.26 As we shall see, indignation may turn out to have strategic advantages, and in a way that bears directly on rebellion against partiality. 
To understand the operation of indignation, it is best to move from game theory to behavioral economics. Consider the results of the ultimatum game, a muchdiscussed test of the relationship between material self-interest and moral motivations, in the context of proposed distributions of resources between two 23 See Michael Harper and Samuel Estreicher, Labor Law 94-97 (Boston: Aspen Law and Business, 1999). 24 Judges, 16, 30. 25 In the context of labor-management relations, where anticipated shirking by workers deters wage cuts, see Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000); in the context of free riding, see Fehr and Gachter, supra note. 26 See Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (New York: Russell Sage, 1993). sides.27 In the ultimatum game, some subjects, called proposers, are asked to suggest a division of a certain sum of money between themselves and other subjects, called responders. Proposers might propose a division of 90/10, 80/20, 50/50—whatever they wish. But in this game, responders have a choice too: They can accept or reject the proposed division. If the responders agree to the proposal, players receive money in accordance with the allocation. If they say no, no one receives any money at all. Proposers are aware of this fact. No bargaining is allowed. 
The standard economic prediction is that outcomes will be extremely unequal— that proposers will make offers approaching zero, and that responders will accept any positive offers. And if people care only about their material selfinterest, this is the set of results that should be observed. But the standard prediction badly fits the experimental data.28 Typically proposers propose a relatively equal division, with median proposals tending to be in the proportion of 60–40.29 Typically responders reject divisions that they perceive as highly unequal and therefore palpably unfair. Often they reject offers of less than 50–50. The ultimatum game is ordinarily played for small stakes, but the same pattern of results holds even when the stakes are quite large. The ultimatum game has been played for several weeks’ or even months’ salary in poor nations, and here too relatively equal decisions are proposed, and conspicuously unequal divisions are rejected.30 All this is well known. But we want to draw attention to two less well-discussed features of these findings, both of which closely connect to our argument here. The first point is that responders are quite heterogeneous, in the sense that they will acquiesce with a diverse range of minimum offers. Only a small percentage of responders will accept an offer of 10–90 or less; most responders will not require a 50–50 split, though many do (typically about 35%); some people will not agree to less than 30–70, whereas many others will set a 40–60 floor (typically 27 For an overview, see Richard Thaler, The Ultimatum Game, in The Winner’s Curse 21 (New York: The Free Press, 1992). 28 See Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 Stan. L. Rev. 1471, 1490 (1998). 29 See id. 30 See Colin Camerer and Richard Thaler, Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners, 9 J Econ Pesp 209, 210-211 (1995); Vesna Prasnikar and Alvin Roth, Considerations of Fairness and Strategy, 107 Q J Eon 865, 873-75 (1992); Robert Slonim and Alvin Roth, Learning in High Stakes Ultimatum Games, 66 Econometrica 569, 573 (1998). Note that the last paper shows that when repetition is combined with very high stakes, offers decrease somewhat, though they remain far above the standard predictions. Id. at 573, 588 fig. 3A. about 60%).31 What does this mean? It means, first, that moral indignation itself, in the face of inequality, is variable; some people are offended by distributions that others find acceptable. It means, second, that spite, fueled by moral indignation, has a price, that it can be “bought,”32 and the necessary amount varies across individuals. These heterogeneities, and the existence of a price for spite, will bear on our discussion below. As we shall see, moral indignation, in the face of inequality, is generally variable, and people will vary in their willingness to incur costs for expressing it. 
The second point is that those who feel moral indignation, and who are willing to sacrifice material self-interest in order to punish perceived unfairness, actually turn out to be at a strategic advantage, because they stand to receive more generous offers from materially self-interested proposers. Or to put it more precisely: Those who are perceived as prone to moral indignation, and as willing to sacrifice to punish what they see as unfairness, will receive more generous offers from self-interested proposers, thus producing more equal outcomes.33 This point emerges from comparing the results of the ultimatum game with the results of a simple variation, the dictator game.34 In the dictator game, the proposer/dictator is allowed to impose any allocation she chooses; the responder/subject must accept that allocation. It turns out that in the dictator game, the median offer is significantly less egalitarian than in the ultimatum game. Still, even here divisions are not in the proportion of 99–1, but typically closer to 80–20.35 The far more equal allocation in the ultimatum game shows that the power of response matters a great deal, and that the anticipated 31 See Jolls et al., supra note, at 1491–92; Werner Guth et al., An Experimental Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining, 3 J Econ Behav. & Org 367, 371-72, 375 tables 4 and 5; Daniel Kahneman et al., Fairness and the Assumptions of Economics, 59 J Bus S585, S291 tbl. 2. The most subtle test of people’s willingness to trade off fairness and absolute income shows similar heterogeneities in both the United States and Spain. Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin, Understanding Social Preferences With Some Simple Tests (unpublished manuscript 2001) 32 See the model of fairness in Matthew Rabin, Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics, 83 Am Econ Rev 1281, 1282 (1993), showing that the willingness to act to punish unfairness will increase as the material cost of doing so decreases. 33 Note that while they received more generous offers, they might not be better off. Someone who receives 40 out of 100, and is willing to accept that offering despite feeling some indignation that he did not receive 50, might be worse off than someone who receives 30 but feels no indignation at all. 34 See, e.g., Camerer and Thaler, supra note, at 213–15; Alvin E. Roth, Bargaining Experiments in The Handbook of Experimental Economics 298–302 (John H. Kagel & Alvin E. Roth eds.) (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995). 35 Id. moral indignation of responders is driving a significant amount of proposers’ behavior in the ultimatum game. If rational proposers anticipate that responders will reject grossly unequal allocations, then proposers will propose more equal allocations, even if proposers are entirely self-interested. At this point the relationship to our concerns here should be clear: If advantaged people anticipate moral indignation from the disadvantaged, they should be expected to offer more equal divisions. 
This last point has received its most direct empirical confirmation in a remarkable study in Israel, designed to test the effects of ethnicity in the ultimatum game.36 Israeli Jewish society consists largely of two main ethnic groups, Ashkenazim (European and American immigrants and their Israeli-born offspring) and Sephardim or Eastern Jews (Asian and African immigrants and their Israeli-born offspring). How, the experimenters asked, do Ashkenazi players treat Sephardi players? The answer is that they treat the Sephardim better than they treat fellow Ashkenazi players, not because they like them more, but because they believe that Eastern players are especially likely to reject offers perceived as unfair. In the dictator game, Sephardim and Ashkenazim received the same amount.37 But in the ultimatum game, Eastern players were offered significantly higher amounts—indeed, almost 50% more than Ashkenazi players. In the authors’ words: “There is ethnic discrimination in the ultimatum game. Eastern players receive larger transfers than Ashkenazi players. This discrimination is probably the outcome of a common ethnic stereotype in Israeli society, according to which men of Eastern origin are believed to react more harshly if treated unfairly.”38 It is worth noting that in their capacity as responders, Eastern Israelis were not, in fact, more indignant and spiteful than Ashkenazi Israelis. The two groups did not differ in their willingness to accept unequal offers. The perception that led to more generous offers was not rooted in reality. But for purposes of ultimate outcomes it was the perception, not the reality, that mattered. 36 Chaim Fershtman and Uri Gneezy, Discrimination in a Segmented Society: An Experimental Approach, Q J Econ 351 (2001). 37 Id. at 365. 38 Id. at 369–70. A related interpretation of the findings couches them in terms of honor and humiliation rather than in terms injustice and unfairness. See Avishai Margalit, “A Just Peace or Just a Peace” (unpublished manuscript). The idea of indignation as here used covers perceived insults to honor as well as perceived injustice. To be sure, there is much debate about the sources of moral indignation in the ultimatum game.39 Some evidence suggests that relative position is important— that some responders simply do not want to have less, or much less, than proposers.40 Other evidence suggests that responders greatly care about proposers’ motivations—that if proposers are perceived behaving in a selfish way, many responders are willing to punish them.41 This view is supported by the finding that people are far more willing to accept unequal offers if the experimenter constrains the proposers’ choices, by, for example, saying that the proposer can only choose between 20–80 and 80–20; in these circumstances, 80– 20 is far more acceptable.42 There is also some evidence of cultural effects on outcomes. While members of all societies diverge from the standard economic prediction, the extent of the variation is culturally variable.43 Our main focus here, however, is on the fact of indignation and its consequences for outcomes. We have seen that when people are indignant, they are liable to sacrifice material self-interest to promote what they see as increased fairness; and that when indignation is anticipated, and when it is backed by strategic ability to punish people in a position of power, those in that position will allow for more equal distributions. 
Let us move now from experiments to actual practice. In the face of moral indignation, the advantaged have a number of options. They can take steps to fend off a desperate rebellion, or indeed to anticipate and fend off any response like that of indignant responders in the ultimatum game. The advantaged might attempt to convince some or most of the disadvantaged that moral indignation is senseless – perhaps because inequalities are trivial, or work to the advantage of both sides, or respond to real differences, or are a part of a system of taking turns over time. All of these strategies are familiar in various contexts. But suppose 39 For a good overview, see Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin, Understanding Social Preferences With Some Simple Tests (unpublished manuscript 2001). 40 This is the interpretation in Robert Frank, Luxury Fever 116 (New York: The Free Press, 1998). See also Dirk Engelman and Martin Strobel, Inequality Aversion, Efficiency, and Maximin Preferences (unpublished manuscript 2001). 41 Armin Falk et al., On the Nature of Fair Behavior, Ec. Inquiry (forthcoming). A more complex account emerges from Charness and Rabin, supra note. 42 See Falk et al., supra note. 43 See the overview in Roth, supra note, at 282–88; Alvin Roth et al., Bargaining and Market Behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo: An Experimental Study, 81 Am. Econ. Rev. 362 (1991). that these strategies do not work and that indignation proves robust. What might the advantaged do? As distinct from the case of ‘taking turns’ discussed above, we assume here that those seeking to maintain the unequal status quo are not motivated by sentiments of fairness and reciprocity. We assume that they are akin to entirely self-interested proposers in the ultimatum game, seeking to perpetuate their privileges if they can. To the extent that they perceive the threat of a rebellion by the disadvantaged as real, they may consider appeasing them by reducing the inequality of the status quo. In other words, they may consider redistribution— the analogue to a more equal distribution in the ultimatum game. For purposes of exposition and without changing anything of substance, take the extreme-case partiality array (figure 3) to reflect material payoffs, and suppose the numbers are the following: The advantaged may, for example, try to ‘throw a bone’ at the disadvantaged, so that the status quo will change into, say (39;21). Or they may offer a still more substantial redistribution by changing the status quo into, say, (35,25). Will this suffice? The answer depends on the nature and extent of the moral indignation involved. It is imaginable that the disadvantaged will at this point stop seeing the inequality as partiality and possibly come to treat it along such lines as “negligible difference” or “mutual advantage.” In the context of American labor law, relatively modest steps toward increasing union power have been thought both necessary and sufficient to secure industrial peace; the preamble to the National Labor Relations Act refers explicitly to the reduction of “industrial strife” as one of its purposes,44 a purpose that it has mostly achieved. It is possible, then, that an act of redistribution will defuse indignation, even if it does not provide equality.45 And might not the disadvantaged at this point consider that they already have something to lose by pushing further and taking the risk of losing everything? This is hardly unfamiliar; again consider the context of 44 See Harper and Estreicher, supra note, at 101–02. 45 See Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (New York: Norton, 1999) (discussing the provision of welfare, rather than equality, as part of a mutually beneficial deal among members of society). labor-management relations, where self-interested workers often settle for much less than they deem entirely fair. What, for that matter, are the conditions under which literal equality (30;30) will be offered, or reached? In the ultimatum game, over 1/3 of responders insist on a 50–50 division46; in some circumstances, the disadvantaged will do the same. But is this the limit? Might there not be conditions under which, once the advantaged make concessions and are perceived as losing nerve, the dynamics will push things toward, say, (25;35) and even further? These questions are empirical in nature: what will or might or is likely to happen, under differently specified conditions. They are also a bit abstract, because people are typically complaining about a particular dimension of inequality (race or sex discrimination, for example, or an absence of certain rights in the workplace, or poverty), and not arguing for equality in general, whatever that might mean. But the important point is the recognition of the potential role of the moral sentiments in posing a threat to the stability of an equilibrium state: even though the status quo is robust in game-theoretical terms, it is nevertheless liable to being overturned by a resentful underdog. 
Let us at this point reflect on partiality as related to our original array (figure 1). Recall that it was an inequitable, double-equilibrium coordination situation, as distinct from the extreme-case partiality array where the status quo is the single equilibrium state (figures 3, 4). Here it is again: (2;1) (0;0) (0;0) (1;2) The point we want to make is that if indignation was thought to make rebellion a possibility in the no-alternative-equilibrium situation, then here the status quo is even more vulnerable to rebellion. But how does the existence of an alternative equilibrium, in which the inequality between the parties is reversed, affect the situation? The existence of an alternative equilibrium strengthens the threat to the stability of the status quo by making the threat strategic. To the extent that the threat of the disadvantaged to deviate from the status quo (from Column 1 to Column 2) 46 See Jolls et al., supra note. is credible, it is to the benefit of the advantaged to deviate too (from Row 1 to Row 2). The reason, of course, is that if the advantaged do not deviate while the disadvantaged do, they end up in the state represented by the top-right cell, where everyone’s payoff is 0, whereas if they do deviate they end up in the alternative equilibrium state, represented by the bottom-right cell, where they manage to cut their losses, with a payoff of 1, as against 2 to the formerlydisadvantaged. Thus, the strategic structure of the situation in effect forces the advantaged to acquiesce in a table turning maneuver, which makes them the newly disadvantaged. Examples come from professional sports within the United States. Athletes now receive substantial sums, often many millions each year, thus reducing profits and apparently ensuring, some of the time, that top athletes earn more than owners and high-level officers, even though the converse was true in earlier eras. The tables have thus been turned, but without leading owners and high-level officers to leave the business. 
To be sure, when judged from the point of view of rational choice or game theory, the mere existence of the alternative equilibrium state, in itself, is not taken to constitute a strategic threat to the unequal status quo. After all, from that point of view it is contrary to the self-interest of the disadvantaged to deviate alone (reducing his payoff from 1 to 0) whether there exists an alternative equilibrium state or not. That is, from the game theoretical point of view it is irrational for the disadvantaged to deviate alone and risk losing everything. But what looks like an irrational move from the narrow perspective of the immediate self-interest comes to look like a credible threat when it is backed by the moral passion of indignation. Immediate psychological motives aroused by the moral sentiments turn out to augment, and at the same time to be backed by, a viable strategic threat. What we have here is passion in the service of reason.47 
Return to the array immediately above. As we have just noted, the threat of rebellion is augmented and made further credible by the existence of the alternative equilibrium state. But there is a further question: If the rebellion takes place and succeeds, and the alternative equilibrium is the new status quo, what exactly has been achieved? In the new status quo, the former disadvantaged are the newly advantaged, and we are once again in exactly the same sort of status 47 Robert H. Frank, Passion within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions (New York; Norton, 1988); see also Amy L. Wax, supra note. quo of inequality, with roles reversed. In theory, the analysis of the new situation is identical to the foregoing analysis of the initial one, though of course the history of table turning is likely to affect the attitudes of both parties in various ways. For example, the newly disadvantaged are perhaps more likely to suffer from resentment and indignation. Ethnic conflicts, with shifts in the categories of advantaged and disadvantaged, can sometimes be understood in these terms. But a more intriguing question relates to a somewhat different situation. Consider the following array (call it the equitable alternative array): Everything we said just now, about the threat of rebellion being augmented and made further credible by the existence of the alternative equilibrium state, holds here too: the equitable bottom-right cell is a coordination equilibrium here too. Now suppose that in this new situation a rebellion takes place and succeeds and the alternative equilibrium is the new status quo. What exactly has been achieved here? In the new status quo, the former disadvantaged have the same (material) payoff as before (namely, 1). So in the material sense they have gained nothing. The only difference is in the payoff to the advantaged, which now have 1 rather than the 2. With this shift, there is a problem about how to frame the point of the rebellion: Is the goal to achieve an equitable distribution, or instead to ensure that the advantaged are stripped of their privileges? The first may be seen as a noble principle, potentially with broad appeal; but the second might be seen as mere spite. Those seeking to perpetuate inequality often urge that there is no point (aside from envy) to moving from (2;1) to (1;1).48 48 See the discussion of envy in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 530-41 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971), which has spawned an extensive literature. See also Frank, Luxury Fever, supra note, for reasons to think that even apart from envy, (2,1) may be worse than (1,1), at least if these are understood in terms of payoffs rather than utilities. There is empirical evidence in support; consider the finding in Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin, Understanding Social Preferences With Some Simple Tests (unpublished manuscript 2001) that when asked to choose between 400 for self, 400 for stranger, and 400 for self, 750 for stranger, 31% of subjects choose 400, 400. Id. at 46. At this point it might be well to identify some complications about the possible motivations of members of disadvantaged groups and about the nature of their indignation. Put in terms of utilities, the shift from (2;1) to (1;2) improves the absolute position of the disadvantaged, as well as their relative position. It does not, however, achieve equality. The shift from (2;1) to (1;1) improves the relative position of the disadvantaged and achieves equality, but does not improve their absolute position. People vary in what they care about most: absolute position, relative position, or equality.49 Which of the three do we assume the disadvantaged to be motivated by? The way we told the story, indignation is produced by inequality. But this in itself is not sufficient to disambiguate the situation and to tell us whether the disadvantaged in a status quo of inequality are motivated by a principled passion for equality as such, or simply by a desire to improve their position - whether absolute or relative. 
To get a sense of the variety of permutations of the three motivations, consider other possible shifts from a status quo of inequality. A shift from (2;1) to (5;2) will be acceptable to the disadvantaged who only care about absolute utility ("As"), but rejected by the relative- utility minded ("Rs") as well as by those who care about equality as a matter of principle ("Es"). People who care only about relative position (Rs), so that their real goal is to do better than the relevant others, will welcome a shift from (6,5) to (1,3): As and Es will reject this shift. For committed Es a shift from (3,2) to (1,1) would be readily accepted: here the commitment to equality is primary, even at the expense of absolute position. More pertinent to our concerns, a shift from (2;1) to (1;2) will please both As and Rs, but will be rejected by Es—while the shift from (2;1) to (1;1) will be welcomed by both Es and Rs but a matter of indifference to the As. 
In the cases that we are here emphasizing, the indignation-producing status quo of inequality was denoted by the canonical (2;1), and the shifts we considered were to (1;2) (in figure 1), to (0;0) (in figure 3), and to (1;1) (figure 5). We saw just now that pushing for these shifts may be variously motivated. Moreover, not only can we not tell the motives of the disadvantaged apart, but we also want to suggest that often the indignant themselves cannot tell them apart either. Or at least they cannot tell them apart at the initial stages of indignation and rebellion. Sometimes there is need to look to the subsequent social states in this evolving, dynamic situation, and to the observed behavior of the (formerly) disadvantaged in them, in order to clarify this question of motives. Thus: are these people content with the reversal from (2;1) to (1;2)? Or do they push further, until (1;1) 49 For an intriguing demonstration, see id. or even (0;0) is achieved? From the answers to questions like these, the motives of the disadvantaged may be disentangled. 
But the main point is that in all of the cases considered here, the shift cannot be achieved directly, in one move. In all of these cases, in order for the disadvantaged to achieve the desired shift they have to be lone deviators from the status quo, and thus they have to be willing to accept the state (at the upperright cell of all the arrays) of (0;0). Whatever else might happen next, this involves willingness on the part of the disadvantaged to sacrifice absolute position, a willingness to suffer—provided the advantaged suffer too. This willingness is the product of indignation. Whether the indignation is fueled solely by a passion for equality, or also by a desire to bring about the fall of the privileged, thereby improving relative position, may be impossible, or premature, to disentangle. And it may, ultimately, not really matter. 
Thus far we have been writing as if there are only two players, understanding each of them to stand for a group as a whole. Of course this is a highly artificial way to see most real-world situations. There is no reason to expect group members who face a situation of inequality to agree in their reactions. Some may be indignant and others not at all; some may be willing to act on the basis of their indignation, while others are not; group members may not be able to, or want to, act in concert.50 Recall here the great diversity of responder behavior in the ultimatum game. To understand the relationship between inequality and indignation more precisely, and to see the possible role of law, it is important to recognize that if they seek to rebel, the disadvantaged potentially face, simultaneously, two types of strategic problems. Specifically, they may face both a coordination problem and a prisoner’s dilemma-type (PD) problem. succeed and for the social change to take place, many or most of disadvantaged have to deviate from the status quo together. If only one member of a religious minority complains of discrimination, little is likely to happen in response. If we assume, as we have throughout, that the two ‘players’ here are groups of people 50 See the various discussions in Oppositional Consciousness, supra note, and in particular AnnaMaria Marshall, A Spectrum in Oppositional Consciousness, in id. at 99, 111–13. (classes, population segments, and so forth) rather than two individuals, then obviously only if many act together do the disadvantaged have a chance to be effective. Of course it is likely to be the case that not everyone has to participate as long as a critical mass of participants is reached. But still the problem remains, of coordinating the deviating actions of a sufficient number of people to cross that threshold. 
If this is a genuine coordination problem, the interests of the parties fully coincide. To solve the problem, the parties need explicit discussion and agreement, or proper signaling or (what comes to the same thing) saliency. In the situation we are addressing, one of the coordination equilibrium points (and there are by definition at least two) has to be salient somehow, or signaled somehow. A pervasive question for disadvantaged groups is how can a signal be given? The question is further compounded because the coordination problem in hand actually entails a series of sub-problems. There is the difficulty of agreeing on a shared understanding of the situation (is indignation the right response?), and then there is the difficulty of agreeing on a course of action (is it worthwhile to incur the potentially high costs of acting on the basis of indignation?). There are various options here. An intriguing possibility involves the efforts of rebel leaders, who might be described for our purposes as “indignation entrepreneurs.” As diverse but salient examples, consider Thomas Paine, Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, Yassir Arafat, Catharine MacKinnon, and Ward Connerly (influential opponent of affirmative action programs in California). The goal of indignation entrepreneurs is to convince people that indignation is morally appropriate and that the costs of expressing such indignation are worth incurring.51 The signals thus given may help to overcome the coordination problem. In providing those signals, indignation entrepreneurs sometimes take the special step of sacrificing themselves or (the extreme form of self-sacrifice) of becoming martyrs to the cause.52 Calling them martyrs, however, should not make us think that all such entrepreneurs deserve to be approved; there will always be those who will see them as manipulators or instigators. Here, as elsewhere, everything turns on one’s evaluation of their ends and their means. 51 See the analogous discussion of political entrepreneurs in the general category of extremism in Albert Breton and Silvana Dalmazzone, Information Control, Loss of Autonomy, and the Emergence of Political Extremism, in Political Extremism and Rationality 44, 57 (Albert Breton et al. eds.) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 52 See Wax, supra, at 1744. A self-sacrificing leader, dedicated to the cause of the disadvantaged, might be among the first to rebel in defiance of the status quo. Consider, for example, the actions of Martin Luther King, Jr., seeking to promote civil disobedience and often emphasizing his own willingness (demonstrated in practice) to go to jail in response for his violations. King’s frequent, highly publicized imprisonments represented a kind of martyrdom and hence produced a powerful signal, helping to solve the coordination problem by suggesting to thousands and even millions of people that civil disobedience would be justified and could be a widespread practice. If acts of this sort succeed in focusing attention on the cause of the disadvantaged, they may well ennoble that cause, fueling indignation. Moreover, they may in fact provide the signal for the entire group, encourage its members, and stir them to action. In the extreme case, the martyr’s act can serve as a rallying point or battle cry for them to follow suit en masse. In this respect this sort of self-sacrifice and martyrdom functions as a coordinating device.53 Indignation entrepreneurs also attempt to alter behavior by promoting discussion among like-minded members of disadvantaged groups, in an effort to inculcate emerging norms.54 This approach is likely to work: It is well established that when like-minded people speak with one another, they tend to end up believing a more extreme version of what they antecedently thought.55 If rebel leaders succeed in engaging members of disadvantaged groups in internal dialogue, and in isolating them within enclaves of group members, coordination will be much easier. Indignation and the willingness to act on it are highly likely to grow.56 People typically learn from the informational signals given by others, and it is easy to imagine ‘indignation cascades,” in which B learns to be indignant because A is indignant, and C comes to share in the common 53 See the general discussion in Dennis Chong, Collective Action and the Civil Rights Movement (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991). 54 See Brett C. Stockdill, Forging a Multidimensional Oppositional Consciousness, in Oppositional Consciousness, supra note, at 204, 22728. 55 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition (New York: The Free Press, 1986); Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy ch. 1 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001); Sharon Groch, Free Spaces: Creating Oppositional Consciousness in the Disability Rights Movement, in Oppositional Consciousness, supra note, at 65, 67-72; Cass R. Sunstein, Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics, Harv. J. Law & Pub. Policy (forthcoming 2002). 56 For an emphasis on physicalsegregation and the rise of indignation, see Aldon Morris and Maomi Braine, Social Movements and Oppositional Consciousness, in Oppositional Consciousness, supra note, at 20, 29–30. Cf. Russell Hardin, The Crippled Epistemology of Extremism, in Political Rationality and Extremism, supra, at 7, 14–19 (discussing the effects of limited information on extremism). indignation of A and B, and D, E, and so forth go along.57 Reputational pressures also play a role, especially within groups of like-minded people. We shall return to these points presently. (a) In general. At the same time that the disadvantaged, as a group, have to solve their coordination problem, they also have to worry about the possibility of free riders. This is a particular worry for indignation entrepreneurs, even for martyrs. In a sense, where there is a martyr everyone else is a free rider. The martyr to the cause is the only one who willingly incurs personal costs, while all the others enjoy the fruits of his or her self-sacrifice if it succeeds, and lose nothing if it fails. A martyr cannot do all that must be done; for a rebellion to succeed, those engaged in the activities that follow the martyr’s sacrifice must solve the problem too. Assume, for example, that the rebellion requires certain acts – from verbal protests to civil disobedience - from which rebels might suffer. Because rebels face risks, everyone will be tempted not to join the rebellion but to remain on the sidelines. Of course moral indignation, spurring material self-sacrifice for the sake of equality, can overcome the temptation. And efforts to ensure discussion within enclaves, consisting of members of disadvantaged groups, can provide much help here. But we have emphasized that moral indignation will vary within the population of the disadvantaged, and also that the expression of moral indignation, for most people, has a price. Even when moral indignation is playing a significant social role, some people will refuse to join the rebellion. If the critical mass of rebels is reached anyway, then the non-joiners stand to benefit from the success, and if it is not reached and the rebellion fails, then they do not pay the personal price (legal or other sanctions) that the rebels stand to pay. The strategic problem of overcoming this temptation, then, is the PD problem that the disadvantaged have to solve in order for their desired social change to take effect. The standard solutions to this problem come from social norms and through law. In the context we are discussing, law is not highly likely to be available, because rebels are not lawmakers. Still, rebels may be engaged in legal advocacy; below we offer some examples of the sorts of laws that they might urge. Also, law is made by coalitions, and in many circumstances the disadvantaged might be able to form coalitions with sympathetic groups within 57 See the general treatment of informational cascades in David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). the broad class of the advantaged. In the United States, participants in the civil rights movement of the 1960s were able to obtain legal protection against discrimination in large part because they were able to enlist northern and western legislators to their cause. In any case – and this is our central point here - norms may have law-like functions. (b) Reputational sanctions and second-order indignation. Without law, reputational sanctions are a good way of solving the coordination problem through a new form of moral indignation. Those who fail to participate in the rebellion might be subject to indignation as intense, in its way, as the moral indignation directed against the advantaged. If non-participants face ostracism or ridicule—if they are treated as traitors, cowards, scabs, or Uncle Toms—the PD problem might well be solved. And indeed, rebelling groups often take steps to impose sanctions on free riders.58 We can better understand those steps, and the intensity of the feelings that underlie them, if we see that they may be indispensable to collective success. Disadvantaged groups often develop strong norms of participation and solidarity, making deviation from the group’s enterprise extremely costly for individuals. Such norms have often played a significant role in the labor movement. They can be found elsewhere as well, for apostates are often hated even more than infidels. 
Here moral indignation is playing a double role. It is aimed against the advantaged group, but it is aimed, with equal or greater force, against fellow group members who free ride on the actions of rebels. Notice as well that it is important to inculcate not only moral indignation against free-riding members of the disadvantaged groups, but also a form of second-order indignation directed at those who do not express indignation against free-riders. Thus, for moral indignation to do its work here, an additional free-rider problem must be solved.59 (c) Indignation and its cost. For individual members of rebelling groups, however, there remain two problems: first, an assessment of whether it is appropriate to feel moral indignation and second, an evaluation of whether it is rational to act on the basis of moral indignation. We are assuming, that is, a stage in the rebellion when it is not at all clear whether moral indignation is sensible or 58 See Laurence R. Iannaccone, Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-Riding in Cults, Communes, and Other Collectives, 100 J. Polit Economy 271 (1992); see also Fehr and Gachter, supra note, for empirical evidence of willingness of groups to punish free riders, even if the punishment is costly for the punishers. 59 This lesson can be drawn from Fehr and Gachter, supra note. appropriate, and when there is heterogeneity on that count within the affected group. Many members of the disadvantaged groups may remain skeptical or ambivalent. One reason is that they are likely to suffer from pluralistic ignorance: They do not know what others like them are thinking. If people’s beliefs are a product of the perceived beliefs of others (“social proof”), this form of ignorance is a real disability. In order for the rebellion to succeed, much moral argument is needed on this count, alongside recruitment efforts, “consciousness-raising,” and more. At the same time, pluralistic ignorance is also an opportunity for strategic actors. Members of disadvantaged groups will have an incentive to exaggerate the extent and intensity of moral indignation, whereas members of advantage groups will minimize both of them. Here too indignation entrepreneurs can play an important role, as can deliberative enclaves and indignation cascades discussed above. 
Those who feel moral indignation will by hypothesis be willing to sacrifice their material self-interest to punish others; but how much indignation is required, and how much sacrifice will they make? Will they be willing to die for the cause? To put family members at risk? Here too we should expect a large degree of heterogeneity. For many people, incentives will matter even when moral indignation is real and significant. 
Both sides to the resulting conflicts are likely to want the law to be on their side, because of their interest in two key variables: moral indignation itself, which will vary within the population, and the willingness to act on it, which will also be highly variable, for some indignant people will prefer to suffer in silence. Of course the disadvantaged will want the law to legitimate their moral indignation and to decrease the cost of acting on it. The advantaged will want the law to do the opposite. Our emphasis here is on the possibility that laws, even ones that are little enforced, will have effects on norms and attitudes, so as to strengthen or to weaken indignation. We will also suggest that law, if enforced, can increase or decrease the cost of expressing indignation. 
There are many complexities here. For the law to affect indignation, it will have to have a degree of moral authority. Typically the extent of its authority will vary across the population, often with asymmetries between members of advantaged and disadvantaged groups. And a legal rule may have the opposite of its intended effects, by, for example, spurring indignation when it is intended to defuse it. Whatever the law does, astute indignation entrepreneurs will use the law strategically. If it supports their efforts, they will invoke its moral authority to intensity indignation; if it attempts to entrench the status quo, they will claim that the very attempt is reason for intensified indignation and a testimonial to the rightness of their cause. For their part, supporters of the status quo will invoke the law to reduce indignation. This they will do either by urging that significant changes have been made in the interest of the disadvantaged, thus making indignation senseless, or by suggesting that if law directs itself against rebellion, its moral authority demonstrates that the rebellion is unjustified. 
(i) Transformative Law The disadvantaged, or at least the rebels within that group, would like the law to solve their free-rider problem. The rebels will also want the law to recognize the normative weight of their claim, to reduce partiality to some degree, and to fuel the view that the inequality of the status quo, or the equality-denying practice to which they object, is a form of injustice. Success in achieving these aims might give their struggle a vital boost. If the law carries moral authority, successful legal reform is liable to turn it from a mere brute power struggle to a push for change that is perceived as just and right. Under the right conditions, legal support can increase the likelihood that the threat to topple the status quo and upset existing arrangements will appear something other than a spiteful and irrational move against self-interest. If the law is on their side, then their struggle will likely be ennobled: legal sanction can make the rebellion appear not for personal gain but in order to vindicate principle. Consider the frequent pleas of Martin Luther King, Jr.: “If we are wrong, then the Constitution of the United States is wrong,” and “All we are saying to America is, be true to what you said on paper.” But what might law do? The most obvious possibility is to outlaw a practice that contributes to inequality, not only providing sanctions against those who engage in that practice, but also in the process emboldening those who are rebelling against that practice. Consider civil rights laws in general, banning private discrimination in employment. The effects of these laws go well beyond their legal enforcement, whether public or private. If promotions and transfers are not allowed to reflect racial discrimination, people are more likely to object to discriminatory practices, merely because of the legal prohibition.60 These objections in turn have effects on behavior. By publicly advertising and affirming the rightness of the new convention, the law can increase the perception that an 60 See the discussions in Oppositional Consciousness, supra note. existing practice is unjust, add momentum to private resentments, and provide a focal point around which players can rally and affirm their commitment to change.61 Or consider the effort to see sexual harassment as a civil rights violation.62 Before the civil rights law was understood to forbid sexual harassment, there was of course sexually harassing behavior. But there was no concept, or term, to stigmatize that behavior, which was seen, socially as well as legally, to be a private matter, not a pervasive practice that contributed to inequality. In these circumstances, it was not hardly possible to be indignant about the behavior; but indignation was far more difficult. A central effect of the new legal understanding is to give both advantaged and disadvantaged a morally charged vocabulary that embodies the belief that sexual harassment is indeed a reason for indignation. The expressive effect of the law continues to be important. Many of those who objected to sexual harassment, especially but not only in the early years, stood to lose a great deal from the objection. This was and is so partly because lawsuits are expensive and grueling, and partly because those who object to sexual harassment are not likely to improve their employment prospects as a result. Actual and anticipated indignation played, and plays, a crucial role in reducing the extent of the behavior. (Recall the ultimatum game, where proposers give better offers precisely because they anticipate indignation.) And because the law supports that indignation, people are all the more likely to be indignant. 
In this way we can cast a new light on the contested idea that law has an expressive function63 – that law is important for what it says, independently of what it does. Sanctions, as well as costly enforcement, may not be necessary in order for the law to play a significant role in facilitating normative change. The expressive power of the law may well be sufficiently effective here. It may be effective, first, because it suggests that moral indignation is in fact appropriate. An important point here is that the very enactment of law will tend to dissipate pluralistic ignorance64: If the political process has chosen to forbid certain conduct, this is a good signal that most people, and especially disadvantaged people, object to it. 61 See Wax, supra note, at 1743. 62 For a catalogue, see Anna-Maria Marshall, supra note, at 99-126. 63 See Mathew Adler, Expressivist Theories of Law: A Skeptical Overview, 148 U Pa L Rev 1363 (2000).. 64 See Richard McAdams, Norms Theory: An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive Law, 79 Oregon L. Rev. 339 (2000). The law may be effective, second, if and to the extent that it increases the benefits and decreases the costs of acting on the basis of moral indignation. If a civil action is available for victims of discrimination, the benefits of that form of rebellion are increased. It is well known that in certain circumstances, compliance with the law will occur even without enforcement of the law; one reason is that when conduct is against the law, private persons are emboldened to sanction violators.65 The same point holds for laws that forbid discriminatory practices. Whether or not the government acts to punish unlawful conduct, the legal rule is likely to stiffen the spines of those who might not otherwise act on the basis of their indignation. 
Of course there are no guarantees here. The law might lack moral authority and hence the relevant expression may have little or no effect.66 In some areas of the United States it is not so important that the law forbids racial discrimination or sexual harassment. The relevant law is seen as an imposition from a kind of elite. The notion of “political correctness” has often been used to undermine the expressive effects of law founded on moral indignation; and one of the consequences of that notion has been to make people wonder whether moral indignation is in fact appropriate. Even if transformative law has moral authority, it might weaken the efforts of rebels, precisely because the legal reform, minor though it may be, may defuse moral indignation and encourage the disadvantaged to believe that the new status quo is acceptable. This effect has been observed with respect to what many see as modest gains, in the form of court decisions, from the women’s movement in the United States.67 In short, the expressive effect of a transformative law cannot simply be read off the enactment. Such a law might be taken as a reason to stop a rebellion or instead as a reason to deepen and extend it. Indignation entrepreneurs will attempt to move social understandings in their preferred directions. 65 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking Policy (Robert Rabin and Stephen Sugarman eds.) (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 66 See Dan Kahan, Gentle Nudges vs. Hard Shoves: Solving the Sticky Norms Problem, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev 607 (2000). 67See Gerald Rosenberg, The Hollow Hope (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991). (ii) Entrenching Law For those who enjoy or otherwise support the inequality of the status quo, and seek to protect it against upheavals, law might not be necessary. Private sanctions and norms may be sufficient. Employers might be able to fire employees who seek a larger share of profits, or even to unionize. Civil rights workers might be beaten or at least ostracized. General norms against malcontents, or particular norms in favor of certain unequal practices, may do the work of law. There is of course the technique of naturalizing the status quo, of making it appear unthinkable that it could be otherwise. Social norms and conventions, often religious in nature, are recruited for this purpose. Thus the inferiority of women, of blacks, and of homosexuals has in many historical periods been made to seem designed by God or by nature. The class structure in feudal Europe and in England until not so long ago was augmented in similar ways. 
Still, those seeking to protect the status quo may be expected to use the law for this purpose. They may, for example, seek legal authorization for the punitive steps taken against rebellion; they may also seek direct legal punishment of rebellion itself. As a prominent example, consider the effort to treat labor strikes as crimes or as subject to injunctions.68 In the same vein consider the early twentieth century effort to authorize employers to discharge members of labor unions,69 and the contemporary effort to enact “right to work” laws, which forbid unionized workforces from requiring new employees to join the union.70 If employers are allowed to discharge union members, and if the law recognizes that right, it might be harder, for some or many, to hold onto moral indignation against non-unionized firms: the law signals that indignation is misplaced. Or even if moral indignation is retained, the cost of expressing it has increased, as people may lose their jobs. Moreover, formal legal protections, backed by sanction, may be augmented by recourse to informal norms and conventions as well. In many workforces, at least in the United States, there are strong norms, encouraged by employers, in favor of rejecting unionization and union drives. One may expect walls of sanctions, both formal and informal, to be erected around the status quo.71 68 See, e.g., Hitchman Coal & Coke Co. v. Mitchell, 245 U.S. 229 (1917). 69 See Coppage v. Kansas, 236 US 1 (1915). 70 See, e.g., Henderson and Estreicher, supra note, at 1070-1080. 71 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, supra note. The basic goal here is to change the incentive structure underlying the situation in such a way that deviation from the status quo becomes – or at any rate appears to become – prohibitively costly. The price should be such that the notion that ‘I have nothing to lose but my chains’ becomes insupportable. In communist Eastern Europe, for example, dissidents were deterred not just by increasing the penalties on them for any subversive activity, but also by threats to the welfare and educational prospects of their children. 
In terms of our payoff array, the attempt is to effectively reduce the payoff for Column-Chooser’s lone deviation from 0 to, say, -2 (if not much lower): Recall that the expression of moral indignation has a cost, for most people most of the time, even when moral indignation is intense.72 If the law sufficiently raises its cost, indignation is less likely to be expressed even when it exists. And when indignation is less often expressed, people who care about the beliefs and acts of others may silence themselves as well, potentially leading to a kind of spiral in favor of the status quo.73 But here too there are no guarantees. In fact there is an interesting alternative possibility: If the law is perceived as grossly unfair, the very fact of unfair punishment may increase moral indignation and make some people willing to act when they would otherwise decline to do so. Consider, as a case in point, the effort by the state of Colorado, in the mid-1990s, to forbid localities from outlawing discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.74 By saying that localities could not treat that form of discrimination as a civil rights violation, Colorado was attempting to entrench a form of inequality. But did the effort actually serve to strengthen discriminatory norms, or did the opposite occur? There is no good evidence on the precise question. But it is clear that the law produced an intense public outcry on the part of advocates of gay rights. It is certainly plausible to think that the law actually strengthened moral indignation on the part of those who were inclined to object to discrimination on the ground 72 See the analogous discussion of fairness in Rabin, supra note. 73 See the discussion of the movement from the unthinkable to the unthought in Timur Kuran, Private Truths, Public Lies 176-195 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997). 74 The background is provided in Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996), in which the Supreme Court struck down the state law. of sexual orientation. A similar point can be made with regard to laws that restrict the right to abortion. Just as transformative, or ‘un-entrenching’ law might weaken a rebel movement by reducing moral indignation, so an entrenching law might strengthen that movement, by increasing it. 
Unequal relationships are often stable simply because it is in the material selfinterest of the less well off to maintain them. Change becomes possible if, as a result of moral indignation, people sacrifice their self-interest to produce change. As the experimental evidence suggests, it is not uncommon for people to show a willingness to lose materially in order to visit losses on those who seem to have been unfair. Real heterogeneity can be found, not only in the basic impulse, but also in diverse conceptions of when it is appropriate to be indignant, and in diverse judgments about how much can or should be sacrificed in order to express indignation. We have also seen that when advantaged people are aware that disadvantaged people are prone to express their indignation, even at their own expense, equality may be promoted as a result, simply because the advantaged (“proposers”) will be prompted to fend off rebellion by offering more equal distributions. We have extended these points to cases involving large numbers of disadvantaged people with varying levels of moral indignation (ranging to none at all) and with willingness to incur varying costs to express it. An ironic implication is that the more stable, strong, and immune to change the oppressive conventions and norms that protect a status quo of partiality may appear to be, the more vulnerable to change they may in fact be. This is so because under the right circumstances oppressive conventions are especially likely to breed indignation. And the more intense the indignation, the more credible the strategic threat of the oppressed to topple the status quo becomes. At this stage effective coordination among the disadvantaged may be sufficient to produce significant change. In helping to bring about such coordination, indignation entrepreneurs are likely to have an important role. 
Law can be important both in assisting and in preventing the rebellion. Law affects the two crucial variables: the extent of moral indignation and the costs of expressing it. If the law allows or requires equality-abridging practices, members of the disadvantaged group may be more likely to see those practices as natural, or as an outgrowth of real differences or as otherwise justified. If the law bans equality-abridging practices, more people are likely to be indignant about them, partly because of the moral authority of law, partly because the law can decrease the costs or increase the benefits of objecting to those practices. Both the phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement” and that of “increased equality without rebellion” can be better understood in this light. 
By virtue of its expressive power, law can lend legitimacy to the moral indignation and hence increase the credibility of the threat to upset the status quo. Law can also play a pivotal role in providing a rallying point and thus in functioning as a coordination device for the disadvantaged. At the same time, law is contested terrain. The advantaged will press for legal initiatives that will give moral support to the status quo and raise the cost of acting on the basis of indignation. But legal victories on either side might turn out counterproductive. Such victories might demobilize rebels, suggesting that indignation is no longer appropriate. At the same time, legal repression may increase indignation, thus aggravating the very problem that the advantaged seek to solve. When moral indignation is on the rise, both sides, seeking to enlist the expressive power of the law, face some recurring dilemmas. 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991). Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992). Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992). 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992). Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992). 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992). 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992). Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993). Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993). Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994). Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994). William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994). J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994). Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994). 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994). 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995). Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996). 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996). 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996). 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997). 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997). 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997). William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998). John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998). 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998). 
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998). 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 2000) 2000) 2000) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 2002) Edna Ull;mann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Economics Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Interpretation and Institutions Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html Preliminary draft 7/1/02 All rights reserved Cass R. Sunstein* and Adrian Vermeule** 
To evaluate theories of interpretation, it is necessary to focus on institutional considerations—to ask how actual judges would use any proposed approach, and to investigate the possibility that an otherwise appealing approach will have unfortunate dynamic effects on private and public institutions. Notwithstanding this point, blindness to institutional considerations is pervasive. It can be found in the work of early commentators on interpretation, including that of Jeremy Bentham; in the influential work of H.L.A. Hart, Ronald Dworkin, and Henry Hart and Albert Sacks; and in much contemporary writing. This blindness to institutional considerations creates serious problems for the underlying theories. The problems are illustrated with discussions of many disputed issues, including the virtues and vices of formalism; the current debate over whether administrative agencies should have greater interpretive freedom than courts; and the roles of text, philosophy, translation, and tradition in constitutional law. In many cases, an understanding of institutional capacities and dynamic effects should enable diverse people, with different views about ideal legal interpretation, to agree on what actual legal interpretation should entail. 
“The courts are the capitals of law’s empire, and judges are its princes . . . .” 
“The design of a decision-making environment must . . . take into account not only the possibility of error of under- and over-inclusion emanating out of a faithful application of rules in the face of an unpredictable reality, but also the errors likely to be made by less than Solomonic decision-makers when, released from rules, they are empowered to apply background justifications directly to the cases they have to decide.” 
*Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. **Professor of Law, The University of Chicago. For valuable comments, we are grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Geoffrey Stone, David Weisbach, and workshop participants at the University of Chicago Law School. 1Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire 407 (1985). 2Frederick Schauer, Playing by the Rules 151 (1991). 
Suppose that a statute, enacted several decades ago, bans the introduction of any color additive in food if that additive “causes cancer” in human beings or animals.3 Suppose that new technologies, able to detect low-level carcinogens, have shown that many potential additives cause cancer, even though the statistical risk is often tiny—akin to the risk of eating two peanuts with governmentally-permitted levels of aflatoxins. Suppose, finally, that a company seeks to introduce a certain color additive into food, acknowledging that the additive causes cancer, but urging that the risk is infinitesimal, and that if the statutory barrier were applied, it would prove absurd and fail to promote the legislative purpose, which is to make food safer. In response, the government argues that the statute must be interpreted literally, and that all additives that “cause cancer” are banned. How should the court resolve the dispute? 
We think that current theories of legal interpretation fail to provide an adequate framework for thinking about questions of this sort, and that the failure reveals a serious problem with contemporary views about interpretation in law. Typically interpretive issues are debated at a high level of abstraction, by asking questions about the nature of interpretation, or by making large claims about democracy, legitimacy, authority, and constitutionalism.4 But most of the time, large-scale claims of these kinds cannot rule out any reasonable view about interpretation. For example, it is impossible to deduce, from such large-scale claims, an answer to a dispute about the meaning of the phrase “cause cancer,” or indeed an answer to any of the current questions about how to approach a statutory or constitutional text. Part of our goal here is to demonstrate the futility of efforts to show that abstract ideals can resolve disagreements about appropriate interpretive methods. 
By contrast, we urge that it is far more promising to focus on two neglected issues. The first has to do with institutional capacities. As we shall urge, debates over legal interpretation cannot be sensibly resolved without attention to those capacities. The central question is not “how, in principle, should a text be interpreted?” The question instead is “how should certain institutions, with their distinctive abilities and limitations, interpret certain texts?” If the relevant judges can reliably decide whether a literal interpretation of a statutory term is absurd, the argument for rejecting literalism is greatly strengthened; if the relevant judges are highly fallible, literalism may have some overlooked virtues. A great deal turns as well on the attentiveness of the relevant legislature. The second issue involves the dynamic effects of any particular approach—its consequences for private and public actors of various sorts. If a nonliteral interpretation of the phrase “induce cancer” would introduce a great deal of uncertainty into the system, and reduce Congress’ incentive to make corrections, it might well be sensible to deny exceptions in cases involving trivial risks. By drawing attention to both institutional capacities and dynamic effects, we are suggesting the need for a kind of institutional turn in thinking about interpretive issues. 
With an emphasis on institutional capacities and dynamic effects, we will be able to see that nearly all of the most prominent discussions of interpretation—including, for 3This is a modest variation on an actual case. See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F.2d 1108 (DC Cir 1987). 4Frank Michelman, A Brief Anatomy of Adjudicative Rule-Formalism, 66 U. Chi. L. Rev. 934 (1999); Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985); John F. Manning, Textualism and the Equity of the Statute, 101 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 36-52 (2001). example, those by Bentham, Blackstone, H.L.A. Hart, Henry Hart and Albert Sacks, Dworkin, Eskridge, Manning, and Richard Posner—are incomplete and unsuccessful, simply because they tend to proceed as if the only question is how “we” should interpret a text. Where they attend to institutional roles at all, these theorists work with an idealized, even heroic picture of judicial capacities and, as a corollary, a jaundiced view of the capacities of other lawmakers and interpreters, such as agencies and legislatures. And if the spotlight is placed on institutional capacities and dynamic effects, we will find it much easier to understand what underlies many interpretive disagreements in law, and also to see how such disagreements might be resolved. 
Consider, for example, the view, often labeled “formalistic,” which sees legitimate interpretation as requiring fidelity to the ordinary meaning of the relevant text when originally enacted.5 Formalism is rejected by those who insist that legitimate interpretation includes a variety of devices designed to ensure that sense, rather than nonsense, is made of the law.6 Many opponents of formalism urge that devices of this kind are simply a part of how communication really works.7 But under certain assumptions, formalism might be seen not as embodying an embarrassingly crude understanding of communication, but as a sensible and highly pragmatic response to institutional limits of generalist judges and institutional capacities of Congress. We believe that in considering these debates, an institutional focus is helpful, not because it always resolves them, but because it shows what many disputes are really about, and because it casts light on central questions that might otherwise be obscured. At a minimum, we urge that an appreciation of institutional capacities and dynamic effects is a necessary part of any theory of legal interpretation. A theory that neglects those issues is seriously incomplete. We also hope that future debates about interpretation will focus on institutional issues, where it remains possible to make a great deal of progress, not least by examining empirical issues, identified below, on which much remains to be learned. 
Why have modern interpretive theories neglected institutional issues? This is a large question, and we do not offer a full answer here; but we do have some speculations. Because of their own role, judges themselves naturally ask a particular question (“how is this text best interpreted?”), and that question naturally diverts attention from the issue of institutional capacities. Legal education, and the legal culture more generally, invite interpreters to ask the following role-assuming question: “If you were the judge, how would you interpret this text?” If the question is posed in that way, institutional issues drop out. The very form of the question makes them irrelevant. Academic observers, usually specialists in the subject at hand, often deplore judicial decisions as “wooden” or “formalistic,” without appreciating the risk that generalist judges, unmoored from the text, might do even worse. Indeed it is possible that specialized interpreters should reject formalism but that nonspecialists should embrace it; and academic specialists are unlikely to appreciate this point. Our principal goal here is to pose the question of interpretation in 5See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation 23-25 (1998); John F. Manning, Textualism and the Equity of the Statute, 101 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 36-52 (2001). 6See Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985); William N. Eskridge, Jr., All About Words: Early Understandings of the "Judicial Power" in Statutory Interpretation, 1776-1806, 101 Colum. L. Rev. 990 (2001). 7See William N. Eskridge, Jr., Gadamer/Statutory Interpretation, 90 Colum. L. Rev. 609 (1990). a form that will sidestep these role-related and cognitive traps, enabling interpretive theory to highlight the neglected issues. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I is a catalogue of influential work on interpretation. We detail the pervasive indifference, in that work, to institutional issues, and also explain how that indifference has weakened the resulting analysis. We attempt to draw out the neglected questions in a way that will help show the range of variables that bear on the selection of interpretive strategies by generalist judges. 
Part II responds to an obvious challenge to our claim: that judgments about institutional issues cannot be helpful without some kind of background normative account of interpretation. A second-best approach, one that asks about interpretive mistakes and dynamic effects, necessarily presupposes some first-best account. This is an important observation, and in a sense it is unexceptionable. But it fails to engage our central point, which is not that a first-best account is worthless or irrelevant, but that it is incomplete without a second-best account that takes account of institutional issues. Institutional analysis is necessary to the choice of interpretive rules, even if it is insufficient. In any case we also offer a further, more ambitious claim: Institutional analysis may indeed be sufficient in some settings, because it may allow interpreters who hold different commitments to converge on particular interpretive rules while bracketing disagreements about their preferred first-best accounts. 
Part III shows how a range of issues in public law might be recast if institutional issues are brought to the forefront. We suggest that a formalist or textualist approach to statutes might be most plausibly defended, not by controversial claims about the Constitution or implausible claims about meaning, but through a suggestion that this approach might produce the most sensible system of law, given the institutions that we actually have. We are confident that the standard defenses of formalism based on first principles are very weak; the same can be said for many of the standard challenges to formalism, also based on first principles. We also urge that even if courts should follow the ordinary meaning of text, it is reasonable to suggest that administrative agencies need not, in part because agencies are specialists rather than generalists. Compared to courts, agencies are likely to have a good sense of whether a departure from formalism will seriously damage a regulatory scheme; hence it is appropriate to allow agencies a higher degree of interpretive flexibility. 
Moving beyond statutory interpretation, Part III applies the institutional lens to issues of constitutional interpretation and the interpretation of common-law precedents. We explain how attention to institutional issues might shift the debate over competing methods of constitutional interpretation, making it necessary to ask some infrequently posed questions about judicial capacity to implement various approaches. Although constitutional theory has become increasingly sophisticated about large-scale institutional questions, such as the allocation of lawmaking authority between legislatures and courts, it has continued to neglect the role of institutional considerations in the theory of constitutional interpretation by judges; and our analysis provides the tools needed to repair this flaw. Finally, we offer a brief note about the common law, suggesting that similar institutional variables very much bear on the appropriate interpretation of judicial precedents. 
In these and other cases, our goal is not to settle on any particular view about what interpretation should entail, but to suggest that it is impossible to answer that question without looking at institutional capacities of various actors and the dynamic effects of competing approaches. We claim, in short, that a focus on institutional issues radically reframes the analysis of legal interpretation—and that it is long past time for those interested in interpretation to see what might be done with that reframing. 
Here we supply a panoramic tour of interpretive theory, and influential theorists, from three periods: the English debate over common-law approaches to statutory interpretation (Section A), the formative era of modern interpretive theory (Section B), and contemporary accounts (Section C). Our limited objective is to document the blindness or insensitivity to institutional considerations that pervades these theorists’ work. We make no pretense of supplying a complete and adequately nuanced intellectual history of interpretive theory. Indeed our catalogue will have the flavor of Whig history, praising theorists who anticipate the institutional turn and (far more often) condemning those who do not. But our goal is not merely critical. By exploring what has been neglected, we hope to make some movement toward the task, ventured in Parts II and III, of isolating the issues that must be faced by an approach to interpretation that is concerned with institutional capacities and dynamic effects.8 
We begin with Blackstone and Bentham, the foremost proponent and critic, respectively, of the common-law approach to statutory interpretation. This approach has many shades and variants, which license varying degrees of judicial freedom in interpretation; but a central or defining idea is that judges appropriately sensitive to legislative purposes and to the surrounding fabric of law should mold and shape statutes with something like the sensitivity and flexibility accorded to judicial precedents. In these respects, the common law approach is a precursor of the legal process school that came to dominate American interpretive theory after World War II.9 
Our critique, unsurprisingly, is that the common-law style of interpretation presupposes a fanciful, even romantic account of judicial capacities, and also fails to ask questions about likely legislative responses to different judicial approaches. We will see, however, a major historical irony: Blackstone, the archetypal common-law interpreter, came far closer to recognizing the suppressed institutional questions, and the institutional case for formalist statutory interpretation, than did Bentham, the common law’s principal 8In what follows, we will put aside the possibility that doctrines of statutory interpretation might be legislated, rather than developed (solely) by judges in common-law fashion. See Nicholas Quinn Rosenkranz, Federal Rules of Statutory Interpretation, 115 Harv. L. Rev. 2085 (2002). Although the possibility is both important and interesting, past history shows that it is most unlikely that Congress will enact rules of interpretation that will generally resolve the disputed issues of interpretive choice. For good reason, the literature on statutory interpretation both past and present, focuses on the question of what interpretive rules judges should use absent legislative intervention; that is our focus here as well. 9See Henry Hart and Albert Sacks, The Legal Process: Basic Problems in the Making and Application of Law (William N. Eskridge & Philip P. Frickey eds.) (1994). critic. We will also see that later theorists, such as H.L.A. Hart, followed Bentham rather than Blackstone, and hence repeated Bentham’s mistake. 
Blackstone. William Blackstone’s brief account of statutory interpretation in Book I of the Commentaries is easily the most famous description of the common-law style of statutory interpretation;10 Hart and Sacks featured it prominently in the legal process materials that influenced a generation of leading academic theorists.11 The object of interpretation, for Blackstone, is to uncover the “will of the legislator” by “exploring his intentions,” as manifested in “signs the most natural and probable.”12 Despite this ceremonial bow to legislative supremacy, however, the discussion quickly turns from the words of the statute, of surrounding statutes, and the subject matter, to more fluid interpretive sources, particularly the “reason and spirit” of the law and the Aristotelian principle of “equity”—the latter being the power “of excepting those circumstances, which (had they been foreseen) the legislator himself would have excepted.”13 Interpretive equity, on this view, “depend[s], essentially, upon the particular circumstances of each individual case.”14 
Here are all the hallmarks of the common-law interpretive style: flexible treatment of statutory text, based on a nuanced sensitivity to legislative intentions or purposes and to the surrounding fabric of the common law. Especially striking is the stylized assumption that interpretation according to the “reason” or “equity” of the statute will capture the legislature’s true intentions, or the intentions that rational legislators would have had if informed about the particular application at bar, as well as the accompanying insistence that equity is necessarily a particularistic or case-specific consideration. Under certain assumptions about institutional capacities, the common-law style might well be best; but Blackstone says nothing in defense of those assumptions, and fails even to acknowledge them as such. The discussion, almost until the very end, shows remarkably little awareness of several relevant possibilities: that judges might mistake legislative purposes; that they might do better by deferring to legislators’ expressed judgments about equity than by enforcing their own; that they might, by treating statutes flexibly, be purchasing case-specific benefits at the price of increased uncertainty, imposing resulting burdens on the interpretive system as a whole; that legislators, confronted with judges refusing to invoke purposes to make sense of text, might be more careful in advance and might make corrections as the need arises. 
Consider, as one example among many, Blackstone’s remarkably casual embrace of the absurd-results canon: the idea, in Blackstone’s words, that where words bear either none, or a very absurd signification, we must a little deviate from the received sense of them. Therefore the Bolognian law, mentioned by Puffendorf, which enacted ‘that whoever drew blood in the streets should be 10See I William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 59-62 (1765). 11Hart and Sacks, supra, at 1170. 12Blackstone, supra, at 60. 13Id. at 61. 14Id. punished with the utmost severity,’ was held after long debate not to extend to the surgeon, who opened the vein of a person that fell down in the street with a fit.15 There is much to be said, pro and con, about interpretation to avoid absurd results; the relevant institutional variables are complex,16 and we shall say a fair bit about them here. What is important for present purposes is Blackstone’s radical institutional blindness—his failure to identify those variables or to find them even relevant. It may well be true that, if apprised of the surgeon’s case, the legislature would have provided a relevant exception. But it hardly follows that the legislature would necessarily wish the judges to provide the exception themselves, given the legislature’s failure to do so. For many reasons, good and bad, the legislature might want to reserve to itself the authority to correct poorly-drafted statutes. Perhaps the legislature would not trust the judges’ judgments about whether a result would be absurd; perhaps the legislature would be willing to tolerate occasional absurdity for the sake of clarity and predictability. Nor does it follow that, apart from the question of legislative preferences about judicial interpretation, the best overall interpretive system would be one in which the judges possessed this case-specific power to modify seemingly absurd statutory applications in light of purpose, reason, and equity. To know whether that is true would require judgments about a range of matters Blackstone fails to consider, such as the rate of mistaken identification of absurd results and the ex ante effects of such a power on legislative drafting; more on these matters below. 
All this said, the end of Blackstone’s discussion offers a remarkable afterthought that, although barely sketched, anticipates some critical questions for interpretive theory by acknowledging the role of second-best considerations. “[L]aw, without equity, tho’ hard and disagreeable, is much more desirable for the public good, than equity without law; which would make every judge a legislator, and introduce most infinite confusion [by producing] as many different rules of action laid down in our courts, as there are differences of capacity and sentiment in the human mind.”17 In this passage “law,” cast in opposition to equity, seems to connote a formalist style of interpretation that enforces rules apparent on the face of statutory texts, rather than molding those texts to background legal principles or attributed legislative purposes. The first-best, Blackstone is suggesting, would be law and equity in an appropriate mix, distributed appropriately across cases. But if the mix is unstable, if judges must choose between enforcing law in all cases or doing equity in all cases, then resolute enforcement of statutory text is preferable on second-best grounds. 
On Blackstone’s account, equity without law is defective on two counts: it “makes every judge a legislator” and introduces an unacceptable amount of uncertainty (“most infinite confusion”) into the interpretive system. The first point is a gesture towards the separation of lawmaking power from adjudicative power; later we will argue that this sort of appeal is unhelpful, because it is too abstract to supply valid reasons for or against interpretive formalism. Far more impressive and significant is the second point, 15Id. at 60. 16Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Regulatory Absurdity? A New Canon of Construction, (unpublished manuscript 2002); Frederick Schauer, The Practice and Problems of Plain Meaning: A Response to Aleinikoff and Shaw, 45 Vand. L. Rev. 715 (1992). 17Blackstone, supra, at 62. an early attempt to introduce institutional considerations and ex ante effects into interpretive theory. We will see, however, that Blackstone’s passing insight proved infertile. Later theorists largely ignored the significance of second-best considerations. 
Bentham. It is illuminating to glance at the interpretive views of Jeremy Bentham, an imposing critic of common-law adjudication in general and of Blackstone in particular. Bentham’s critique of Blackstone’s Commentaries develops the claim that common-law adjudication is both incoherent and inconsistent with a rational, meaning utilitarian, legal order. The positive side of Bentham’s program was the codification of utilitarian legal principles, and more generally a consolidation and expansion of legislation’s domain that would bring clarity, certainty and order to the law. Increasingly precise and comprehensive codification would ultimately cause adjudication itself to wither away, as citizens and officials could simply consult the code to ascertain their legal rights and duties. In the interim, however, Bentham was intermittently aware that statutes would contain gaps, ambiguities, and generalities ill-adapted to specific cases— the usual sources of difficult interpretive questions. Bentham thus discussed interpretation on several occasions, most prominently in the Comment on the Commentaries, which contains two substantial chapters on the “Interpretation of Laws” and the “Construction of Statutes,”18 although it is fair to say that he nowhere presents a fully-developed account of statutory interpretation. 
For our purposes the significance of Bentham’s work on interpretation lies in his imperfect utilitarianism—in his neglect of institutional variables in his discussion of the judicial role. Despite his piercing depiction of the sponginess of common-law adjudication, which he equated with arbitrary judicial tyranny, Bentham failed to transpose his critique of judicial capacities to interpretive theory in any consistent way. The chapters on interpretation and construction in the Comment on the Commentaries manage both to approve flexible, purposivist interpretation devoted to forwarding legislative “ends,” on one hand, and on the other to mock the pretensions of common-law interpretation by emphasizing what Bentham saw as the arbitrariness of judicial claims about “reason” and “equity.” We see, for example, Bentham both supporting the absurd results canon on purposive grounds, in Blackstone’s example of the surgeon prosecuted for “drawing blood” in the streets,19 and also denying that the common-law judge’s appeal to reason or reasonableness is anything other than a statement of personal “opinion.” On the one hand, “reasonableness or unreasonableness is nothing but conformity or nonconformity to . . . opinion.” On the other hand, “[t]he words of a legislator are no otherwise to be regarded than inasmuch as they are expressive of his will.” 
But these positions are in tension with each other. Recall that Blackstone’s argument for purposive, equitable interpretation assumed that reasonable legislators 18See Jeremy Bentham, A Comment on the Commentaries and A Fragment on Government I.9, II.2 (J.H. Burns and H.L.A. Hart eds. 1977). 19See id. at 111; 160. Bentham sometimes intimates that he endorses purposivism and the absurd results canon only in cases of ambiguous statutory language, see, e.g., id. at 160,although it requires some work to square that qualification with Blackstone’s example, so it isn’t clear how seriously we are to take it. See also Jeremy Bentham, The Theory of Legislation 155 (C.K. Ogden ed. 1987) (“urging that “laws should be literally followed”). would have recognized the need for an exception, if made aware of the application at hand. Purposivism usually attributes goals or aims by envisioning reasonable legislators acting reasonably; certainly that is the premise for purposivism in the later legal process account of interpretation, as we shall see.20 This may even be a necessary feature of purposivism; it may be conceptually impossible for judges to proceed by imagining what unreasonable legislators would do. So to deny that the judges can assess the reasonableness or equity of some particular statutory application is also to deny purposivism; Bentham cannot have it both ways. Conversely, Blackstone’s second-best argument for interpretive formalism was precisely that judicial disagreement about what is equitable would make interpretation unacceptably subjective and uncertain (because of “differences of capacity and sentiment” across judges). Bentham fails to appreciate that the rapier he uses to skewer the common-law judges might be turned against the purposivist statutory interpretation he also embraces. If even Bentham—the greatest critic of the common law and the greatest advocate of legal utilitarianism—overlooks the significance of judicial capacities, and the systemic effects of flexible interpretation, the institutional blindness in interpretive theory runs very deep indeed. 
Why might Bentham have neglected, in his critique of common-law method, the institutional critique of flexible interpretation? There may be a clue in his most focused treatment of the relationship between interpretation and judicial discretion—a short discussion in his great unpublished work on legislation, Of Laws in General. There Bentham argues that legislative mistakes—the enactment of statutes that are overinclusive or underinclusive relative to their purposes, due to inadvertence, lack of foresight, or changed circumstances—require that judges possess the power to “mould[] statutes into form.”21 Yet this power in turn created the possibility that informational deficits or bad motives on the part of judges would pervert the legislative product and increase legal uncertainty: 
How difficult to distinguish what the legislator would have adopted had he adverted to it, from what he actually did advert to and reject. How easy to establish the one under pretence of looking for the other . . . . And thus sprang up by degrees another branch of customary law, which striking its roots into the substance of the statute law, infected it with its own characteristic obscurity, uncertainty, and confusion.22 This is a powerful indictment of purposivism and imaginative reconstruction. On the score of institutional sophistication, Bentham here outdoes his jurisprudential successors of the next century, including both H.L.A. Hart and the legal process scholars; we will see that the later accounts fail even to see the problem that Bentham poses. 
Yet for this Bentham himself must take a great deal of blame. The prescriptions he offered to cure the problems of purposivism rest on the same sort of idealized or stylized view of institutional capacities that infects most of Blackstone’s treatment, and that Bentham might have been expected to transcend. Bentham first suggests that “the necessity of discretionary interpretation” can be “supersede[d]” by the development of a 20See the discussion of Hart and Sacks below. 21Jeremy Bentham, Of Laws in General 239 (H.L.A. Hart ed. 1970). 22Id. at 240. sufficiently perspicacious legislative code (doubtless the code developed in Bentham’s own extensive proposals for law reform).23 But this idealizes legislative capacities, thus reversing the characteristic error of common-law interpretation.24 Bentham himself recognizes, both here and elsewhere, that institutional limitations on legislatures make the project of a fully-specified code fantastic. So Bentham abashedly sketches a fallback plan, never fully developed, whereby judges would “declare openly” the need for judicial “alteration” of a statute in appropriate cases, and certify a proposed emendation to the legislature; the emendation would have legal force unless “negatived” or vetoed by the legislature within a certain time.25 Absent from the proposal is any explanation why the judges, whose information and motivations Bentham has so powerfully impeached, will be able to distinguish alterations from interpretations, or be willing to comply with the plan even where alterations are identifiable as such. 
Taking Blackstone and Bentham together, the striking irony is that the commonlaw jurist more nearly appreciates and anticipates the second-best justifications for formalist, rule-bound statutory interpretation than does the great critic of the common law. Bentham’s turn into the blind alley of complete codification, under the influence of an idealized picture of legislative capacities, did little more than create a target for subsequent critics, such as H.L.A. Hart, who could justify antiformalist interpretation by pointing to the limits of legislative foresight, while overlooking the countervailing limits on the capacities of antiformalist interpreters. 
We now turn to the defining period of modern jurisprudence. In this period, academic observers largely attempted to steer a middle course between formalism and realism.26 They argued that interpretation was not merely a matter of following established rules, but also that it was far from simple or direct policy analysis.27 For present purposes, we focus on the critique of formalism and on the institutional blindness of that critique—not to show that formalism is right, but to identify the issues on which its acceptance or rejection might turn. One of the most striking features of the period is 23Id. 24Hart provides a helpful correction here. See below. 25Bentham, supra note, at 241. 26See, e.g., Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (1949). We do not discuss the realists themselves, though it is noteworthy that they tended to argue for candid and open-ended judicial policymaking in the face of ambiguous statutes, without grappling with the risks posed by judicial discretion. See, e.g., Karl N. Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev 395, 299 (1950), which, after challenging the canons of construction, suggests that courts should “strive to make sense as a whole out of our law as a whole” (emphases in original), without engaging the obvious institutional problems raised by any such effort. Max Radin, Statutory Interpretation, 43 Harv. L. Rev. 863, 884 (1930), criticizes the conventional sources of interpretation and suggests that the real question is: “Will the inclusion of this particular determinate in the statutory determinable lead to a desirable result?” Radin does not address the difficulties that courts might face in answering that question. Of course we do not deny the possibility that the sources of law favored by the formalist—above all, the text—will leave ambiguities; in such cases, institutional considerations are highly relevant to the decision how to proceed. Chevron v. NRDC, 467 US 837 (1984), represents an institutionally grounded choice to leave the resolution to the relevant administrative agency. See part IIIB below for discussion. 27See, e.g., Levi, supra note, at 3-8. that it was dominated by the work of the “legal process” school, whose central mission was to focus attention on institutional considerations. And indeed, the legal process materials do talk a great deal about comparative institutional competence,28 and do discuss the relevance of agency interpretations of law.29 But even in those materials, the question of interpretation is answered by asking about how ideal judges would proceed, rather than by asking about how real-world judges should proceed. But to say this is to get ahead of the story; let us begin with H.L.A. Hart, simply because his treatment of legal interpretation can be seen as canonical. 
Hart. In his treatment of mechanical jurisprudence and rule-skepticism, Hart offers a highly influential account of the failures of formalism—an account that, remarkably, says not a word about institutional issues.30 A chief contribution of the account is a clear and convincing explanation of why Bentham was wrong to hope that a rule-bound legislative code could sensibly resolve all cases that might arise under it. What is absent is a serious treatment of how institutions should respond to the inevitability that unexpected cases will confound the expectations of rulemakers. 
Hart’s principal submission is that in hard cases, interpretive problems arise from legislators’ “inability to anticipate.”31 In his view, a “feature of the human predicament (and so the legislative one) is that we labour under two connected handicaps whenever we seek to regulate, unambiguously and in advance, some sphere of conduct by means of general standards to be used without further official direction on particular occasions.”32 These handicaps are “our relative ignorance of fact” and “our relative indeterminacy of aim.”33 Mechanical jurisprudence or formalism, involving simple application of law to fact (Bentham’s utopia), would be possibly only if “the world in which we live were characterized only by a finite number of features, and these together with all the modes in which they combine could be known to us.”34 But “[p]lainly this world is not our world.”35 
Hart claims that the “vice known to legal theory as formalism or conceptualism consists in an attitude to verbally formulated rules which both seeks to disguise and to minimize the need for . . . choice, once the general rule has been laid down.”36 This is sometimes done by freezing “the meaning of the rule so that its general terms must have the same meaning in every case where its applications is in question.”37 And what is wrong with that freezing? Hart has a simple answer. He urges that this approach secures “a measure of certainty or predictability at the cost of blindly prejudging what is to be done in a range of future cases, about whose composition we are ignorant. We shall thus indeed succeed in settling in advance, but also in the dark, issues which can only be 28Hart and Sacks, supra, at 158-72 (surveying the major lawmaking institutions and their relationships).. 29Id. at 1271-1312 (examining administrative interpretation of statutes). 30H.L.A. Hart, The Concept of Law 120-130 (1972). 31See id. at 125 (1972). 32Id. 33Id. 34Id. at 126. 35Id. 36Id. at 127. 37Id. reasonably be settled when they arise and are identified.”38 And what is wrong with decision in the dark? Hart urges that this kind of decision forces us “to include in the scope of a rule cases which we would wish to exclude in order to give effect to reasonable social aims. . . .”39 
Hart is entirely right to urge that the absence of legislative foresight is inevitable, and that this can create serious problems for interpretation. But notice Hart’s apparently unself-conscious use of word “we” to identify the interpreting authority. Of course Hart’s readers do not constitute a community of “we’s” who have the power to adopt a mutually agreeable approach to interpretation. And once it is seen that a system of interpretation must be established that some “they” must apply, the assessment of “decision in the dark” as opposed to of decision based on “to reasonable social aims” will appear in a very different light. If we make our assessment in institutional terms, we will see that Hart is neglecting two points. The first involves the risk of judicial blunder under one or another approach; the second involves the dynamic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. 
Suppose, for example, that judges will err if they attempt to discern “reasonable social aims.” At least it is conceivable, in light of human fallibility, that some judges would do better, by the lights of many or most, if they refused to inquire into reasonable aims. An important factor here is that it is sometimes complicated to make that inquiry; an equally important factor is that sometimes people dispute how to answer it. Take TVA v. Hill,40 the famous snail darter case, raising the question whether the Endangered Species Act should be taken to block the completion of an important dam, because of the late discovery, on the land, of an ecologically uninteresting fish. Does this application of the ESA violate reasonable social aims? People do not agree about the answer to that question. 
In addition, a sensible system of interpretation is based on an understanding that dynamic effects are highly likely; it sees that the judges’ approach will not be limited, in its effects, to the immediate parties or even to the system of adjudication. Hart seems oblivious to this point. Suppose that courts, deciding the issue in the light, will introduce a high degree of uncertainty into the law, making it harder for people to plan their affairs. Suppose too that if they proceed in the dark, they will create strong incentives for the legislature, which will promptly correct the problems that arise.41 In these circumstances, might not formalism be the most sensible path? What is most remarkable is that Hart appears not to see the problem at all. 
Hart and Sacks. Now consider the influential treatment by Henry Hart and Albert Sacks in their enormously influential legal process materials.42 In a brilliant “note on the rudiments of statutory interpretation,” Hart and Sacks urge that the task of interpretation requires courts, first and foremost, to “decide what purpose ought to be attributed to the 38Id. 39Id. 40437 US 153 (1978). 41Note here that Congress ultimately authorized completion of the dam involved in TVA v. Hill, see note X infra, and also significantly amended the Delaney Clause in response to concerns about excessive rigidity. See the Food Quality Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 104-170, 110 Stat. 1489 (1996). 42See Hart and Sacks, supra, at 1374-1380. statute and to any subordinate provision of it which may be involved,” and to “interpret the words of the statute immediately in question so as to carry out the purpose as best it can.”43 Hart and Sacks caution that courts should not give words a meaning that their text will not bear. But they also urge that courts should require Congress to speak clearly if it wishes to accomplish certain ends, including “a departure from a generally prevailing principle or policy of the law.”44 These are the building blocks for a complex system of interpretation, in which judges treat legislators as “reasonable people proceeding reasonably,” make “purpose” crucial to interpretation, and push statutory language, where fairly possible, in the direction of sense and consistency with the rest of the law’s fabric. 
In the abstract, this approach seems perfectly sensible, and we will not argue that it is indefensible here. But to evaluate it, we need to know how well judges are able to execute the suggested approach, and how other persons and institutions will react to it. The fact that Hart and Sacks do not explore these issues is extremely revealing, for a primary contribution of the legal process materials was to put the spotlight on institutional issues, and indeed to assess much of law in a pragmatic spirit. With respect to legal interpretation, Hart and Sacks did not keep the institutional project in mind, perhaps because of the tenacity of the common law framework with which they began. “Purposes” are their loadstar; but purposes are hardly transparent. Is the purpose of the Delaney Clause to eliminate carcinogenic substances from the food supply? To make Americans safer? To improve the world? The characterization of purposes involves a large element of discretion, and here it is necessary to know how the discretion will be exercised. Sometimes the characterization of purposes will have a significant political or even ideological component. Hart and Sacks pay no attention to that issue; they seem to think that it is irrelevant. 
General lessons cannot be drawn from the practice of interpretation under Fascism, but for our purposes, some illumination can be found from the disparate practices of Italian and German courts. The Italian judiciary, faced with a totalitarian regime, engaged in a strategy of resistance, based on the idea of “plain meaning.” 45 They prohibited the government from acting in a way that did violence to the apparent meaning of statutory texts.46 This was a self-conscious method for limiting Fascist government, by requiring genuine statutory authorization for its goals. By contrast, German judges rejected formalism and construed statutes hospitably and in accordance with their “purposes,” defined by reference to the public values of the Nazi regime.47 They thought that courts could carry out their interpretive task “only if they do not remain glued to the letter of the law, but rather penetrate its inner core in their interpretations and do their part to see that the aims of the lawmaker are realized.”48 Thus, for example, the German Supreme Court concluded that a law forbidding “sexual intercourse” between Germans and Jews “is not limited to coition. . . . A broad interpretation is . . . appropriate in view of the fact that the provisions of the law are meant to protect not only German blood but 43Id. at 1374. 44Id. at 1377. 45See the account in Guido Calabresi, : Two Functions of Formalism, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev. 479 (2000). 46Id. 47See Ingo Muller, Hitler's Justice: The Courts of the Third Reich (Deborah Lucas Schneider trans, 1991). 48Id at 101. also German honor.” A lower court went so far as to conclude that kissing could take “the place of normal sexual intercourse” and therefore violate the statute, in such a way as to justify a two-year jail sentence.49 
Of course we do not suggest that purposive interpretation is an ally of Fascism, or that it is always illegitimate or unacceptable. Our only claim is that the evaluation of purposive interpretation must depend, in large part, on an assessment of the relevant institutions and of the effects of that approach over time. It is ludicrous to suggest that purposive interpretation is best in the abstract, for the simple reason that no approach to interpretation is best in the abstract. Here, as elsewhere, Hart and Sacks’ elaborate talk about institutional competence is undercut by their stylized, nonempirical treatment of actual institutions and their capacities. 
Dworkin. Ronald Dworkin is often taken to be H.L.A. Hart’s antagonist, urging an approach that Dworkin calls “integrity,” meant to be alternative to Hart’s form of positivism.50 But on the issue that concerns us, Dworkin shares Hart’s blindness. On Dworkin’s account, judges who seek “integrity” attempt to put existing legal materials in “the best light possible.”51 They owe a duty of fidelity to those materials; but they are also authorized to attempt to understand the materials by reference to what they see as the most appealing principle that organizes them. “Law as integrity asks judges to assume, as far as this is possible, that the law is structured by a coherent set of principles about justice and fairness and procedural due process, and it asks them to enforce these in the fresh cases that come before them, so that each person’s situation is fair and just according to the same standards.”52 In arguing for this understanding of adjudication, Dworkin offers not a word about the virtues and the imperfections of judges and the systemic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. 
Dworkin spends a great deal of time on Riggs v. Palmer,53 the famous case posing the question whether judges should adopt a literal interpretation of the law of wills if the consequence would be to allow a murderer to inherit from his victim.54 And Dworkin is not wrong to argue that Riggs “was a dispute about what the law was, about what the real statute the legislators enacted really said.”55 But it is inadequate to cast the issue in those terms. The dispute was about the appropriate approach to statute whose literal text produces absurdity. If courts ask about the meaning of “the real statute the legislators enacted,” they will not be asking some of the crucial questions. 
Dworkin does not say how he would decide Riggs, but he does offer a conclusion about the appropriate resolution of TVA v. Hill. Dworkin supposes that his idealized judge, Hercules, “shares the substantive opinion that seemed dominant on the [Supreme] 49Id at 202. 50See Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985). 51Id. at 243. 52Id. 53115 NY 506, 22 NE 188 (1889). 54Law’s Empire at 15-20. 55Id. at 20. We say that this is not wrong, but it seems to us unhelpful. Neither view, in Riggs, could be said to be lawless. But to ask what the law “really said” obscures the key issue, which is how judges should interpret it, given the institutional variables discussed in the text. Court, that the wiser course would be to sacrifice the fish to the dam.”56 If so, Dworkin urges, it is “not difficult” to see how Hercules will vote, because he “thinks reading the statute to save the dam would make it better from the point of view of sound policy.” Given that judgment, Hercules will vote to allow the dam to be completed. 
But to know how to vote in TVA v. Hill, is it really enough to consult “sound policy”? Here Dworkin sounds very much like Hart, urging that statutory language should not be taken to conflict with reasonable social purposes. Other things being equal, the claim is surely correct. But it is important to ask whether Congress would overturn a literal interpretation of the ESA, if the consequence was indeed to violate sound policy. Subsequent events showed that Congress was entirely willing to do that.57 And it is also important to ask about the systemic effects of a ruling that would allow the dam to be completed. If that were the ruling, what would the ESA actually mean? Would subsequent cases become hard too? If this question is in turn difficult to answer, then the consequences of the ruling, in itself sensible, might in their way conflict with “sound policy” as well. And in cases of this sort, do we have good reason to trust judges’ views about sound policy? These points suggest that it is hardly enough to ask, as Dworkin urges, which interpretation of the Endangered Species Act would best complete the story that Congress has begun. If institutional considerations are taken into account, we might conclude that judges should ask themselves a very different set of questions. 
Where statutes are entirely ambiguous, it is impossible to decide cases simply by reference to their words. But in TVA v. Hill, the words were far more easily taken to ban the completion of the dam; and judicial unreliability, on conflicts between environmental and economic goals, might well be taken to argue in favor of formalism.58 What is striking about Dworkin’s analysis is that it is undertaken without any thought at all about judicial capacities and about the effects, over time, of one or another approach to interpretation. Like Hart, Dworkin proceeds as if the question is how an idealized judge deals with interpretive problems—not how a real-world judge, operating as part of a decisionmaking committee staffed by multiple actors, should proceed in the face of uncertainty. 
Contemporary interpretive theory is increasingly sophisticated along many margins. Philosophy (including pragmatist antifoundationalism), linguistics, and economics have all contributed to ever-more-refined normative accounts of interpretation. Yet on the critical dimension of institutional awareness, many of the most 56Id. at 347. 57Congress promptly established an administrative mechanism for granting exemptions from the Endangered Species Act, see Pub. L. No. 95-632, 92 Stat. 3751, 3752-60 (1978), and Congress itself specifically exempted the dam at issue in TVA v. Hill, see Pub. L. No. 96-69, 93 Stat. 437, 449 (1979). 58Consider in this regard the late nineteenth and early twentieth century struggle between courts and the regulatory state, in which judges, trying to harmonize regulatory statutes with the common law, tended to require Congress to speak unambiguously if it sought to depart from judicial understandings, and abandoned plain or ordinary meaning in order to minimize conflicts with those understandings. The result was to limit the reach of statutes designed to protect workers and consumers. See, e.g., FTC v. American Tobacco Co., 264 US 298, 305-06 (1924); Shaw v, Railroad Co., 101 US 557, 565 (1880). prominent contemporary theorists do no better than their predecessors, or so we will claim. Institutional blindness remains a pervasive condition in the current scene. 
Eskridge. William Eskridge has a claim to being the most prominent interpretive theorist of the modern era; his identification and critique of the “new textualism,”59 and his advocacy of “dynamic interpretation,”60 redefined the field in the late 1980s. Yet a neglect of institutional factors undercuts Eskridge’s conclusions just as it did his predecessors’.61 Dynamic statutory interpretation, it turns out, embodies the nirvana fallacy—the juxtaposition of an idealized picture of judicial capacities with a grudging picture of the capacities of other actors in the interpretive system. 
Eskridge’s principal target is the formalist approach that emphasizes the original meaning of statutory text; his principal criticism is that this approach stumbles on the problem of statutory obsolescence—statutes that have fallen out of step with the public values prevailing in the surrounding context of the legal system. Dynamic interpretation is the answer to the problem of obsolescence. Rather than adhering either to ordinary meaning at the time of enactment, or even to legislative intent conceived in strictly originalist terms, courts should “update” statutes by intelligent adaptation of original purposes to new social circumstances, and by taking account of changes in the overall fabric of public law.62 Yet Eskridge is sensitive to the radicalism of this recommendation, which he moderates and improves by adding a side constraint: judges should treat contemporary public values as something like an interpretive principle or canon, defensible by clear contrary instructions from legislatures.63 
At first glance this position is attractive, even compelling; how could “wooden” or “mechanical” enforcement of obsolete statutes possibly be the best course of action for judges to take? Eskridge’s claims certainly have some descriptive power, and on certain assumptions, they might be plausible on institutional grounds as well. Yet Eskridge fails to discuss those assumptions or those grounds. He does not consider how the case for dynamic interpretation fares once we recognize the possibility that judges will make serious mistakes in updating, or that the ex ante effects of dynamism on legislative behavior might prove pernicious. We may agree with Eskridge that judicial updating is a good thing, all else equal, but the proviso is crucial. The possibility of judicial mistakes, or of deleterious system effects, makes Eskridge’s defense of dynamism radically incomplete. Dynamic interpretation might or might not prove justified, given adequate information on these variables; here as elsewhere we take no position on that ultimate question. What is clear is that Eskridge has failed to ask, let alone answer, most of the critical questions. 
Start with the question of judicial error. The linchpin of dynamism is the claim that “when societal conditions change in ways not anticipated by Congress and, especially, when the legal and constitutional context of the statute decisively shifts as 59See William N. Eskridge, Jr., The New Textualism, 37 UCLA L. Rev. 621 (1990). 60See William N. Eskridge, Jr., Dynamic Statutory Interpretation, 135 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1479 (1987). 61Candor requires an acknowledgement that one of the present authors showed a similar blindness in his youth (adolescence? infancy?). See Cass R. Sunstein, Interpreting Statutes in the Regulatory State, 103 Harv L Rev 405 (1989). 62Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation, supra note, at 1484. 63Id. at 1482, 1496. well, this current perspective should, and will, affect the statute’s interpretation.”64 This is essentially a recommendation to minimize the false negative or Type II error: the possibility that nondynamic approaches will erroneously fail to update obsolete statutes. But Eskridge says very little about the converse possibility, the false positive or Type I error: the risk that the judges’ relative social insulation, and the resulting informational deficits, might cause them to err in the other direction, updating statutes that aren’t obsolete because the judges fail to comprehend the statute’s current social utility. If judicial updating produces erroneous rewriting of statutes whose sensible and fully up-todate justifications the judges have simply failed to understand, then dynamism may cause more institutional failure than would a rule denying judges the authority to update. In any case updating may cause harm if the new values, not yet able to receive clear democratic support, are questionable on normative grounds. (Is it entirely irrelevant to mention that Nazi judges were enthusiastic updaters?) 
Eskridge also overlooks the possibility that the systemic effects of nondynamic interpretive approaches would prove better, on Eskridge’s own criteria, than would the systemic effects of dynamism. Eskridge supports his case for dynamism by drawing upon process theory and public choice, arguing that “the legislature acting alone will be subject to . . . biases,”65 and that “given the biases of the political process, the fact that judges are not elected may enable them to be better ‘representatives’ of the people than their elected legislators are (in some instances).”66 It may be true that interest-group pressure and institutional failures will cause Congress to update statutes with insufficient frequency, relative to some optimal rate of policy change. But that failure might itself be an endogenous consequence of the interpretive theory the judges use. Textualists indeed argue that their methods will spur legislatures to update at an optimal rate,67 and there is certainly some evidence of updating in response to textualism.68 If so, then textualism would itself just be the dynamic approach to interpretation that Eskridge advocates. On certain empirical premises about institutional capacities, Eskridge ought to support the very textualism that he spends so much time excoriating. 
In later work Eskridge episodically shows an awareness of these considerations, acknowledging, in the limited context of the legislative-history debate, that the desirability of judicial resort to legislative history turns importantly on a cost-benefit calculus that examines judicial performance, litigation costs, and legal certainty in competing legislative-history regimes.69 Yet he also seems to think this sort of analysis theoretically disreputable or empirically intractable or both. In even more recent work Eskridge reverses his ground, arguing both that empiricism is conceptually meaningless without normative premises (a question we address below) and that the relevant empirical and institutional variables are costly to measure—certainly true, but hardly an argument 64Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation, supra note, at 1494. 65Id. at 1530. 66Id. 67See Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, 75 N.Y.U. L. REV. 74, 103 (2000). 68The Delaney Clause was substantially amended by the Food Quality Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 104-170, 110 Stat. 1489 (1996). 69See William N. Eskridge, Jr., Textualism, The Unknown Ideal?, 96 Mich. L. Rev. 1509, 1541 (1998). for nonempirical interpretive theory.70 The sum of it is that, as with some of the other theorists we will consider, Eskridge occasionally notes the critical institutional considerations en passant, but fails to incorporate them into his normative account of interpretation in any systematic way. 
It is worth emphasizing that none of these considerations necessarily refutes Eskridge’s dynamic conclusions. If judges update successfully more often than not, and if textualist interpretation causes legislatures to spend most of their time correcting mistaken (because wooden or mechanical) judicial interpretations, then textualism would prove inferior to dynamic interpretation; Eskridge’s methods would push the courts closer to the optimal rate of updating. But there is no valid path to that conclusion from Eskridge’s institutionally insensitive premises. 
Manning. Among contemporary writers, Eskridge’s chief formalist adversary is John Manning, whose work details an important textualist account of interpretation rooted in constitutional law, in contrast to Eskridge’s nontextualist dynamism. For our purposes, however, the common ground between Eskridge and Manning is more important than their differences. Strikingly, despite spirited debates between them, Eskridge and Manning largely share the crucial and mistaken premise that the important questions about interpretive theory are first-best questions, rather than second-best questions about institutional performance and systemic effects. 
Manning’s work shows that insufficient attention to institutional capacities is an equal-opportunity hazard, one that afflicts nonformalists and formalists alike. Manning’s contribution is to have provided the most rigorous attempt to justify formalist modes of interpretation by reference to formal sources of law, principally the Constitution. In our view, however, the project is an impossible one; it is doomed to failure despite Manning’s skill at deductive reasoning from constitutional premises. Interpretive formalism at the operational level—formalism in the jurisprudentially modest sense of rule-bound interpretation that sticks close to the surface of statutory texts, where it is possible to do so—cannot itself be justified by conceptual deduction from constitutional premises. Supplemental institutional and empirical premises are needed, premises about the comparative capacities of institutional actors and about formalism’s ex ante effects. 
Consider Manning’s influential critique of judicial resort to legislative history.71 The argument suggests that the Constitution, particularly Article I’s procedure of statutory enactment, should be read to embody an implicit norm against legislative selfdelegation. That constitutional norm forbids courts to afford “authoritative” weight to legislative history in statutory interpretation, but allows consultation of legislative history as a persuasive or confirmatory source.72 But this deduction, even if valid, leaves open the most important questions about legislative history at the operative level, the level of the interpretive doctrines that judges should use. Few people think that the legislative history is “authoritative” in the sense that it trumps unambiguous text; the usual argument is that the history is relevant to ascertaining meaning. That courts may not afford 70See William N. Eskridge, Jr., Norms, Empiricism, and Canons in Statutory Interpretation, 66 U. Chi. L. Rev. 671 (1999). 71John F. Manning, Textualism as a Nondelegation Doctrine, 97 COLUM. L. REV. 673, 695 (1997). 72Id. at 728. 
The EPA did not contend that an MCL was not “feasible” to implement, nor did it argue that it was not “feasible,” in the economic or technological sense, to monitor lead levels in water. Nonetheless, the court upheld the agency’s decision.131 The court accepted the EPA’s seemingly implausible suggestion that the word “feasible” could be construed to mean “capable of being accomplished in a manner consistent with the Act.” The court said that “case law is replete with examples of statutes the ordinary meaning of which is not necessarily what the Congress intended,” and it added, pointedly and controversially, that “where a literal meaning of a statutory term would lead to absurd results,” that term “has no plain meaning.”132 Because an MCL would itself lead to more contamination, “it could lead to a result squarely at odds with the purpose of the Safe Drinking Water Act.”133 
The court therefore accepted EPA’s view “that requiring public water systems to design and implement custom corrosion control plans for lead will result in optimal treatment of drinking water overall, i.e. treatment that deals adequately with lead without causing public water systems to violate drinking water regulations for other contaminants.”134 It should be plain that the court permitted a quite surprising and even countertextual interpretation of the Act. The statutory terms seem to make no room for the EPA’s refusal to issue an MCL. In upholding the EPA’s refusal, the court authorized the agency to avoid an unreasonable result. 
Qualifications. We believe that agencies should not be required to interpret statutes in the same way as courts; but any judgment on this point itself depends on contextual factors. If, for example, Congress would immediately and costlessly correct the problems that would be produced by formalism, then there would be much less need to allow interpretations of the kind upheld in American Water Works. In a legal universe in which Congress can be expected to correct the problem in that case—if it is indeed a problem—the pressure for agency correction would be greatly reduced. And there are other possible problems. Suppose that, in a world not so very different from our own, agencies are systematically distrusted, in part because they are not technically expert after all, in part because they are highly susceptible to the power of self-interested private groups, moving their decisions in predictable directions. In such a world, the argument for purposive agency interpretation, in the face of statutory text, would be very weak. And in fact it is not difficult to imagine a legal system in which courts are, and should be, authorized to engage in purposive interpretation, and in which agencies must follow the text unless courts specifically instruct them not to do so. 
With these points we are able to have a better understanding of some continuing disputes about judicial review of agency action. Notwithstanding American Water Works and similar decisions, a number of cases insist that agencies adhere closely to statutory text. If these outcomes are to be defended, it must be with an expectation that Congress will correct the resulting problems, or with a belief that agencies, authorized to depart from text, will move regulatory law in undesirable directions. 131American Water Works v. EPA, 40 F.3d 1266, 1271 (DC Cir 1994). 132Id. 133Id. 134Id. 
Another contextual and empirical factor to consider is whether a regime of purposive interpretation by agencies and textualist interpretation by courts would be stable. We might imagine, pessimistically, that the anticipation of judicial review by textualist courts would cause agencies to adopt textualist methods, simply to maximize the chances of having their decisions sustained; agencies’ authority to depart from textualism would then become strictly nominal. If so, it would provide a reason, all else equal, for courts and agencies to adopt the same interpretive approach, although we would still face the important choice between across-the-board textualism or across-theboard purposivism. But we might also imagine, more optimistically, that reviewing courts defer to agencies’ adoption of a purposive interpretive style, even if the same courts would adopt a textualist approach when deciding cases with no agency in the picture. Chevron, after all, can easily be understood to allow the agency some latitude to choose between interpretive approaches, and to vary from the approach the court itself would adopt. In this scenario, the agency would have no need to mimic the judges’ own interpretive approach, so a regime of agency purposivism and judicial textualism would not be excessively unstable. These possibilities, like the considerations above, exemplify the sort of institutional questions that a fully-developed analysis of agency interpretation must ask. 
Arbitrariness and ossification: a final note on administrative law. Under the Administrative Procedure Act, courts are required to set aside agency action that is “arbitrary” or “capricious.” But what do these terms mean? How should courts try to answer that question? For much of the modern period of administrative law, the answer has come from accounts of “agency failure.” Drawing attention to administrative susceptibility to powerful private groups, many critics, both on and off the federal bench, have endorsed the idea that courts should take a “hard look” at agency action, in order to reduce factional influences and promote better policymaking. 
What has been ignored, for much of the life of the resulting debate, are two sets of risks. The first involves judicial error, partly a product of sheer ignorance.135 The second and more fundamental involves systemic effects, above all in the form of large-scale alterations in administrative behavior, produced by the very fact of “hard look” review. It is now well-documented that such review has contributed to the “ossification” of noticeand-comment rulemaking, which now takes years, in part as a result of the effort to fend off judicial challenges. In light of the risk of invalidation, many agencies have turned away from notice-and-comment rulemaking altogether—with NHTSA, for example, attempting to promote automobile safety, for example, through ex post recalls, which is generally regarding as a senseless way to proceed. Our claim here is that the analysis of hard look review is ludicrously incomplete if it does not pay attention to institutional considerations of this kind. And indeed, much of the most impressive current work in administrative law attempts to incorporate judicial fallibility, and dynamic effects, into an account of how to assess whether agency action counts as “arbitrary” under the APA.136 135See Stephen Breyer, Vermont Yankee and the Courts' Role in the Nuclear Energy Controversy, 91 Harv. L. Rev. 1833 (1978). 136See, e.g., Richard Pierce, Seven Ways to Deossify Agency Rulemaking, 47 Admin. L. Rev. 59 (1995). 
Overview. Our principal recommendation has been that interpretive theory in legislation and administrative law should take an institutional turn. What of constitutional interpretation? Here we will say that academic theory about constitutional law does far better, on the score of institutional sensitivity, than academic theory about statutory interpretation. Constitutional theorists have, in part, already taken the institutional turn, with important work beginning in the 1970s. At the same time, the turn is as yet incomplete and has not been explicitly recognized as such; the treatment of basic questions in constitutional law, such as judicial review, has always suffered from institutional blindness, and there remain important pockets of contemporary theory that are resolutely oblivious to second-best questions. 
We will begin by emphasizing the extent to which the foundations of interpretive theory in constitutional law are deficient on the score of institutional sensitivity. Here the critical case is, of course, Marbury v. Madison137 and its inadequate (because excessively abstract and conceptual) justification for judicial review. After sketching the partial and salutary turn to institutional analysis in modern constitutional theory, and especially in the most recent work, we then discuss several important theorists who exemplify the remaining, unreconstructed resistance to institutional analysis: Ronald Dworkin, Akhil Amar, and Lawrence Lessig. We mean to press claims that parallel our claims about statutory interpretation. First, at a minimum, accounts of constitutional interpretation are incomplete without reference to institutional capacities. Second, and more ambitiously, institutional considerations may enable constitutional lawyers to converge upon interpretive approaches, while bracketing first-best accounts of constitutionalism or simply remaining agnostic about them. 
Marbury v. Madison. Is judicial review desirable? Does the Constitution call for it? These are old and much-debated questions. Our modest goal here is to do draw attention to a serious problem: Many of the most well-known arguments on behalf of judicial review, including those in Marbury itself, are blind to institutional considerations. They ignore the risk of judicial error and the possibility of dynamic consequences. In American law, Chief Justice John Marshall might even be deemed the father, or the founder, of the kind of institutional blindness that we are criticizing. 
Indeed, what is most striking about Marshall’s arguments for judicial review is that they depend on a series of fragile textual and structural inferences, ignoring the institutional issues at stake. Much of Marshall’s emphasis is on the unobjectionable claim that the constitution is “superior paramount law”; but it is possible to accept that claim without also thinking that courts are authorized to strike down statutes that violate that law. A constitution is “superior paramount law” in many legal systems that offer little or no judicial review of legislation. When Marshall famously asserts that “[it] is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is,”138 he is offering a conclusion, not an argument on its behalf. Marshall invokes the 1375 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137 (1803). 138Id. at 177. Supremacy Clause,139 which certainly mean that a law repugnant to the Constitution must yield; but that clause offers nothing in support of the institutional claim that courts have the power to strike down laws that, in their judgment, are unconstitutional. Marshall’s textual and structural inferences are very weak, and no source of constitutional meaning clearly settles the question. Any evaluation of Marshall’s conclusion must depend, in large part, on institutional considerations. 
If it appears odd to suggest that judicial review need not be a part of the American constitutional fabric, a reading of the historical materials should dispel the appearance.140 Larry Kramer urges that for the framers, the "Constitution was not ordinary law, not peculiarly the stuff of courts and judges." Instead it was "a special form of popular law, law made by the people to bind their governors."141 For many members of the revolutionary generation, constitutional principles were subject to "popular enforcement,"142 that is, public insistence on compliance with the Constitution, rather than judicial activity. "It was the legislature's delegated responsibility to decide whether a proposed law was constitutionally authorized, subject to oversight by the people. Court simply had nothing to do with it, and they were acting as interlopers if they tried to second-guess the legislature's decision."143 Kramer traces the controversial early growth of the practice of judicial review, with many seeing it as an "act of resistance." At the founding, a "handful of participants saw a role for judicial review, though few of these imagined it as a powerful or important device, and none seemed anxious to emphasize it. Others were opposed . . . . The vast majority of participants were still thinking in terms of popular constitutionalism and so focused on traditional political means of enforcing the new charter; the notion of judicial review simply never crossed their minds."144 
In Kramer's account, constitutional limits would be enforced not through courts, but as a result of republican institutions and the citizenry's own commitment to its founding document. Kramer raises serious doubts about the understanding in Marbury v. Madison and in particular about judicial supremacy in the interpretation of the Constitution. He suggests that for some of the framers, judicial review was "a substitute for popular resistance" and to be used "only when the unconstitutionality of a law was clear beyond dispute."145 What is important for our purposes is the idea that at the American founding, the supremacy of the Constitution was clear, but judicial enforcement was not, in part because of ambivalence about which institutions would be well-suited to ensuring compliance. 
Of course judicial review is, at present, constitutionally respectable to say the least; we do not mean to argue against it here. But it is easy to imagine constitutional systems that would refuse to give judges the power to strike down legislation. If judges are corrupt, biased, poorly-informed, or otherwise unreliable, it would hardly make sense to entrust judges with that power. And if legislative officials could be trusted to be 139See U.S. Const. Art. VI, cl. 2 (“Laws of the United States” made “in pursuance of [the Constitution] . . . shall be the Supreme Law of the Land”). 140See Larry D. Kramer, We the Court, 115 Harv. L. Rev. 1 (2001). 141Id. at 10. 142Id. at 40. 143Id. at 49. 144Id. at 54. 145Id. at 74. faithful to constitutional commands, the need for judicial review would be greatly diminished. Or suppose that a constitutional system feared, with reason, that the power of judicial review would weaken the attention paid by other institutions to constitutional requirements—so that judicial review, it was thought, would weaken the grip of constitutional limitations on other branches. This conjecture, empirical in character, has been made in the United States as elsewhere.146 A system of this kind might be accepted by people who believe emphatically in constitutionalism, but who think that judicial review will tend to undermine rather than to promote its goals. Hence the analysis of the Marbury question itself must depend, in part, on the same considerations that we have been stressing throughout. 
It is possible to draw a general conclusion. In many domains, the question is posed whether one institution should review the acts of another, and if so, the intensity with which that review should occur. This question arises, for example, in the context of constitutional challenges; attacks on criminal convictions; review of punitive damage awards by juries; appellate review of trial court findings; and judicial review of agency decisions of law, fact, and policy. In all of these areas, it is important to pay close attention to institutional variables. The costs of error and the costs of decision are crucial. It is necessary to examine dynamic effects. There is no sensible acontextual position on the question whether review, of one institution or another, should be intense or deferential, or indeed available at all. 
Modern constitutional theory. We do not mean to claim that Marbury’s institutional blindness fairly represents all of subsequent constitutional theory in America. Many important strands of post-Marbury theory have been grounded in accounts of institutional capacities. Most familiar is Thayer’s idea that the Constitution might properly be treated, or interpreted, in one way by a legislature and another way by a court, in light of the distinctive characteristics of the interpreting institution. Among the modern refinements of this idea are Alexander Bickel’s legal process account of the distinctive attributes of courts as constitutional interpreters, although that account glorified courts’ insulation (“the ways of the scholar”) while overlooking the informational deficits that insulation produces;147 and Lawrence Sager’s idea that legislatures might properly be charged with responsibility for underenforced constitutional norms. In general, it is unsurprising that a body of theory pervasively structured around the countermajoritarian difficulty should display some sensitivity to institutional role, if only in the stylized, abstract manner of the legal process tradition. In this light, it is perhaps most accurate to say that constitutional theory has always taken some account of the institutional determinants of interpretation. 
Indeed, new contributions, of the 1990s and after, have displayed an increasingly sophisticated treatment of institutional attributes and capacities. First, lawyer-economists like Neil Komesar148 and Einer Elhauge149 drew upon transaction-cost economics and 146See James Bradley Thayer, John Marshall 107 (1901). 147Donald Horowitz, The Courts and Social Policy (1977). 148Neil K. Komesar, IMPERFECT ALTERNATIVES: CHOOSING INSTITUTIONS IN LAW, ECONOMICS, AND PUBLIC POLICY (1994). 149Einer R. Elhauge, Does Interest Group Theory Justify More Intrusive Judicial Review?, 101 YALE L.J. 31 (1991). interest-group theory to refute simple arguments for an aggressive judicial posture in constitutional cases—what Komesar calls “single-institutional” arguments that fail to compare all relevant costs and benefits of the available institutional alternatives.150 Consider the standard line that judges should intervene to correct failures in political markets. Formulated in a traditional legal process vocabulary by John Hart Ely, this view was translated into the vocabulary of public choice by libertarians and free-marketers in the 1980s. Komesar and Elhauge, however, make clear that process failures in the form of rent-seeking activity and differential interest-group access afflict the courts as well (Elhauge), and that whatever relative insulation judges enjoy comes at the price of severe informational deficits (Komesar), so that the judges are prone to stumble into empirical pitfalls. The premise of comparative judicial advantage underlying the standard line, then, is at best questionable, and defending that line has become far more complicated business.151 
A second, currently influential strand in recent constitutional theory might be called neo-Thayerian; it is represented by Jeremy Waldron,152 Mark Tushnet,153 and Larry Kramer,154 among others. Waldron has examined how legislative institutions help to resolve otherwise intractable political disagreements; Tushnet has revived and enriched the Thayerian concern with the debilitating effects of judicial guardianship on legislative performance; and Kramer, as we have seen, has worked to dispel overheated claims on behalf of ambitious, interventionist judicial review, especially by impeaching its historical pedigree. In general, the stylized abstractions about legislative and judicial capacities familiar to legal process have been improved by successive doses of realism and analytic sophistication, especially by the neo-Thayerians on the legislative side and by the lawyer-economists on the judicial side—although both camps have enriched our understanding across the whole institutional system, as is fitting for approaches that emphasize comparative institutional analysis and the avoidance of nirvana fallacies. 
These strands of recent constitutional theory might be described as involving institutional competence writ large; their focus is on the large-scale allocation of responsibility, for policymaking and lawmaking, between or among the courts and political branches. To these salutary developments we wish to add considerations of institutional competence writ small. To the extent that interpretive authority over certain questions has been allocated to the courts by some background theory of comparative competence, there remains the question what interpretive rules courts should use in constitutional cases. We will claim that important strands of constitutional theory still attempt to answer this last question in an institutional vacuum. The essential defect in these accounts is that they are entirely insensitive to the identity and capacities of the interpreter; they treat the interpreter, explicitly or implicitly, as a theorist much like the constitutional theorist himself, rather than a judicial bureaucrat deciding cases under constraints of time, information and expertise. We will consider three examples: the 150Komesar, supra note 17, at 6. 151But see Thomas W. Merrill, Does Public Choice Theory Justify Judicial Activism After All?, 21 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL’Y 219, 221-22 (1997) (responding to Elhauge and Komesar). 152See Jeremy Waldron, Law and Disagreement (2000). 153See Mark Tushnet, Taking the Constitution Away from the Courts (1999). 154See Larry D. Kramer, We the Court, 115 Harv. L. Rev. 1 (2001). interpretive accounts of Ronald Dworkin, Akhil Amar, and Lawrence Lessig. In important respects these theorists perpetuate, even amplify, the flaws in Marbury’s logic. 
Dworkin (redux), and a philosophical brief. Dworkin’s approach to constitutional law is nicely illuminated by an unusual brief submitted to the Supreme Court in the assisted suicide cases, a document widely known as “The Philosophers’ Brief.” 155 The brief bears Dworkin’s distinctive mark, and indeed Dworkin is listed as lead counsel. The Philosophers’ Brief offers an ambitious argument, one with considerable appeal. It says that some “deeply personal decisions pose controversial questions about how and why human life has value.156 In a free society, individuals must be allowed to make those decisions for themselves, out of their own faith, conscience, and convictions.” The brief urges that distinctions between “omissions” (failing to provide continued treatment) and “acts” (providing drugs that will produce death) are “based on a misunderstanding of the pertinent moral principles.” Drawing on the abortion cases, the brief says that every person “has a right to make the ‘most intimate and personal decisions central to person dignity and autonomy,’” a right that encompasses “some control over the time and manner of one’s death.”157 The brief thus urges the Court to declare a constitutional right to physician-assisted suicide. Dworkin’s personal gloss on the brief says that it “defines a very general moral and constitutional principle--that every competent person has the right to make momentous personal decisions, which invoke fundamental religious or philosophical convictions about life’s value for himself.”158 
Simply as a matter of political morality, the argument in the Philosopher’s Brief is certainly reasonable, and it cannot easily be shown to be wrong. But suppose that the Court was convinced by the argument in principle; should the Court have held that there is a right to physician-assisted suicide? This is not so clear. Before accepting the argument, it is necessary to ask about judicial competence to evaluate moral arguments of this sort, and also to ask facts and incentives. Perhaps the Court is not especially wellequipped to evaluate those arguments; and if consequences matter, the moral arguments might not be decisive in light of the risk that any right to physician-assisted suicide would, in practice, undermine rather than promote the autonomy of patients.159 
Many people, including Dworkin himself, appear to think that the Supreme Court should not much hesitate to find a constitutional right of some kind if it is presented with convincing (to the judges) philosophical arguments for that right, at least if the right “fits” with the rest of the legal fabric. For those who take an institutional perspective, this view is wrong. Courts may not understand what justice requires, or may not be good at producing justice even when they understand it. In these circumstances, their understanding of the Constitution is partly a product of their judgments about their own distinctive role as a social institution. Note that this claim does not depend on skepticism about moral or political arguments. It is reasonable to believe that judges are not wellequipped to engage in theoretically ambitious tasks, without also believing that political theory is itself problematic or useless. 155See The New York Review of Books, vol. 44, no. 5, p. 41 (1997). 156Id. 157Id. at 42. 158Id. at 41. 159As argued in Cass R. Sunstein, The Right to Die, 106 Yale L.J. 1123 (1997). 
Amar. Akhil Amar describes his preferred interpretive approach as “intratextualism.”160 The term denotes a textualism that makes extensive use of comparisons across clauses, even to the point of insisting that words appearing in widely separated contexts be given similar meanings—a technique capable of generating dramatic readings, such as the claim that the key to understanding the meaning of “speech” in the First Amendment is the meaning of “speech” in the Speech and Debate Clause. Amar’s target is what he calls “clause-bound” interpretation, the judicial practice of reading constitutional provisions and their accompanying history and precedent in (partial) isolation from textually related provisions. 
In its emphasis on the authority of constitutional text, and in its populist underpinnings, Amar’s account appears to lie at some polar opposite from Dworkin’s, in which the constitutional text does relatively little work and populism is hardly a defining ideal. Yet for our purposes the two accounts are on a par. What Dworkin and Amar share is a deep commitment to a sort of constitutional holism: a commitment to reading the Constitution (whether that is taken to denote the document’s text or the moral principles underlying constitutional law) as a coherent, integrated whole. It is this shared feature of holism or coherentism that unites our critique of Dworkin with our critique of Amar. Amar, like Dworkin, ignores the possibility that real-world judges charged with holistic interpretation will simply blunder, producing a pattern of incoherent outcomes, or, worse yet, producing an internally coherent but morally misguided vision of public law.161 
Amar recommends intratextualism as tool suitable to the courtroom as well as the classroom; indeed most of Amar’s intratextualist heroes are famous judges, especially John Marshall. Yet Amar pays no attention to the institutional capacities of the real-world judges who would be charged with practicing intratextualism; he ignores the judges’ interpretive capacities or their likely performance under the alternative regimes of intratextualism, on one hand, and clause-bound interpretation, on the other. Compared to the clause-bound alternative, intratextualism requires a more complicated and information-intensive inquiry, one that will reduce decisional accuracy whenever judges read the comparison texts mistakenly. So, for example, a judge who looks to the Speech and Debate Clause to illuminate the Free Speech Clause might well go badly wrong, given that the former provision predated the First Amendment and addresses very different problems. Amar gives us no reason to think that the illuminating effect of intratexualism will predominate over its error-producing effect. 
What’s worse, intratextualism in the hands of fallible judges risks producing a holistic, highly coherent, but fundamentally mistaken analysis, one that constitutionalizes a simultaneous misreading of a whole set of related provisions. Justice Douglas’ opinion in Griswold v. Connecticut,162 for example, offered a holistic, coherent account of the Bill of Rights as based upon a general principle of privacy; and it is an account that Amar 160See Akhil Reed Amar, Intratextualism, 112 Harv. L. Rev. 747 (1999). 161See Adrian Vermeule & Ernest A. Young, Hercules, Herbert and Amar: The Trouble with Intratextualism, 113 Harv. L. Rev. 730 (2000). 162381 U.S. 479 (1965). himself thinks is deeply mistaken.163 If Amar had a more realistic view of judges’ abilities as constitutional interpreters, he might prefer the limited incoherence of clausebound interpretation to a sweeping, integrated, but erroneous universal account. What Amar has done, in short, is to overlook the principle of second-best. Rather than asking “What interpretive methods should judges use?,” Amar has asked “What interpretive methods would I use, were I a judge?”—the question that, as we have seen, is a common cause of institutional blindness in interpretive theory. 
Lessig, Interpretation as Translation, and Compensating Adjustments. Similar problems beset Lawrence Lessig’s account of constitutional interpretation, which sees that practice as an exercise in “translation.”164 Translation is a particular version of originalism, of “fidelity” to the Constitution of the founding era. Lessig’s important insight is that judges might, in principle, act more faithfully to the original constitution by updating constitutional rules to meet changed circumstances than by adhering woodenly to the specific text chosen by the founding generation, or to their specific expectations. Just as a translator might do better to choose a colloquial analogue that captures the flavor of the original, rather than simply using a literal equivalent, so too the original meaning of the constitutional structure might, in changed circumstances, best be preserved by departures from the original understanding. In the area of federalism, for example, Lessig urges the Court to “make up” constitutional rules that restore the original balance between federal and state authority.165 “[T]o be faithful to the constitutional structure, the Court must be willing to be unfaithful to the constitutional text.”166 
Translation is, without doubt, a valuable contribution to first-best theorizing about constitutional interpretation. No other such account has, in recent years, generated as much comment and as many engaging applications.167 Translation is best viewed as a refinement of purposivism: like Hart and Sacks’ approach, translation boosts the level of interpretive generality from the specific intentions or expectations of a law’s framers to their ultimate aims or ends. But Lessig’s account also shares purposivism’s insensitivity to institutional considerations. Lessig fails to consider the possibility that judges might be poor translators, garbling meanings so badly that a simple-minded transliteration would preserve more of the original than would an ambitious and mistaken attempt to capture the original’s real sense. Judicial mistakes might make ambitious attempts at translation self-defeating, driving results further away from the original meaning rather than pushing results closer to it. In the federalism setting, for example, it is by no means obvious that making up rules to approximate the original balance is, even on Lessig’s theoretical premises, the right prescription for the Court. The Court might overshoot the mark by announcing stringent restrictions on federal authority that push constitutional law farther away from the founding balance than would deference to national political processes.168 163Amar, Intratextualism, supra note, at 797 & n. 196. In Amar’s view, the key to a coherentist reading of the Bill of Rights is constitutional populism, not libertarian privacy. See Akhil Reed Amar, The Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction (1998). 164Lawrence Lessig, Fidelity in Translation, 71 Tex. L. Rev. 1165 (1993). 165Lawrence Lessig, Translating Federalism: United States v. Lopez, 1995 Sup. Ct. Rev. 125, 192. 166Id. at 193. 167See generally Symposium, Fidelity in Translation, 65 Fordham Law Review (1997). 168This was one of the themes of Justice Souter’s dissent in United States v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549 (1995), which argued, among other things, that deference to rational congressional judgments about the scope of 
Here is another example, taken not from Lessig’s own work but from the secondary literature applying Lessig’s insights.169 Suppose that the original Constitution, rightly understood, bars delegations of legislative authority to the executive, and also bars the legislative veto. (Of course we do not mean to endorse or oppose either claim here). The circumstances of modern government are such, however, that delegations of legislative authority are pervasive, and there is no prospect of returning to the original understanding in this regard. The translation theorist might argue that judges should vote to uphold the legislative veto, even though it is clearly unconstitutional in isolation, on the ground that it is a “compensating adjustment”170 needed to restore the original structural balance among the branches of government.171 The legislative veto will, on this view, allow the legislature to limit and police the sweeping delegations of authority that it cannot avoid making. In fact Justice White’s dissent in the decision that invalidated the legislative veto urged upholding the veto on just this ground.172 
Of course there is a competing account. Perhaps the legislative veto falls afoul of the translated Constitution, because it aggravates the power of self-interested private groups over processes of lawmaking, thus defeating the goal of bicameralism and presentment, which is (on this view) to reduce the role of factions in government. On this view, for the Court to uphold the legislative veto might move public law farther away from, rather than closer to, the structure and purposes of the original Constitution. Now this view may be wrong. The problem is that it is no simple task to identify the commitments of the Constitution that are to be translated to fit with modern circumstances. As with purposes, so with commitments: There is no simple task of discovery here. 
We are confident that Lessig would not disagree with this claim. But from the institutional perspective, the idea that judges should translate original structures by searching for offsetting constitutional adjustments is defective if unaccompanied by an account of judicial capacities. It takes great confidence in those capacities to think that judges can identify the net effects of such large-scale reforms with enough precision to warrant jettisoning clear constitutional provisions and settled constitutional rules. The overall effect of the legislative veto, or of its invalidation, is a major research question for experts in political science.173 There is little reason to believe that generalist judges, devoting a brief time to the subject and possessed of limited information, can form even a plausible view of the relevant complexities. Judicial competence is not the only the problem with idea of translation through compensating adjustments; there are serious conceptual puzzles as well.174 But for our purposes the important objection is that the interstate commerce power better captured the original understanding. See 514 U.S. at --- (Souter, J., dissenting). 169See Peter B. McCutchen, Mistakes, Precedent and the Rise of the Administrative State: Toward a Constitutional Theory of the Second Best, 80 Cornell L. Rev. 1 (1994). 170Daryl Levinson, Framing Transactions in Constitutional Law, 111 Yale L.J. 547 (2001). 171McCutchen, supra, at 37-38. 172See Chadha, 462 U.S. 919, 994-95 (1983) (White, J., dissenting). 173See Jessica Korn, The Power of Separation: American Constitutionalism and the Myth of the Legislative Veto 4-5 (1996). 174Levinson, supra, observes that identifying a compensating adjustment depends upon highly contestable judgments about the framing of constitutional problems: why exactly should the constitutionality of the legislative veto be assessed in relation to the nondelegation doctrine, rather than in isolation? We add that a translation assumes an optimistic account of the judges’ abilities as translators, an account that becomes increasingly questionable as judicial departures from text and original expectations become increasingly ambitious, and as the systemic effects of the adjustment become increasingly difficult for generalist judges to predict. 
Some generalizations. We can generalize these points about Dworkin, Amar and Lessig in two ways; both are familiar from the earlier, institutional account of statutory interpretation. The first point is that a master principle of constitutional authority—law as integrity (Dworkin), or the primacy of constitutional text (Amar), or fidelity through translation (Lessig)—taken by itself, can yield no conclusions at all about proper interpretive method. With a certain assessment of judicial capacities, judges might do better, by Amar’s own lights, with clause-bound interpretation than with intratextualism. On Lessig’s own premises, fallible judges might be better translators if they stick to the unambitious transliteration that Lessig disparages. As for Dworkin, consider the possibility that a fallible judge charged with implementing law-as-integrity might do better, from the moral point of view, by opting for a relatively mechanical adherence to prior rulings, described at a low level of generality, than by ambitiously attempting to bring principled coherence to large areas of law. Thus an epistemically humble Dworkinian judge might look a great deal like the incremental, common-law constitutional jurist, who defers to precedent on the basis of a Burkean appreciation of the limits of individuals’ cognitive capacities.175 
The second, larger point is the possibility of incompletely theorized agreements about interpretive method in constitutional cases. Interpreters who hold various firstorder accounts of constitutional authority might, for example, converge on a practice of clause-bound precedent. The Amarian would do so to avoid large-scale, coherent mistakes by fallible intratextualist judges; the Dworkinian would do so because any more ambitious attempt at justificatory ascent might predictably do worse, on Dworkin’s own criteria of moral integrity, in the hands of judges who do not resemble Hercules, Dworkin’s idealized judge. Moreover, where agreements of this sort are possible, the underlying disagreements between competing accounts of the Constitution’s authority could be bracketed or ignored; with respect at least to the role of precedent, it would be possible to choose an approach to interpretation without committing to any such first-best position. 
To be sure, any of these stories might or might not be plausible; the empirical agenda we mean to sketch would consist of investigations along these and similar lines. The important point is just that constitutional interpretation is not the same in a secondbest world as in a first-best world. As with statutes, so with the Constitution: any account of constitutional interpretation that overlooks the decisive role of institutional considerations is for that reason defective. 
A note on tradition in constitutional law. These ideas very much bear on the continuing debate about the proper role of tradition in constitutional law. Justice Scalia, critical factor, among others, in deciding upon the proper scope of the transactional frame is the capacity of judges to manage the increased complexity of larger frames. 175This is the picture drawn in David A. Strauss, Common Law Constitutional Interpretation, 63 U Chi L Rev 977 (1996). among others, has urged that in the face of textual ambiguity, judges should follow traditions described at a low-level of generality. They should not strike down legislation unless it contravenes actual practices as vindicated by history.176 “We refer to the most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified.”177 It would be possible to defend this approach on Burkean grounds, with the claim that longstanding practices are likely to be justified, or good, by virtue of their historical pedigree. And for those who dislike Burke, it would be possible to respond that longstanding practices might reflect power or arbitrariness, and hence that tradition is a bad source of constitutional law and in particular of constitutional rights.178 Much of the debate over tradition has been cast in these terms. 
With an institutional focus, the debate looks very different. Perhaps traditionalism is best defended on the ground that judges are highly fallible human beings, and that if they are unmoored from either text or traditions, they might well make mistakes.179 In fact we could imagine a society, different but not unrecognizably from our own, in which this defense of traditionalism would be convincing to a diverse group of people. Suppose, for example, that political processes functioned extremely well, in the sense that unjust or ill-considered outcomes were highly unlikely, and were corrected politically when they occurred. Suppose too that in such a nation, judges were likely to make big blunders, in the form of decisions that were confused or even invidious, and very hard to correct once made. In such a society, tradition might well be the best foundation of constitutional rights where text is unclear. Perhaps other bright-lines rules—such as a strong presumption in favor of upholding enacted law—would be better still. The point is that an evaluation of traditionalism, as of any other interpretive method, is partly empirical, and based on an assessment of how different institutions are likely to perform under the various alternatives. Without some empirical projections, it is hard to venture sensible answers. 
Our emphasis has been on the interpretation of texts, taken as the sorts of commands found in constitutions, statutes, and regulations. But precedents are of course texts too, and in deciding what a precedent means, a common law court should pay close attention to institutional considerations. This point is often well-understood in the common law context, especially in the academic literature on contract interpretation,180 but not always, for academics often evaluate common law decisions simply by asking whether the existing cases can be unified by an attractive conceptual principle. That is not the question courts should ask; at least it is not the only question. When common law judges, as opposed to theorists of the common law, decide whether to characterize 176See Michael H v. Gerald D, 491 US 110 (1989). 177Id. at 127 n. 6. 178See John Hart Ely, Democracy and Distrust 62 (1980). 179Justice Scalia suggests a similar point: “Because [general] traditions provide such imprecise guidance, they permit judges to dictate rather than discern the society’s views.” 491 US at . 180The possibility of formalism in the operational, rule-based sense, justified on the basis of claims about judicial competence and ex ante effects, has recently commanded great deal of interest in the literature on contract interpretation. See, e.g., Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law Under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error, 94 Nw. U. L. Rev. 749 (2000); Robert E. Scott, The Case for Formalism in Relational Contract, 94 Nw. U. L. Rev. 847 (2000). precedents narrowly or broadly, the questions of judicial fallibility and of dynamic effects are central. 
Consider two currently disputed issues frequently faced by common law courts: whether to expand employee protection against at-will discharge181 and whether to cabin punitive damage awards by juries.182 It would be possible to analyze precedents in a style akin to Dworkin’s, asking what principle puts them in the most attractive light. Under this approach, some people would undoubtedly conclude that courts should limit the power of employers to discharge employees, eventually creating, perhaps, a right to be fired only on job-related grounds. And other people would undoubtedly erect barriers to apparently unreasonable punitive damage awards, expanding judicial power of remittitur to ensure, for example, a sensible relationship between the compensatory award and the punitive award. 
It should be clear that any effort to proceed in this way should pay close attention to two problems. First, judges might not know what they are doing. In the labor market, for example, some observers suggest that arbitrary discharges are actually rare,183 and that a right to be discharged only for job-related reasons would not really protect deserving employees, but increase meritless litigation, with employees being the victims (through reduced wages or employment). Any significant shift in the common law could have large systemic effects on the employment market, and courts are not in a good position to anticipate those effects. With respect to punitive damages, it is not so clear that there should be a sensible relationship, all of the time, between the compensatory award and the punitive award. If, for example, the injury is very hard to detect in most cases, the standard economic approach calls for a large multiplier. In any case state legislators have been very much involved in the process of considering relevant reforms. There has been active debate, in many states, about the permissible grounds for discharge, and even more active debate about cabining large punitive damage awards. Perhaps judicial decisions, attractive in principle, would dampen those debates. Perhaps cautious and incremental judgments, less attractive in principle, would represent a form of deference to ongoing processes that are more likely to settle the relevant areas well. 
Here as elsewhere we do not mean to reach a final judgment on the issues in question. And by drawing attention to institutional considerations in the common law setting, we hope that we are not saying anything surprising or novel. Too often, however, the institutional considerations are placed in the background, and the interpretation of precedents is undertaken in a way that is indifferent to them. 
We have argued that issues of legal interpretation cannot be adequately resolved without attention to institutional issues. An extraordinary variety of distinguished people have explored interpretive strategies without attending to the fact that such strategies will inevitably be used by fallible people and with likely dynamic effects extending far 181For a helpful overview, see Mark Rothstein et al., Employment Law 680-699 (2d ed. 1999). 182Campbell v. State Farm, 2001 UT 89; 432 Utah Adv. Rep. 44; 2001 Utah LEXIS 170 (2001), cert. granted, S. Ct. (2002). 183See, e.g., Richard Epstein, In Defense of the Contract at Will, 51 U Chi L Rev 947 (1984). beyond the case at hand. Two mechanisms seem principally responsible for this institutional blindness. One is a role-related trap: interpretive theorists ask themselves “how would I decide the case, if I were a judge?”—a question whose very form suppresses the key consideration that the relevant interpretive rules are to be used by judges rather than theorists. Another is a cognitive trap: specialists, such as legal academics, criticize the insufficiently nuanced opinions issued by generalist judges in particular cases, overlooking that the same judges might well have done far worse, over a series of cases, by attempting to emulate the specialists’ approach. Overall, the key question seems to be, "how would perfect judges decide cases?" rather than "how should fallible judges proceed, in light of their fallibility and their place in a complex system of private and public ordering?" 
Our minimal submission has been that answers to the former question are hopelessly inadequate. We have argued as well that in some cases, an appreciation of judicial fallibility and of dynamic effects will enable people to converge on an appropriate approach despite their disagreements about the right path for perfect judges to follow. At the very least, an appreciation of institutional questions should make it possible for people to have a better appreciation of what they are disagreeing about, and also of strategies for making some progress in the future. We have emphasized the importance of asking about the likelihood of legislative oversight and correction; the values of planning and predictability, and the effects, on these values, of one or another interpretive choice in the particular context; and the actual performance of courts that follow textualism, purposivism, or some other approach. Here there is much room for empirical work, involving, for example, the nature and effects of different interpretive approaches within different states, the responsiveness of state legislatures to those different approaches, and the possible connection between formality in interpretation and legislative attentiveness in various domains of law. 
If we evaluate interpretive issues in institutional terms, we will not necessarily adopt any particular approach to interpretation. But we have suggested that once the question is properly framed, it becomes easy to see why reasonable people might favor a formalist approach to statutes in some or many contexts, not on the basis of indefensible ideas about how words work, but on simple institutional grounds. On this view, formalism might be accepted, not because the Constitution requires it (it doesn't), and not because formalism is required by a proper understanding of the concept of law (it isn't), but when and because formalism is the best path for generalist judges who are often illequipped to resolve the policy issues at stake. For the same reasons, we have indicated some enthusiasm for the emerging view that administrative agencies ought to be allowed a degree of flexibility in their own interpretations, flexibility that goes well beyond that of courts. Agencies are in a better position to know whether a particular result, apparently compelled by text, really is senseless. They are also in a better position to know whether a departure from text will unsettle the regulatory scheme in a damaging way. If agencies ought not to be given this interpretive flexibility, it is also for institutional reasons, as, for example, in the claim that agencies are subject to the influence of powerful private groups, or in the suggestion that Congress will provide sufficiently prompt corrections of regulatory decisions that, while faithful to statutory text, produce significant harm. Of course there are many empirical issues here. 
In many ways the question of constitutional law is harder, simply because people disagree so sharply about what constitutes a good outcome. Ironically, however, constitutional law has already witnessed a significant if partial institutional turn: Many people emphasize that any approach to the Constitution must take account of the institutional strengths and weaknesses of the judiciary. Even here, however, we have seen that influential voices in constitutional law argue in favor of interpretive strategies in a way that is inadequately attuned to the issue of institutional capacities. Those who emphasize philosophical arguments, or the idea of holistic or intratextual interpretations, seem to us to have given far too little attention to institutional questions. Here as elsewhere, our minimal submission is that a claim about appropriate interpretation is incomplete if it does not pay attention to considerations of administrability, judicial capacities, and systemic effects in addition to the usual imposing claims about legitimacy and constitutional authority. But we have also suggested the possibility that in constitutional law, an assessment of those issues might lead to convergence, on appropriate methods, from those who disagree about what ideal judges should do. The New Deal period culminated in a convergence of this kind. In the current period, it is revealing that many people, from their diverse points of view, now seem decreasingly satisfied with the idea that judges should interpret ambiguous constitutional provisions in a way that seems, to those judges, best on grounds of political morality. 
Our major goal here has not, however, been to argue on behalf of any particular approach to interpretation. Our ambition has been at once narrower and more critical-- to show that interpretive theory, as elaborated by its most able practitioners, has been remarkably indifferent to institutional issues, proceeding as if judges are reliable and as if their choice of approach lacks systemic consequences. We think that this indifference is a kind of pathology, produced, in large part, by the legal culture's continuing insistence on framing the question of interpretation as, "What would you do, when faced with a problem of this sort?" We hope to have shown that this is a misleading question to ask, and one that has quite damaging consequences not only for the academic study of law, but for legal institutions as well. Once the question is properly reframed, it should be possible to see interpretive questions in a new and better light, and perhaps to adopt new and better answers as well. 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu Adrian Vermeule University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 
a-vermeule@uchicago.edu William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992) Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993) Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994) Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
For their valuable comments, we are most grateful to Cary Coglianese,' Mark Kelman, 2 and the team of Theodore Eisenberg, Jeffrey Rachlinski, and Martin Wells (hereafter ER&W).3 ER&W offer a great deal of information about the real world of punitive damages, presenting a mixed verdict on our basic claims. Coglianese provides an impressively detailed account of the problem of achieving coherence in the world of administrative penalties. Kelman questions the importance of coherence and also urges that in many cases, people's judgments may be better if they lack a global perspective. We are pleased to say that we have few significant disagreements with the three commentaries. In brief, we think that ER&W's evidence is fully consistent with our basic claims, despite a conservative test; that Coglianese has elaborated helpfully on the problem of achieving coherence in civil penalties; and that Kelman's basic arguments should not be taken to dispute our claims, which are less different from his own than a reader of his commentary might infer. Apart from these points, which we elaborate below, we offer a more general suggestion, one that is perhaps insufficiently emphasized in our main paper: Even if it is demonstrated, incoherence usually is not taken to be outrageous. The persistence of incoherence, in many domains of the law, is closely connected with this psychological fact. 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago. 
Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University 
Herbert D. Kelleher Professor of Business, University of Texas, Austin. 
Associate Professor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 
I. Cary Coglianese, Bounded Evaluation: Cognition, Incoherence, and Regulatory Policy, 54 STAN. L. Rnv. 1217 (2002). 
(2002). 
ExperimentalIncoherence with Real-World Coherence in Punitive Damages, 54 STAN. L. REv.1239 (2002). 
1293 
ER&W provide an instructive look at the real-world of punitive damage awards. The most novel part of their essay offers some intriguing data analysis, suggesting that the incoherence that we describe actually exists, and hence that there is a "degree of support"4 for our claims in real-world data. But thinking that few "complaints about a legal system resonate louder than charges of incoherence," 5 ER&W object that if our argument is right, we should "be observing a legal system on the verge of collapse," 6 because any "society would find a torrent of incoherent legal judgments to be unfair, unjust, unpredictable, and unmanageable." 7 And in a discussion of prior findings that appears to be in some tension with their new analysis, ER&W contend that the system of punitive damages is actually quite coherent, showing a high degree of predictability. Of the three comments, ER&W's raises the most complex issues, and we shall discuss those issues in some detail. 
ER&W's innovative empirical analysis is based on their (welcome) claim that our essay can be used to generate testable hypotheses. They offer three such hypotheses. The first involves juries. In their view, we would predict that juries, which make decisions in isolation, would produce, across diverse categories of cases, the same statistical relationship between punitive awards and compensatory awards. The second hypothesis involves judges, who observe cases from many categories. ER&W think that we would predict that judges will be engaging in cross-category comparisons and hence that the effects of case categories "should be greater in judge-tried cases than in jurytried cases."' Perhaps most interestingly, ER&W urge that if we are right, judges will offer higher awards than juries in cases involving the more prominent category of harm. The reason is that in cross-category comparisons, the awards in the more prominent category typically increase; and judges, in ER&W's view, are engaged in cross-category comparisons. ER&W rightly say that the third hypothesis seems counterintuitive, even a bit odd. Could it be right to suggest that when the harm is prominent, judges will produce higher damage awards than juries? 
Comparing actual awards in cases involving bodily injury to actual awards in cases not involving bodily injury, ER&W find support for all three hypotheses. For juries, the ratio of compensatory to punitive awards is about the same between cases involving bodily injury and cases not involving bodily injury. For judges, punitive awards have a far higher ratio to compensatory awards in cases involving bodily injury. Most strikingly, the counterintuitive prediction is vindicated. The punitive award is likely to be much higher, compared to the compensatory award, when judges are making the decision than when juries are doing so. 
ER&W have done a very creative job of adapting our account of punitive damage assessment to produce testable hypotheses for their extensive data set. We are of course delighted that our model passed the tests that they set for it. Still, we should point out that these tests are overly severe and that our model might have failed them even if it is basically correct. Three points deserve mention. First, ER&W's analyses use compensatory damages as a proxy for the "outrage x harm"9 component of our model. But in our model, as in the law, compensatory damages are linked only to the harm, not the outrageousness of the defendant's behavior. The outrageousness (often called egregiousness) of the defendant's behavior is not represented in the ER&W analyses, though it is central to our model of how punitive damages are set. Second, ER&W's analysis takes for granted that judges consider each case in a broader context, one that includes cases from other categories. What is certainly true, and what we emphasized, is that judges could consider cases through a wider viewscreen because, unlike juries, they have encountered a varied set of cases. However, we are not aware of any direct evidence that judges do spontaneously consider particular cases in a broad context. Indeed, our original paper drew on work by Guthrie, Rachlinski, and Wistrich in raising doubts about precisely that point. 1° 
The Supreme Court apparently has similar doubts about the width of the screen judges use. In Leathermanthe Court found it necessary to require even appellate judges to engage in an explicit comparison (i.e., to use a wide screen) in evaluating the constitutionality of damage awards, rather than trusting their experience." Finally, ER&W's analyses use the contrast between cases with Incoherent Judgments, 54 STAN. L. REV. 1153, 1166(2002). 
Mind, 86 CORNELL L. REv. 778 (2001). 
Differences in the institutional competence of trial judges and appellate judges are consistent with our conclusion. In[BMW ofNorth Am. v.G]ore [517 U.S. 559 (1996)], we instructed courts evaluating a punitive damages award's consistency with due process to consider three criteria: (1)the degree or reprehensibility of the defendant's misconduct, (2) the disparity between the harm (or potential harm) suffered by the plaintiff and the punitive damages award, and (3) thedifference between the punitivedamagesawardedby thejury andthe civil penalties authorizedor imposed in comparablecases. Only with respect to the first Gore inquiry do the district courts have a somewhat superior vantage over courts of appeals, and even then the advantage exists primarily with respect to issues turning on witness credibility and demeanor. Trial courts and appellate courts seem equally capable of analyzing the second factor. And the third Gorecriterion, which calls for a broad legal comparison, seems more suited to the expertise of appellate courts. Considerations of institutional competence therefore fa itoltip the balance in favor ofdeferential appellate review. [-Vol. 54:1293 and without physical injury as a proxy for the prominence of the case category. While certainly a reasonable operationalization, this classification is imperfect since the "non-physical" class includes many highly prominent categories (as possible examples, consider sexual harassment and racial discrimination' 2), again limiting our hypotheses' chances to succeed. In sum, because our account of punitive damage assessment succeeded on this somewhat unfavorable terrain, what ER&W call "modest" support should probably be interpreted as much stronger.'3 
One further point. ER&W contend that we predict that case categories will play no role in jury cases; but the claim strikes us as too strong, and it is their speculation, not ours. Indeed, compensatory awards typically differ among categories, and hence categories will matter insofar as compensatory awards operate as anchors. In our study compensatory damages were held constant. But in an earlier study, mentioned briefly in our article, compensatories were not constant in the isolation condition, and we found a large difference between categories in the isolation condition.' 4 
Notwithstanding the evidence just discussed, ER&W urge that "research on quantitative judgments demonstrates substantial consistency in judgments."' 5 Drawing largely on an impressive and influential study by Eisenberg, Wells, and three co-authors,16 ER&W claim that the legal system has proved its "ability to reduce and manage the limitations of human judgment.' 7 In our view, the real-world data do not support this optimistic conclusion, at least if the optimism is applied to jury determinations.' 8 We have noted that in Leatherman, the Supreme Court found the risks of arbitrary jury outcomes sufficiently troubling to require de novo review of the constitutionality of jury awards by appellate courts. Further, over half of punitive damage awards are reduced or overturned.' 9 The process of appellate review can impose on all parties involved substantial transaction costs and lead to situations in which justice delayed becomes justice denied. 
Before explaining the problem, we emphasize our agreement with many of ER&W's conclusions. Punitive awards are indeed relatively rare. They are especially uncommon in cases lacking intentional misconduct. Significantly, the compensatory award plays a substantial role in determining the punitive award. For this reason punitive awards are far from entirely unpredictable. But ER&W downplay the existence of a great deal of noise in the system. The studies that purport to show predictability find that the compensatory award explains 46-47% of the variation in punitive damage awards, an impressive figure to be sure, but one that leaves the majority of the variation unexplained. The claim of predictability is further weakened by the fact that in the relevant work, the focus of analysis is not on actual punitive damage awards, but on the logarithm of such awards, which is the dependent variable that is being explained. Any transformation of real awards into log awards will naturally shrink much of the variation in the size of punitive damages awards. But defendants pay their penalties in dollars, not in log dollars, and the uncertainty they face when a punitive award could range from $10,000 to $1,000,000 is rather more impressive than is conveyed when the same range is expressed in log units (7 vs 9). With respect to predictability, judicial oversight and appellate review can and do help, but we respectfully disagree with ER&W's suggestion that the legal system has overcome the cognitive problems that we have described. Consider the fact that another empirical study, based on a larger sample than that used by ER&W, finds that punitive awards "are highly variable and unpredictable." 20 
But coherence, not predictability, is our focus here. To the extent that ER&W are able to establish predictability, they have not established coherence. To see this point, begin with the fact that because of the difficulty of translating moral judgments into dollars, anchors will loom very large. The compensatory award is the most readily available anchor, and in light of the translation problem, it should be no surprise that that award helps to explain the punitive award. And when people are making judgments in isolation, the anchor will have an especially big effect, indeed a bigger effect than it has when people look at two or more cases at once. Here, then, is the problem. Because REV. 1093, 1115-16 (1996) (citing studies finding that jury punitive damage awards are reduced in fifty percent or more of product liability cases). 
Punitive DamageAwards, 42 J.L. & EcoN. 527, 571 (1999). The authors do find that compensatory awards, alongside other identifiable factors (such as lawsuit type, firm characteristics, and location of suit), can explain as much as 50% of the variation in punitive awards. But without prior information that there will be a punitive award, "only 1-2 percent of the variation in punitive awards can be explained." Id. compensatory awards in certain categories of cases (for example, commercial fraud cases) are typically larger than compensatory awards in other categories of cases (for example, personal injury cases), punitive awards will be larger in the former set of cases as well, regardless of the relative outrageousness of cases from the two categories. The existing research shows that this difference is entirely predictable. But that very difference is a form of predictable incoherence in the sense that we discuss. The reason is that people are most unlikely to approve of the pattern of outcomes that emerges from their own judgments in isolation. And one reason for the disapproval is that anchors have a larger effect on judgments in isolation than on comparative judgments. We can now see that if, as ER&W urge, compensatory awards are acting as the anchor, people's judgments will appear to make sense on their own, but will not make sense, by people's own lights, when taken together. 
In this light, it is possible to dissolve the tension between the apparently conflicting empirical claims reported by ER&W. First, punitive awards do indeed have some degree of predictability (although that predictability is more impressive for scholars who think in terms of logarithms than for plaintiffs and defendants, who think about actual dollars). Second, punitive awards can be shown to be incoherent, in the sense that people's decisions in isolation do not match their decisions if they are engaging in cross-category comparisons. The two claims are not in conflict. 
Now let us turn to ER&W's broadest claim. They contend that if incoherence is pervasive, the legal system would be "on the verge of collapse,"2' and people would be up in arms. The "paradox" lies in the fact that "the system seems to work well, despite the well-founded concerns"2 of our article. 
We do not think that there is any paradox. Because people do not naturally seek coherence, it seems to us wrong to suggest that incoherence, in the domain of punitive damages, would produce any kind of public outcry. Suppose, for example, that a presidential candidate of either party, armed with sensational data, wanted to make an energetic and dramatic campaign speech, in which he demonstrated, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that punitive awards in some categories of cases were far too low when taken in comparison with awards in other categories of cases. If you were the candidate's campaign manager, would you urge him to deliver-that speech? Would the speech be taken to have uncovered an outrage? Would the candidate make a public splash? We doubt it. For the same reason that people do not spontaneously worry over coherence, incoherence, when brought to public attention, is a reason for embarrassment and possibly reform-but hardly an outrage. Because of the relative indifference to incoherence, the system may appear "to work well"2 even when it in fact does not. 
Like ER&W, Coglianese is concerned to connect our arguments to realworld evidence about law and policy.24 But while ER&W concentrate on punitive damage awards, Coglianese examines administrative penalties. His overall goal is to show that incoherence cannot be established simply by finding disparities in congressionally-specified penalty amounts. It is necessary to ask many more questions. 
Coglianese says, rightly, that our discussion of administrative penalties is focused on what he calls the problem of "comparative coherence."2 He insists that seemingly inexplicable variations in dollar amounts are only partly informative. Suppose, for example, that those who injure birds are subject to a federal penalty of $20,000, but that those who subject employees to dangerous working conditions are subject to a federal penalty of $10,000. Is this proof of incoherence? Not necessarily. For example, employers may be subject to stiff, additional penalties under state law while those who injure birds may not be; the lower federal penalties may make a great deal of sense once federal and state penalties are taken together. It is also possible that the government regularly enforces the latter statute, and infrequently enforces the former-and hence the disparity in penalties is sensibly responsive to varying enforcement levels. 
Coglianese offers an impressive account of the many variables that must be examined in order to reach firm conclusions about coherence. He is correct to insist that judgments of incoherence might themselves reflect a form of bounded rationality-a failure to take account of considerations (such as additional penalties and the level of enforcement activity) that actually matter a great deal. But we are sure that Coglianese would agree that people, including policymakers, rarely attempt to make anything like the necessary assessment. It would be heroic, and in our view implausible, to think that the existing array of administrative penalties reflects considered judgments about the factors that Coglianese rightly identifies. So too with existing variations in cost-per-lifesaved. As Coglianese urges, no sensible person could urge that every program for risk reduction should have the same cost-per-life-saved. Contextual factors, including distributional issues, matter a great deal. But incorporating contextual factors is most unlikely to rescue the current system from the charge of incoherence. 

Coglianese raises the possibility that after all relevant sanctions have been imposed, there will be less incoherence than it would seem if we focus on only one type of penalty. But we think that Coglianese would agree that incoherence is likely to be substantial, all the more in light of the fact that the greater the number of different proceedings that must be initiated to achieve a coherent penalty, the less likely it is that a sensible overall outcome will be achieved. The execution of a complex strategy is harder than a simpler one, and a complex task will inevitably have higher transaction costs. Indeed, we greatly doubt that administrative penalties are in fact set through deliberate consideration of all the variables to which Coglianese draws attention. The relative coherence of penalties within categories itself suggests that these variables do not play a major role, simply because there is no reason to assume that the variables in question are kept constant within categories. For example, if we compare a violation of the African Elephant Conservation Act 26 and a violation of the law protecting Bald and Golden Eagles (carrying the same penalty),27 it is not obvious why the existence of other liability, or the availability of other remedies to ensure compliance, or the probability of detection, and so forth, would be the same in both cases. 
One of the most striking features of Coglianese's discussion is the support that it gives to our claim that full coherence is exceedingly difficult or perhaps impossible to achieve in practice (assuming we could agree on what it means in principle). Nonetheless, we think that much can be done to reduce the most serious anomalies. This point brings us directly to Kelman's paper. 
Our major concern with Kelman's interesting discussionn2 is that he has taken issue with claims that we do not make. Contrary to Kelman's suggestion, we do not believe that category-bound judgments are always inferior to the judgments made in cross-category comparisons. And in analyzing punitive damage reform, our approach is prescriptive rather than normative. We seek to show how certain social goals might be obtained, without saying anything about the appropriate goals of punitive awards. We attempt to dispel four misunderstandings here. 
First, we do not say (and do not believe) that those who make categorybound judgments are "irrational." 29 Indeed we do not mean to make any controversial claims about the nature of rationality. Our more cautious suggestions are that category-bound thinking does give rise to incoherence, in the sense that we describe it, and that incoherence is indeed a problem. We plead innocent to Kelman's charge that we have offered an "unduly casual invocation of the 'rationality' norm."3' We have no view about Kelman's claim that law students are rational to be intensely disappointed when they do not receive job offers from their preferred law firm; and nothing we say speaks to his suggestion that intense emotional reactions are generally rational if they promote people's subjective ends. 
Second, we do not think, as Kelman suggests, that "the global perspective is always optimal."'3 We meant to be very tentative here, suggesting only "that most people, in most conditions, prefer a wide viewscreen to a narrow one, and will in principle (though not always in actual practice) have greater confidence in the judgments they make in a broad context rather than in a narrow context." 32 We do not disagree with Kelman's suggestion that in some circumstances, people's judgments may be better when and because they are category-bound. (Certainly we do not mean to say anything about "the appropriate response to misbehavior by one's child"!33) 
Third, Kelman misunderstands our argument in objecting that we emphasize coherence-what he calls "horizontal equity"3 4 -at the expense of other social goals, and in insisting that it might be sensible to sacrifice coherence for the sake of ensuring that punishments are not too severe or too lenient. We agree with Kelman's suggestion that horizontal "equity is at best but one value."3s We said that "coherence is not a trumping value, and a system displaying incoherence may well be better than one that is coherent but pervasively unjust."36 We urged only that at "the very least, efforts should be made to correct the most conspicuous anomalies-a goal that can be obtained without thinking that it is easy or even possible for people to agree on what full coherence actually requires. ' 37 
Fourth, Kelman is mistaken to say that according to our argument, "we should assess punitive damages in accord with a sense of outrage because we typically do."3 He urges (far more modestly than Hume) that "it is never clear why we should derive an 'ought' from an 'is'; 39 he adds that perhaps punitive damages should not be understood in terms of outrage at all. But we did not intend to accept any particular normative theory of punitive damages. We certainly did not mean to express any view on the retributive view of punishment. Our goals, here as in other work, are descriptive and prescriptive rather than normative: Why are awards what they are? Assuming that the legal system has as a certain goal, how does it best get there? If optimal deterrence is the goal, it does not make much sense to rely on juries. If the goal is to reduce incoherence while retaining a large role for retributive thinking, the legal system might attempt to use additur and remittur to increase anomalously low awards and to decrease anomalously high ones. But as we also say, a society "should be willing to tolerate a degree of predictable incoherence if this is the price of avoiding a (coherent) set of biased and unjust awards." 0 
Much of our work on punitive damages has been concerned with the topic of outrage. In our view, outrage is associated with an urge to punish, which is the foundation for such awards.41 Jurors' reactions to misconduct are rooted in judgments about whether the defendant has done something that qualifies as genuinely outrageous. We have also shown that outrage itself is categorybound. What appears outrageous in isolation may appear barely objectionable when placed in the context of far more egregious wrongdoing. 
Our investigation has brought new clarity to a not unrelated point: Withincategory incoherence is easily noticed and arouses a strong sense of injustice. Incoherence across categories is harder to see and less impressive when it is seen. People do not spontaneously question the coherence of their judgments across category boundaries, and are not greatly exercised by incoherence when it is drawn explicitly to their attention. Nonetheless, incoherence can be a serious problem, indeed a source of real injustice. We are not exactly outraged. But we think that much more can, and should, be done to reduce the problem. 
by CASS R. SUNSTEIN* 
As currently interpreted, the Constitution protects a range of fights involving marriage, bodily integrity, and reproduction. Does the Constitution guarantee the right to clone? 
The question is not as fanciful as it might appear.1 Cloning is a possible method for "reproduction." For some people, cloning would undoubtedly be the preferred choice. Among this group, some would choose cloning on the ground that it is the only way to produce children with some genetic connection to them. For such people, the potential value of cloning should not be understated. And because reproduction is involved, the individual right to choose might well be thought to fall within the doctrinal protection given by Roe v. Wade and other cases. At the same time, it is not clear that the government can offer constitutionally adequate grounds for interfering with a presumptively protected right. Some of the most common justifications seem speculative, and others could be taken care of through narrower means, falling short of a flat ban on cloning. Indeed, the justifications for banning cloning might wel seem, at first glance, to be weaker than the justifications for banning abortion, which involves the intentional destruction of what many people consider innocent human life. If government cannot ban the intentional destruction of human life, why-it might be asked-is government allowed to forbid the intentional creation of human life? 
Notwithstanding these points, I will argue here that under existing law, there is no constitutional right to clone for reproductive purposes, and indeed that the argument for such a right is quite weak under the law as it now stands. I will also argue that there is no constitutional right to clone for therapeutic purposes, though the analysis must be quite different from that in the reproductive context. In the process of engaging the legal issues, I will offer a few more general remarks as well. Some of those remarks involve the appropriate judicial posture in cases involving "substantive due process." I will suggest that it is desirable for courts to be extremely cautious in extending the reach of cases that do not involve an element involving inequality or some other kind of failure from the democratic point of view. Judicial caution is justified in light of the complexity of the underlying scientific issues and the existence of a reasonable debate over the questions of policy and value. These are institutional points about the sense of a general posture of judicial deference in a situation of this sort. 
But some of my remarks bear on the general question whether government should, in principle, ban reproductive and therapeutic cloning. I do not mean to resolve those questions here, but I will suggest that many of the most commonly offered arguments are extremely weak, resting as they do on a mixture of ignorance and confusion. With respect to nonreproductive cloning, the argument for a presumptive constitutional right is strained under the precedents; but ironically, the government's justifications for intruding on freedom of choice are very weak indeed. Here, as elsewhere, we should distinguish sharply between the legal question and the political question. The suggestion that there is no constitutional right to clone does not say whether a reasonable legislature would ban the practice of cloning; and in the context of therapeutic cloning, we shall see many reasons for doubt. At the very least, we should distinguish between the strongest justifications, now involving the doubtful safety of the procedure, and the weaker justifications, based on mistakes of fact or simple distaste. 
For purposes of substantive due process, the first question is whether the right to clone counts as a fundamental one, with which the government can interfere only to protect a "compelling" interest. If there is no fundamental right, the government is required merely to show a "rational basis" for its action, a much easier burden to meet.4 A 
This is not the simplest question to answer. The Supreme Court has not-to say the least-given clear criteria for deciding when a right qualifies for special constitutional protection. The cases leave a great deal of ambiguity and the doctrine lacks much coherence.5 There are two common ways of reading the cases. One reading is that the Court has issued a firm "this far, and no more" and is unwilling to recognize additional fundamental rights unless they find specific and extremely strong recognition in Anglo-American traditions. Chief Justice Rehnquist appeared to accept this argument for a majority of the Supreme Court in Washington v. Glucksberg6. This approach most certainly would not see cloning as a presumptively protected right. The other reading is that the cases should be taken to establish a presumptive right to noninterference with decisions that are highly personal and intimate, at least if those decisions involve choices about sexuality and reproduction. This approach might well require strong government justification for any interference with an individual decision to clone. I explore the two approaches in sequence. B. Due Process Traditionalism 
On occasion, influential Justices and the Court as a whole have said that fundamental rights qualify as such largely because of their origins in Anglo-American traditions, understood at a level of considerable specificity.7 Chief Justice Rehnquist's opinion for the Court in Glucksberg8 draws upon this theme, though Justice O'Connor's separate and narrower opinion places its status into doubt.9 A central goal of due process traditionalism is to discipline judicial discretion and to draw upon views that are time-honored and therefore unlikely to be idiosyncratic. 
Let us for the moment assume that due process traditionalism is correct-that it describes the appropriate approach to the due process clause. If the right to clone must emerge from such traditions, the case is simple: There is no such right. The right to clone is not something that Anglo-American law traditionally protects. Of course, we could say that the absence of a tradition of protection is not relevant, because the relevant technology is so new. But if such a tradition is a necessary condition for constitutional protection, there can be no right to clone. 
But there are severe problems with defining fundamental interests solely by reference to tradition, specifically described. The first problem is that many of the Court's cases cannot be understood in purely traditionalist terms, and hence the traditionalist understanding of the privacy cases fits poorly with existing law. Roe v. Wade presents the clearest example; there is no clear tradition establishing a right to abortion. But this is not true only of abortion. The cases establishing a right to contraceptives outside of marriage do not vindicate a longstanding tradition.0 Nor is there any general right to marry within Anglo-American traditions; hence Loving v. Virginia," striking down a ban on interracial marriage under the due process clause, and Zablocki v. Redhail'2 recognizing a fundamental right to marry, fit poorly with due process traditionalism. Traditions, taken at a level of specificity and as brute facts, explain few of the key cases, and hence traditionalism does not make sense of existing law. 
Should the Court consider its own decisions doubtful and use traditionalism in the future notwithstanding its inconsistency with past decisions? This course has considerable support within the Court; it is suggested by the Court's opinion in Washington v. Glucksberg, the plurality opinion in Michael H. v. Gerald D., and Bowers v. Hardwick.3 And such a course might be deemed reasonable if traditionalism was extremely appealing in principle and if the alternatives were unacceptable. Perhaps a firm "no more!" would make sense despite its failure to fit with existing law; the 
113 (1973). 
Court's occasionally cavalier treatment of its own precedents implies a judgment of this sort. But if we assume that at least some kind of substantive due process is legitimate,'4 as all of the Justices appear to assume, we will find large problems with using traditions, narrowly and specifically conceived, as the sole source of rights under the due process clause. To be sure, such a use of tradition does help to discipline judicial discretion, and that is an important gain. If traditions were extremely reliable as sources of rights, and if judges thinking more independently about the appropriate scope of rights were systematically unreliable, due process traditionalism might be justified on balance. That is, due process traditionalism might be justified as a way of minimizing the costs of decision and aggregate judicial errors even if it were quite imperfect as a source of rights. 
But this is not a very plausible view, for there is no reason to think that traditions, understood at a level of great specificity, are systematically reliable or so close to systematically reliable as to exclude a somewhat more reflective and critical judicial role." AngloAmerican traditions include a great deal of good but also significant confusion and injustice (consider, for example, bans on racial intermarriage); it is sensible for courts to engage in a degree of critical scrutiny of intrusions on liberty even if those intrusions do not offend tradition. Nor is there sufficient reason to think that judges will inevitably do very badly if they think critically about rights. 
Of course, judges should be very cautious about rejecting judgments made by elected officials; judges should also avoid hubris in examining the past. Certainly it is plausible to think that judges should generally proceed incrementally and in good common law fashion from previous decisions. It also makes sense to say that substantive due process should be used sparingly, because of its uncertain textual basis and because of the unreliability of judicial judgments about which rights should qualify as fundamental. Understandings of this kind provide important constraints on judicial power under the Due Process Clause. But at the very least it is appropriate for courts to ask whether the interest said to qualify as a fundamental right is, in principle, at all different from rights that have of text and history. But we might see that idea as doing the work of the privileges and immunities clause, which could plausibly have been used for an enterprise of this kind. See Charles Fairman, Does the FourteenthAmendment Incorporatethe Bill of Rights?, 2 STAN. L. REV. 5 (1949). 
CONSTITUTIONS Do (2001). been sanctified by tradition. If, for example, there were no relevant difference, in principle, between a traditionally-unrecognized right to clone and (let us suppose) a traditionally-recognized right to use contraceptives within marriage, courts should not say that the latter is constitutionally protected and the former is not. 
To make the point more vivid, assume that a state banned the use of all reproductive technologies, requiring all reproduction to occur the old-fashioned way. For many couples, the consequence of such a ban would be to prevent reproduction at all. It would seem sensible, in a case of that sort, to require the state to justify its action in highly persuasive terms. 
In short: If tradition is the exclusive basis for special protection under the due process clause, then the right to clone cannot possibly qualify for such protection. But there are good reasons to question the idea that tradition should be the exclusive basis for this special protection. 
If tradition is not decisive, what is the source of fundamental rights for purposes of substantive due process? (1) An IlluminatingFalseStart 
It is tempting to resort to terms such as "intimate" and "personal"; but these terms provide little help. They tend to be conclusions masquerading as analytic devices. In any case, some of the cases deny protection to interests that seem highly intimate and highly personal; consider both Hardwick,6 refusing to recognize a right to homosexual sodomy, and Village of Belle Terre v. Boraas,7 refusing to recognize an associational right to enable people to live together. Thus, the Court's cases refuse to accept the view that intimate and personal decisions deserve constitutional protection as such. Putting previous cases to one side, we can see that some seemingly intimate and personal decisions are not strong candidates for constitutional protection. Consider the decision to work longer than the maximum hour laws allow in order to provide for one's family, the decision to take medicines or drugs of a certain sort, the decision to marry one's cousin or aunt, or for that matter the decision to commit suicide. There is good reason to think that the Constitution does not protect these decisions, however intimate and personal they seem. For this reason, a reference to "intimacy" or "personal" decisions is insufficiently helpful. (2) Reproductionand Sexuality 
But the Court could find a narrower principle of some appeal, and considerable consistency with the cases, if it said that there is a presumptive right against government intrusionsinto the decision how and whether to produce children. This idea might be invoked to explain both Roe v. Wade and cases involving governmental efforts to prevent people from diminishing risks of pregnancy. The suggested standard also has the advantage of distinguishing Bowers v. Hardwick on the ground that there is no prohibition on the regulation of sexual conduct if decisions about pregnancy and childbirth are not involved. In any event, the standard seems to provide a sufficient if not necessary condition for constitutional concern. There do not appear to be any cases that fail to find a constitutionally protected interest in cases in which the standard is met. (3) Problemsand Difficulties 
It would not be frivolous to take the precedents in this way. 8 But there are two problems with the argument. 
The first is that it is not clear why the right to decide how and whether to produce children should have this special status, if other rights, such as the right to choose physician-assisted suicide and the right to engage in consensual sexual activities, do not. 9 Surely it is true that decisions about reproduction-about whether and how to reproduce-are central to individual autonomy. But many other decisions seem equally central, or at least not less central, and those decisions do not receive special constitutional protection. Why should reproduction be singled out? The question suggests that the cases involving reproduction and contraception may not, in fact, only involve those issues, and that they may be marked by another feature, one that involves sex equality. Perhaps issues of that kind also helped motivate the Court. A ban on abortion has disproportionate effects on women, to say the least; and when a law forbids the use of contraceptives, women are likely to face especially strong adverse effects, in the form of an involuntary pregnancy. Indeed, several members of the Court have acknowledged that Roe v. Wade owes something to equality concerns,20 and it does seem clear that bans on contraception have disproportionate effects on women. 
This equality concern does not appear to be present with bans on cloning. Do such bans treat women worse than men? Do such bans treat any disadvantaged group especially badly? To be sure, it would be possible to urge that people who are disabled, in the sense that they lack the ability to produce children in the standard fashion, are distinctly harmed by bans on cloning. But whenever the government imposes barriers on the use of some medicine or medical technology, there is a disproportionate burden on those who believe that they need it. By itself that burden is not enough to create a serious constitutional issue. 
The second problem in the argument is that it defines the relevant interests very broadly, and in a way that is not at all compelled by the cases. People might have a right to decide whether to abort, and whether to use contraceptives, without also having a right to choose any available means to have, or not to have, a childeven if that means is, for some people, the only realistic means. We should agree that it would be presumptively unacceptable for the government to ban certain couples from having children, or to impose a one-child policy on the nation. We should also agree that the government may not require people to have children, and indeed that government may not bar women from availing themselves of what is, for most people, the usually indispensable means of preventing the birth of unwanted children (such as contraception and abortion). But none of this means that there is a presumptive right to do whatever might be done to increase the likelihood of having, or not having, a child: to enter into surrogacy arrangements, or to use in vitro fertilization, or to attempt to clone a child. The central point is that a ban on cloning, or on surrogacy arrangements, leaves open numerous other channels by which most people may bear a child. If numerous channels remain open, perhaps the government need not face the strongest possible burden when it merely closes off one. 
The point should not be overstated. There are many means to prevent unwanted childbirth (I omit the details); abortion and contraception are hardly the only methods. And for some people, cloning might be the only feasible way to produce a biological offspring. It would certainly not be ludicrous to say that as a matter of constitutional law, the state has to produce a strong justification for intruding on that choice in cases in which it is the only realistic option. Indeed, there is reason to question a doctrine that would apply strict scrutiny to a ban on "natural" reproductive practices while applying only deferential review to a ban on new technologies. But where there is no problem of inequality, courts would probably not, and should probably not, demand the kind of overwhelming justification that is required in some cases. Indeed, it seems sensible to understand the Court's precedents as reflecting special circumstances: the potentially large intrusion on women's bodies that is entailed by a ban on abortion or contraception, and the fact that when such bans are in place, women's equality is at risk. 
I now turn to the arguments that might be offered to justify a ban on reproductive cloning. These arguments can be taken in two ways. First, they might be an effort to show that the government has a rational basis for the ban-all that is required if, as I believe, a fundamental right is not involved. Second, they might be invoked to show that government has a compelling interest in banning reproductive cloning-the showing that is required under strict scrutiny. My basic conclusion is that most of the arguments, and perhaps even all of them, are sufficient to satisfy rational basis review. I also urge that if a compelling interest must be shown, the most stringent standard is met by the significant risk that cloning would result in a greater deal of illness, suffering, and death. 
(1) MoralRepugnance 
In a widely discussed article, Leon Kass has pointed to what he calls the "wisdom" of repugnance, and urged that disgust or repugnance is by itself a sufficient reason to ban a practice.21 There is an interesting claim in the background here. Perhaps repugnance, even of the visceral sort, reflects a kind of wisdom and rationality that are superior to readily accessible arguments. But is moral repugnance, felt by many people, enough to meet the government's burden? 
The Supreme Court has indicated that it is, at least in the context of a prohibition of homosexual sodomy.' And undoubtedly it is true (1998). 
that "disgust" sometimes captures a sound moral intuition and that on reflection, we will find that moral repugnance is based on good grounds. Sometimes repugnance is fully rational. But standing by itself, and not subject to reason or scrutiny, moral repugnance seems to be a weak basis for intruding on a human choice, no matter what the Court said in Hardwick.2 Moral repugnance has been invoked for many bans that could not easily withstand analysis; consider prohibitions on racial intermarriage or masturbation. In the context of cloning, moral repugnance might well be a response to vaguely remembered science fiction stories or horror movies, or to perceptions based on ignorance and confusion (as in the idea that a clone is a complete "copy" of the original, or a "copy" that is going to be evil). The real task is to see if moral repugnance can be defended, not simply asserted. 
But these points remain to be translated into constitutional terms. If we are speaking of strict scrutiny, moral repugnance by itself cannot be sufficient; Loving v. Virgini24 is enough to establish the point. Moral repugnance must be explained, not merely asserted. But if rational basis review is at work, and if the task is merely to describe current law, moral repugnance does seem adequate under the authority of Bowers v. Hardwick. At the same time, there is every reason to be uneasy with this conclusion. Indeed, in the context of discrimination against the mentally retarded, offense and repugnance were expressly found to be irrational and hence constitutionally inadequate.' To uphold a ban on reproductive cloning, we should seek some other rationale, even under the rational basis test. (2) Lessening the Worth of Individualsand ThreateningIndividuality 
Would cloning lessen the worth of individuals? Would it make the clone less of an individual? The person whose genetic materials were used? Would it diminish the uniqueness of human identity? Some people think so. No less an authority than Ian Wilmut has said, "I think that each child should be treated as an individual; and if you challenged on due process clause grounds, but that it is not enough to support a law that is challenged on equal protection grounds. See Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, 473 U.S. 432 (1985). This view might be supported on the ground that the due process clause is rooted in tradition, and hence traditional repugnance is adequate, whereas the equal protection clause is not rooted in tradition, and hence traditional repugnance is inadequate. 
have chosen to make a child, who is a copy of someone who is already here, you can't possibly treat that person as an individual."26 My speculation is that for many people, the idea of "copying" human beings is unacceptable, simply because of what it seems to do to the individuals involved. 
Here too, however, the argument seems to dissolve on reflection. Wilmut is making an empirical claim ("you can't possibly treat that person as an individual"), and taken as such, the claim is very weak. Identical twins are genetically identical, and the existence of identical twins does not lessen the worth of individuals, or make anyone less of an individual. If John and Jim are genetically the same, they are likely to be similar in many ways for that very reason; but they will not be identical, simply because they will have different experiences, and experiences affect personality and development. It is not necessary to set out controversial claims about the precise mix of genetic endowments and environment in order to make the point. The individuality of the person whose DNA is used to create a clone would not be compromised by the fact; nor would the individuality of the clone be affected as a result." Indeed, the difference between cloning and ordinary reproduction should not be overstated on this count. Many children are extremely close, as a genetic matter, to one or another parent. 
If we are speaking of strict scrutiny, a ban on cloning cannot plausibly be defended on this ground. Because rational basis review is so deferential, the individuality argument might well be sufficient to support a ban. But even here, the argument is extremely shaky. (3) GeneticDiversity 
A species does well if it has a large stock of genetic diversity. Some people who are concerned about human cloning fear that if it occurs, the stock will be diminished-making the world, or parts of it, a bit like the English royal family. If this is a plausible threat, wouldn't it be legitimate for a state or a nation to ban cloning for that reason alone? 
On reflection, this too is an extremely weak argument, certainly insufficient to satisfy strict scrutiny, and probably insufficient to satisfy rational basis review. The reason is simple: it simply defies belief to suggest that cloning would become so popular as to reduce, in any significant way, the existing level of genetic diversity. B. Three Stronger Arguments (1) ProtectingAgainst Suffering and Early Death 
The first and simplest justification, of the stronger ones, is that in light of the current state of medical technology, it is highly likely that cloned human beings would face serious medical problems-leading, in many cases, to serious illness and early death.' The underlying risks include high rates of miscarriage, deformed children, premature aging, and high rates of cancer and other diseases." There are possible risks to the mother as well.' 
Let us assume that this pessimistic account of the current situation is accurate as a scientific matter. If it is true, it should be easily sufficient to satisfy rational basis review. Indeed, it is probably sufficient to satisfy even the most stringent standard of review, though under that standard, the scientific claims would be investigated closely. If the claims are taken to be adequate-as prominent groups have concluded 31-then a ban is likely to be upheld even if the consequence is to prevent the development of technology that would reduce the relevant risks. By hypothesis, the practice of cloning would lead to much suffering and many deaths. The government would therefore have strong reason to prevent that practice. Compare the question of animal welfare. If scientists are experimenting with animals in a way that will lead to a great deal of suffering, the government is certainly allowed to intervene, even if the experiments would have many benefits too. 
There is, however, a possible counter-argument. Roe v. Wade held that the interest in protecting fetal life is not sufficient to override the right of privacy.32 Suppose that many or most of the early deaths would involve fetuses, not viable human beings. Is it not clear, after Roe, that the interest in protecting fetal life cannot overcome the right to choose? The simplest answer is that strict scrutiny is likely not to be involved, and hence the interest in protecting fetal life is indeed sufficient. A slightly less simple answer is that in light of current technology, a ban on cloning would protect fetuses, young children, and mothers themselves, and hence the question turns out to be easy after all. If we are speaking of strict CALIFORNIANS?, 53 HASTINGS L.J. 1145. (2002) [hereinafter CLONING CALIFORNIANS?]. scrutiny, the best answer is that a ban on cloning is justified as an effort to protect not only fetuses, but also people who are actually born. Even if a relatively small percentage of clones (10%? 20%?) would suffer in the predicted way, the state almost certainly has sufficient reason, as a constitutional matter, to ban the practice. (2) PsychologicalHarm to the Clone 
It is possible to urge that the clone would suffer psychological harm, even psychological trauma. Imagine the likely emotional state of someone who knows that he or she is genetically identical to someone who has already lived a number of years. Perhaps such a person would believe that her future course was in many ways preordained-that some possibilities were open and others were closed off. If the clone's genetic equivalent suffered from high blood pressure, or diabetes, or cancer, she might believe, with very good reason, that she would face those problems as well. Other problems are more subtle. If the genetically identical parent faced a depressing career path, or had unappealing physical features or an unpleasant smile or laugh, or was severely overweight, it might prove difficultfar worse than distressing-for the clone. 
These are hardly implausible concerns, but they do involve a degree of speculation. We do not know whether in most or many cases, the psychological harms would be serious. Identical twins appear to do very well notwithstanding the fact that psychological harm could be predicted in the abstract. To be sure, the case of human cloning would be different, simply because of the age difference between the people involved; the harms I am discussing would be a product of seeing a life that has run much of its course. But biology is not (entirely) destiny, and we could easily imagine young people concluding that even if they are genetically equivalent to one or another parent, or some other living person, their path is hardly foreordained. Is cloning so radically different, on this count, from ordinary reproduction? I am not sure. 
As far as the Constitution is concerned, however, the issue will be resolved by selection of the governing standard. If the rational basis test is involved, the arguments from psychological harm are undoubtedly sufficient. If strict scrutiny is the appropriate standard, the speculative nature of the argument is probably decisive, and the ban could not be defended on this ground alone. (3) Use and Exploitationof HumanBeings 
Of the stronger arguments for banning reproductive cloning, the third is the most interesting. Imagine a situation in which cloning was freely permitted-in which individuals could clone themselves, and in which people interested in children with a certain genetic endowment could assure themselves of that very endowment. If a family wanted a terrific athlete, it could obtain a genetic equivalent of, say, Michael Jordan; if it wanted a terrific musician, it could obtain a genetic equivalent of, say, Bob Dylan; if it wanted a terrific scientist, it could obtain a genetic equivalent of, say, Ian Wilmut; if it wanted a terrific philosopher, it could clone John Rawls. Why would this be objectionable? The reason is that people would be treating their children-to-be as means, with prearranged agendas, rather than as ends, to seek their own path. Someone who seeks a clone of Michael Jordan might well have a particular plan in mind for that individual. So too with anyone who has sought, and been able, to choose people with one or another genetic endowment. In such cases, the parents would be carefully programming their children's future, and likely, perhaps, to keep the program in mind throughout childhood. 
Of course this is not altogether different from ordinary life. Many parents have particular plans for their children. Many parents are insistent on those plans. Sperm and egg donations depend, in part, on perceptions about genetic endowments. But the particular programming that I am now discussing cannot be achieved. Perhaps parents who produce clones will, too much of the time, treat their own children not as ends but as means.3 If we see a significant increase in that kind of treatment, there would seem to be considerable reason for concern. 
Is this an adequate justification, by itself, for banning cloning? If the rational basis test is at work, it certainly is; and for reasons suggested above, rational basis should be all that should be required here. But if we probe a bit more deeply, we will uncover some complexities. The argument depends on a speculation about what people would do, and we do not know if the speculation can be supported. Perhaps most people would clone themselves, or would seek clones of strangers who meet some genetic minimum, and would not attempt to clone particular individuals with particular traits and career paths. Perhaps this would be rare. Probably those who cloned people with particular characteristics would, almost all of the time, treat their children with love and respect. Here, as elsewhere, strict scrutiny is not easy to satisfy, and here, as elsewhere, a widespread argument against human cloning seems to rest on weak grounds. 
Therapeutic cloning presents quite different issues.' Here there is no effort to create actual human beings. Children are not involved. My basic conclusion is that it is not at all easy to argue that there is a fundamental right to engage in therapeutic cloning-indeed, the argument for that right is weaker, as a legal matter, than the argument for a right to engage in reproductive cloning. On the other hand, the justifications for banning therapeutic cloning are also relatively weak-much weaker, in fact, than the strongest justifications for banning reproductive cloning. To understand the constitutional issues associated with a ban on therapeutic cloning, a brief background is in order. 
Here, in brief, is how therapeutic cloning would work. An embryo would be created and allowed to grow for a short period, perhaps fourteen days. Its stem cells would then be extracted and grown into human tissue or a complete human organ for transplant. The result of the process would not be a human being, but a piece of nerve tissue, or a replacement organ, or a certain amount of skin. The goal would be to grow replacement organs from a sample of someone's DNA. 
It is not clear if and when therapeutic cloning will succeed, but the potential benefits are enormous. In theory, people could receive perfectly matched replacement organs, with little or no danger of rejection of the transplant. Insulin-secreting cells could be used to treat diabetes; nerve cells could be used for Parkinson's disease or strokes; liver cells could be used to repair damaged organs. There would be no need to wait for the death of a donor. Nonreproductive cloning could also produce significant benefits for knowledge and research, with eventual medical advances as well. 
Is there a fundamental right to engage in therapeutic cloning? The issue is quite different from the case of reproductive cloning, for childbirth is not in any sense involved. Hence the precedents that might support a right to reproductive cloning cannot be invoked here. For constitutional purposes, the central question is whether there is a presumptive right to select medical treatments. Those who seek to engage in therapeutic cloning might be protected if the Constitution recognizes such a presumptive right. We can imagine patients, or derivatively scientists and researchers, urging that the right to privacy includes a presumptive right to noninterference with choices among medical treatments that are crucial to people's well-being. 
At first glance, however, the mere statement of the question serves as an answer. No Supreme Court decision suggests that there is any such right. Indeed, daily practice argues against its existence. The Food and Drug Administration controls the kinds of medicines that doctors may prescribe and that patients may choose. It would be fanciful to attack those controls on constitutional grounds. Now perhaps it could be urged that in the relevant cases, the FDA is attempting to protect people against fraud or deception, or against the effects of their own ignorance, and that these are not the grounds for forbidding nonreproductive cloning. Probably this is true. But the key point is that the FDA is not required to justify its decisions in the terms of strict scrutiny, on pain of constitutional invalidation. 
We have seen that it is not implausible to argue, on the strength of Roe v. Wade, that the government would be required to produce a strong justification for any effort to ban in vitro fertilization or surrogacy arrangements. But nothing in Roe v. Wade supports the right to choose medical treatments. Recall that the Court has upheld a ban on physician-assisted suicide, applying rational basis review. 5 If people do not have a right to choose death, it is unlikely that they have a right to a particular set of medical experiments that might ultimately benefit them. Or consider another analogy: scientific experiments on animals. Must the government justify a limitation on such experiments in the terms of strict scrutiny, simply because important medical advances might result? This is most doubtful. No court has ever suggested that strict scrutiny will apply to government efforts to protect animals in the process of experimentation. 
I do not mean to suggest that the area lacks complexities. Perhaps it could be argued that while there is no right to die, there is a right to live, and that when a patient seeks to use medical technology that is the (only) means of saving his life, that the government should be required to produce an unusually convincing justification. This is not entirely implausible. But it would go well beyond the existing precedents, and it would also have the disadvantage of requiring careful judicial oversight of numerous decisions by the FDA. One of my general themes has been the value of judicial deference, under the due process clause, in the face of complex disputes of fact and value. A posture of deference makes best sense here as elsewhere. 6 
What interests support a ban on therapeutic cloning? The answer is not simple. Those who object to therapeutic cloning tend to believe that personhood begins at conception, and that the state should not use "persons" for the benefit of others. Is this an adequate justification? In the case of rational basis review? 
It might be tempting to say that this justification is inadequate after Roe v. Wade. In Roe, after all, the Court held that the interest in protecting fetal life was not sufficient to justify a ban on abortion. But the temptation should be resisted. Roe holds only that the interest in protecting fetal life is inadequate to override the woman's right to choose; it does not hold that the interest is illegitimate or weightless. It seems clear that government can make it a crime for third parties to kill first-trimester fetuses, whether they are inside women's wombs or in the laboratory; and to justify such a prohibition, it is not necessary for government to say that firsttrimester fetuses are human beings. 
But what is the reason for forbidding nonreproductive cloning? Those who object to therapeutic cloning may be unsure whether personhood begins at conception, but may nonetheless press two points. First, they may think that the use of human pre-embryos is itself a moral wrong. Second, they may urge that the use of human embryos could tend to have subtle but ultimately corrosive effects on human values, in ways that will lead to an assortment of problems-a point that might seem especially powerful in light of the prospect of "embryo factories." If rational basis review is at work, these points should be sufficient to support the ban as a matter of constitutional law. But I am not sure whether to endorse the claims in principle. Why is it a moral wrong to use pre-embryos in the suggested way? Animals are frequently used as means; most of these uses are lawful, and at least some of them seem morally acceptable. Do pre-embryos medical or scientific research. The law is ill-developed on this point. have such a strong claim to protection? Or consider the view that human values will be corroded by nonreproductive cloning. Why, exactly, should this be feared, if nonreproductive cloning is not itself morally wrong for the purposes and in the circumstances I am describing? The empirical claim seems most doubtful. If the relevant "embryo factories" really involve tiny cell combinations, is the problem so serious? 
Perhaps the strongest ground for banning nonreproductive cloning has nothing to do with these points. Perhaps it is a different sort of empirical claim, to the effect that a ban on nonreproductive cloning is a necessary means for enforcing the ban on reproductive cloning. It might be feared that if nonreproductive cloning is permitted, some people, at some point, will inevitably use the preembryos in the forbidden way, so as to produce, or to try to produce, children. Here too, there are many doubts. If reproductive cloning is a crime, should we really fear that nonreproductive cloning would be used for that by-hypothesis unlawful end? But if rational basis review is at work, this justification should be sufficient. 
This has been a lawyer's essay, exploring the constitutional issue, not the question of policy. I have argued that bans on cloning are constitutional, not that they are a good idea. 
With respect to substantive due process, I have offered a general claim. The Court should be most reluctant to invoke the due process clause to strike down legislation on substantive grounds. Where the Court has acted, it has usually done so because of an implicit understanding that the case did not simply involve substantive due process. In cases involving sexuality and reproduction, a question of sex equality was also involved. The argument for a cautious approach to the due process clause depends in part on a belief that the idea of "substantive due process" is awkward as a matter of text and history. But it also depends on a belief in judicial fallibility, especially in the domain of complex facts and contested values. Simply because of its complexity, the area of cloning is a prime arena for judicial deference. Unless there is some problem in the process that led to the law under review, courts should be hesitant to interpose their own views, at least outside of the most egregious cases. Tradition is indeed relevant here, at least as a way of undertaking the inquiry into egregiousness; an unprecedented intrusion is likely to be especially egregious. Tradition does not exhaust the substantive content of the due process clause. But the intrusion marked by bans on cloning does not rise to the level of intrusions the Court has marked for invalidation; and that is sufficient for my basic conclusion here. 
I have argued that there is no constitutional right to clone human beings for reproductive purposes, and hence a ban on cloning, for those purposes, would and should be upheld. I have also argued that there is no constitutional right to clone human beings for therapeutic purposes. In both cases, the Constitution does not create a presumptively protected right-and thus the government is not required to show more than a rational justification for its actions. In both cases, the government has such a justification. In the case of reproductive cloning, the best argument is the least sectarian-that a ban is necessary to protect against human suffering. In the case of therapeutic cloning, a ban is far harder to justify. But so long as rationality review is at work, it is probably sufficient to say that the ban on therapeutic cloning is a means of making the ban on reproductive cloning effective. 
At the same time, the analysis has shown that many of the standard objections to human cloning are extremely weak. Some of those objections depend on ignorance and confusion, or on a kind of half-remembered message from old science fiction movies. By itself, repugnance should not be, in principle, an adequate justification for law. An unintended by-product of a discussion of the constitutional issue may be to take some small steps toward something that is long overdue and much needed in the political arena: A disaggregation of the issues that are involved in reproductive and nonreproductive cloning, and a separation of the diverse, sometimes strong, but sometimes implausible grounds that are invoked on behalf of statutory bans in both domains. 
There is a remarkable difference between television in 1961, when Newton Minow delivered his great "Vast Wasteland" speech,1 and television in the current era. The difference is the increase in the number of channels. When Minow spoke, most Americans only had access to three or four stations. The big networks monopolized the system. In the modern era, most Americans have cable television, and this means that most Americans have access to about 100 or more stations. Indeed, many Americans have access to DIRECTV, which means that they have access to more than 500 stations. No one knows what innovations the future will bring, but it is clear that scarcity is a decreasing problem. Let us suppose, plausibly, that for the overwhelming majority of Americans, television will contain an extraordinarily wide range of options in the near future. 
Certainly it is still possible to describe the fare of particular broadcasters and stations, on particular days, as a kind of wasteland. But it would not be possible to describe television in this way. In the modem era, television is much less like a wasteland and much more like Manhattan, in the sense that it contains an astonishingly wide range of options, suitable for many tastes. Those who want to see the news can watch the news all day, and on more than one channel (and C-SPAN is hardly a wasteland). Those who want to learn about history can watch The History Channel (not a wasteland in the least). Those interested in animals can watch Animal Planet (very far from a wasteland). Nor are children left out: the Disney * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
Association of Broadcasters (May 9, 1961). Channel offers high-quality fare for children; so too does Nickelodeon. For consumers and citizens, what would seem to matter is the overall package and option set, not the offerings of a particular broadcaster. Does the idea of a "vast wasteland" have relevance today? 
Consider an analogy: magazines. Many magazines are extremely low quality. They offer their readers little or nothing. Taken by themselves, they are not-so-vast wastelands. But the world of magazines is exceptionally diverse, with large differences in topics, points of view, seriousness, and quality. The world of television is not entirely different. Channel 71 might be akin to People, or occasionally even The National Enquirer, but channel 44 might be like National Geographic. Is this a problem? Or consider the more recent analogy of Internet Web sites. Many Web sites are a wasteland or worse; but the Internet is no wasteland. Television does not offer anything like the range of possibilities afforded by the Internet. But in its current incarnation, it is far closer to the Internet than was its 1961 version. Would it not seem odd for a regulator to complain that certain Web sites are wastelands if the overall package contains numerous options and if many of them are good? 
We can go further. The idea of analogies itself might be misleading. The experiences of most people are not determined by any particular technology. Few people learn, or find entertainment, from only one source. Most people do not restrict themselves to magazines, or television, or the Internet, or, for that matter, radio, movies, DVDs, books, or newspapers. They tend to learn from, and to enjoy, some kind of mixture of all of these. And if they emphasize one of the available possibilities, it is because that is what they prefer. It might have been possible to express concern about the content of television in an era of three or four stations and a far more limited set of communications options. But in the modern era, people are free to choose among countless possibilities. 
In these circumstances, it might be sensible to ask: What's the problem? If television viewers end up seeing a wasteland, it is because that is what they have chosen to see. In a free society, they are entitled to do exactly that. Of course the interests of children, much emphasized by Minow, cannot be entirely promoted by reference to choice. But parental choices surely matter, and good programming can certainly, and increasingly, be found for children as well. In short: Minow's concerns were relevant in 1961, simply because the options on television were so limited, but today's world is entirely different. Do his concerns have continuing relevance? Do any concerns have relevance, or should we see the communications market as mostly well-functioning and free from any need for substantive controls, or even moral suasion on those who provide programming? Why not leave the market alone? 
I am not certain how to answer these questions. 2 But there are several problems with the emerging situation. The first involves fragmentationnot a problem for Minow in 1961, but for obvious reasons a problem for us. 
To see this point, imagine that in a technological future, each person could devise, with great precision, her own preferred communications "menu"; imagine, in other words, that programming could be fully and not just partially individuated. In such a system, people could filter in exactly what they want, and filter out exactly what they do not want. Instead of having channels 4, 5, and 7, or even 2 through 90, people would be able to specify, on demand, exactly the programming that they wanted. If they sought to include only news, and indeed only news dealing with the Middle East, they would be able to do exactly that. If they wanted to see situation comedies, or for that matter situation comedies dealing with the romantic lives of people in their thirties, that would be feasible as well. If they wanted to encounter congenial political perspectives, and only congenial political perspectives, that would be possible too. 
On the grounds favored by neoclassical economics, this would seem to be a striking advance, a victory for both freedom and welfare. But it also contains serious risks, above all because it may well result in a situation in which many or most are not exposed to diverse topics and views, but instead hear louder and louder echoes of their own preexisting convictions.3 Like Minow, we should evaluate the system of communications in democratic terms, and not simply from the standpoint of neoclassical economics. And from the democratic point of view, one of the advantages of a well-functioning system of communications is that it supplies one or more genuinely public spheres. In those spheres, diverse points of view are presented and confront one another, and are offered to people who have a willingness to learn. And in those spheres, people cannot monitor, in advance and with precision, the topics to which they are exposed. In a way, the inability to monitor is irritating; but it is also a gain, simply because it ensures that citizens will be able to see a range of topics and perspectives. 
PROBLEM OF FREE SPEECH (1993); CASS SUNSTEIN, REPUBLIC.COM (2001). 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONSLA WJOURNAL 
Compare this to the situation in which Minow spoke in 1961, when general-interest broadcasters, newspapers, and magazines dominated the scene. An advantage of the daily newspaper, Time, Newsweek, and ABC World News Tonight is that typically they provide people with many subjects and points of view. For a democracy, it is important to make provisions for multiple forums of this kind. Of course I do not mean to suggest that scarcity is better than numerous options. A system with multiple channels, not to mention countless Web sites, offers countless advantages. What I am suggesting is that if a large number of options produces a great deal of fragmentation, real problems might arise, if only because people will be living, in a sense, in "gated communities" 4 in which they do not encounter their fellow citizens. 
If, for example, liberals are mostly hearing from liberals, and conservatives mostly from conservatives, democratic deliberation will be harder to undertake. Such deliberation requires an ability to have some sympathetic understanding of the views of those with whom one disagrees, and such an understanding cannot come from a system of gated communications communities. Of course Manhattan has many extraordinary virtues; but fragmentation is a problem with Manhattan, both in its current form and as a model for communications. 
Social science has underlined this point. 5 It shows that when likeminded people speak only or mostly with one another, they tend to go to extremes. More specifically, group polarization means that "members of a deliberating group predictably move toward a more extreme point in the direction indicated by the members' predeliberation tendencies.' 6 Thus, for example, those who think that global warming is a serious problem are likely, after group discussions, to think that global warming is an extremely serious problem. Those who reject affirmative action are likely, after talking with one another, to reject affirmative action with great vehemence. Those who tend to support gun control are likely to do so with heightened enthusiasm after talking together. By itself, these movements toward a more extreme position may or may not be a problem. The difficulty arises when a fragmented system of communications ensures that many people will live in a set of "gated communities." 
sense that the people within speak, and listen, mostly to like-minded others. 
John M. Olin Law & Economics Working Paper No. 91, 1999), at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfmabstractid=199668. 
It is not inevitable that a wide range of options will be seen as a problem here. Everything depends on what people actually choose. When perspectives and topics are easy to find, people easily can get access to opinions that diverge from their own. Fragmentation need not result. If people seek out new topics and views, society may see convergence rather than fragmentation. The problem will arise only if many people use the fact of great variety as a reason to limit their own horizons, at least as compared to a situation in which general-interest broadcasters provide an array of opinions and subjects. I believe that we have reason to think that many people are indeed using diverse options in this way and in many domains. Notice that the word is "many," not "most." My only suggestion is that a system of diverse options creates risks of its own; and that fragmentation is among those risks. 
I have noted that this was not Minow's focus in his "Vast Wasteland" speech, and for understandable reasons. But part of Minow' s emphasis was on democracy; and if we emphasize democratic goals, we will be concerned with fragmentation as well. 
But these points about fragmentation do not go to the core of Minow's concerns. Minow seems to be urging, most generally, that television is not best understood as an ordinary commodity, entirely subject to the forces of supply and demand. He seems to think that those who run important communications outlets should have aspirations that go beyond people's consumption choices. He seems to be concerned with the cultural effects of television, and to think that even if broadcasters are catering to people's tastes, they might not be serving the public interest. Hence there is a difference between the public interest and what interests the public. I believe that on these counts, Minow was, and is, entirely right. 
The American political tradition is committed to the ideal of deliberative democracy, 7 an ideal that has animated much First Amendment doctrine and media regulation. If so, a system of communications might not be ideal even if it provides exactly what consumers want. The question remains whether democracy is served by that system. Even if the problem of scarcity is conquered, and even if the media market is well functioning from the economic point of view, it remains important to ask whether it promotes a well-functioning system of democratic deliberation. This is so especially in view of the importance of television to people's judgments DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT (1994). about what issues are important and about what it is reasonable to think. 8 If television is to promote democracy, rather than the other way around, we need to ask whether it is covering serious questions in a serious way, and appealing to people's best and most substantive sides. Consider, by way of general orientation, John Dewey's suggestion: [W]hat is more significant is that counting of heads compels prior recourse to methods of discussion, consultation and persuasion, while the essence of appeal to force is to cut short resort to such methods. Majority rule, just as majority rule, is as foolish as its critics charge it with being. But it never is merely majority rule.... The important consideration is that opportunity be given that idea to spread and to become the possession of the multitude.... The essential need, in other words, is the improvement of the methods and conditions9 of debate, discussion and persuasion. That is the problem of the public. 
The most important point is that a well-functioning market system may fail to provide a system of communication that is well-adapted to a democratic social order. Americans are entirely aware of this fact, whatever they may choose in their capacity as viewers and listeners. Hence they may, and sometimes do, seek collective corrections, in the form of financial subsidies and regulations that might make the situation better rather than worse. 
In this sense, there is a pervasive difference between what people want in their capacity as viewers (or "consumers of television") and what they want in their capacity as citizens, in which their aspirations sometimes move to the fore. Minow was appealing, above all, to people's role as citizens. And a democratic public, engaged in deliberation about the world of telecommunications, may legitimately seek a system embodying aspirations that diverge from their consumption choices. When participants in a democracy attempt to make things better, and do not simply track their consumption choices, it is not helpful to disparage their efforts as "paternalism" or as "meddling." Their efforts at reform represent democracy in action. It is hardly inappropriate for government to respond to people's aspirations and commitments as expressed in the public realm. 
In any case, it seems clear that the public's "tastes," with respect to television programming, do not come from nature or from the sky. They are partly a product of current and recent practices by broadcasters and other programmers. What people want, in short, is partly a product of what they are accustomed to seeing. Tastes are formed, not just served, by TELEVISION AND AMERICAN OPINION (1987); SHANTO IYENGAR, Is ANYONE RESPONSIBLE? How TELEVISION FRAMES PUBLIC ISSUES 127-43 (1991). 
broadcasters. In an era in which broadcasters are providing a good deal of public interest programming, dealing with serious issues in a serious way, many members of the public will cultivate a taste for that kind of programming. This effect would promote democratic ideals by disseminating information and helping to increase deliberation. 10 Inan era in which broadcasters are carrying sensationalistic or violent material, members of the public may well cultivate a taste for more of the same. "Free marketeers have little to cheer about if all they can claim is that the market is efficient at filling desires that the market itself creates ... Just as culture affects preferences, so also do markets influence culture.' If this is so, the economic ideal of "consumer sovereignty" is placed under some pressure; market activities cannot easily be justified by reference to tastes that they themselves generate. 
I do not suggest that any particular reforms or regulations are justified by these ideas. I urge only that democratic aspirations are a legitimate basis for evaluating television and any other system of communications. The point is fortified by the fact that such systems help form the various preferences and values to which they cater. If this is so, it continues to make sense to challenge those who provide television programming, in order to urge that they do more and better for the viewing public. Taken as a whole, television is hardly a wasteland. But much of it could be far better. Too frequently, news coverage emphasizes sensationalistic charges, depicts candidates in the crudest terms, and fails to engage substantive issues at all. 
Increasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as indepth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one anotl~r, we become an increasingly ill-informed and ill-tempered electorate. 
Too often, programming consists of ludicrous situation comedies or unimaginative "action" shows. Television, of course, is for relaxation and entertainment as much as for anything else. But even when it is designed for these purposes, it can be much better, as the best programming shows. 
I have emphasized the largest difference between television in 1961 and television in the modern era: the astonishing increase in the range of IYENGAR, supra note 8, at 26-116. 
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS LA W JOURNAL options. This difference raises many questions about the continuing relevance of Minow's speech. Television is hardly a vast wasteland; it is more like Manhattan. And even if there is too much wasteland on television, the world of communications includes countless possibilities. Many magazines are by themselves wastelands, but few would argue for a "Federal Magazine Commission," entrusted with the job of improving the world of magazines as a whole. Many Web sites are worse than wastelands, and some of them should be regulated; but there is no sufficient basis for a "Federal Web Site Commission" with the mission of overseeing Web sites on some kind of continuing basis. 
Despite these points, Minow's speech does seem to me to survive the test of time, above all because of his emphasis on democratic goals and his rejection of the idea that television should be evaluated in the terms used for ordinary markets. I have mentioned the risk of fragmentation-not a problem when Minow spoke, but a genuine risk today. And Minow's largest plea was for a conception of television that would cater to people's highest aspirations, not to their short-term preferences. By stressing those aspirations, and the cultural consequences of programming, Minow was able to urge that the public interest is different from what interests the public. When large cities, like Manhattan, work well, it is not only because they cater to the private interests of individual consumers; it is also because they engage in a large set of civic enterprises that appeal to, and draw on, the deepest commitments of their citizens. In the modem era, the same is true of individual broadcasters and of television itself. 
President Bush's Military Order of November 13, 2001 established a legal framework to enable military commissions to try terrorists associated with the attacks of September 11, 2001 on Washington, DC, and New York City.1 This Military Order was greeted with impassioned criticism in the press, the legal academy, and Congress. But it hardly lacked precedent. Sixty years earlier, in the midst of World War II, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR) established a Military Commission to try eight Nazi agents who had covertly entered the United States to commit acts of sabotage and terrorism. Although the Nazis failed in their mission, their aims were similar to those of the 9/11 terrorists. And yet Roosevelt's creation of the Commission, and the subsequent secret trial of the Nazi saboteurs, received widespread praise from the same institutions that protested Bush's action. 
* Professor of Law, University of Chicago ** Karl N. Llewellyn Dist. Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. We thank Ryan Goodman, Dennis Hutchinson, Bernard Meltzer, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Peter Spiro, Laurence Tribe, Detlav Vagts, Adrian Vermeule, G.E. White, and Ben Wittes for helpful comments, and Sarah Rispin for outstanding research assistance. 
This article was completed before Professor Goldsmith took a leave of absence to serve as Special Counsel to the General Counsel of the U.S. Department of Defense. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Department of Defense or the United States Government. 
see note 92, but the defining cases clearly involved those associated with the September 11 attacks. 
Our purpose here is not to investigate, except in passing, issues of law and policy.2 We instead explore three other questions: What explains the dramatically different reactions? What lessons do the different reactions offer about changes, over time, in the legal culture and in culture in general? What lessons do they offer about the evolution of protections for civil liberties in general and during wartime in particular? 
The most tempting, and common, explanation for the different reactions is that there is a significant difference in lawthat President Roosevelt's Order stands on much firmer legal ground than President Bush's Order. We show that this and related explanations are weak. The different reactions are instead best explained in terms of two large differences between the United States of 1942 and the United States of 2001. In 1942, the nation perceived a far greater threat to its own survival; for this reason Americans were far less solicitous of the interests of defendants thought to have participated in a war effort against the United States. But this explanation is inadequate by itself. It must be supplemented with an understanding of the largescale, post-1960s shift in American attitudes, involving decreased trust of executive and military authority, and a strengthened commitment to individual rights in the legal system and broader culture. Our general claim is that with respect to these issues, the legal culture is fundamentally different from what it was before, so much so that many previous practices are barely recognizable. We use the different reactions to the Bush and Roosevelt Military Orders as a way of obtaining a window on this shift. 
After making out these claims, we conclude with some general reflections on the evolution of civil liberties protections during wartime. In particular, we identify a mechanism behind the trend toward greater protection for civil liberties during wartime, namely: A judgment, in hindsight, that past civil liberty intrusions were unnecessary or excessive. We also suggest that this trend is, in a way, an accident of America's distinctive history. 
Katyal and Laurence H. Tribe, Waging War, Deciding Guilt: Trying the Military Tribunals, 111 Yale L.J. 1259 (2002); George P. Fletcher, War and the Constitution: Bush's Military Tribunals Haven't Got a Legal Leg to Stand On, The American Prospect 26, (Jan. 1, 2002); Curtis A. Bradley and Jack L. Goldsmith, The ConstitutionalValidity of MilitaryCommissions,5 Green Bag (2d) 249 (2002). I. THE NAZI SABOTEURS AND THE REACTION TO 
ROOSEVELT'S ORDER 
against the United States, four Nazi agents who had traveled by submarine from France landed in darkness on a beach in Long Island, New York.' A few days later, four more Nazi agents landed on the north Atlantic coast of Florida. The eight men had all lived in America before returning to Germany after Hitler rose to power; two of them, Herbert Haupt and Ernest Burger, were naturalized American citizens.4 The saboteurs' mission was the brainchild of Hitler himself, who wanted to cripple U.S. military production capacities and demoralize the American civilian population. Their task was to blow up aluminum plants, railroad lines, canal locks, hydroelectric plants, and bridges. They also had plans for "nuisance bombings" of railroad terminals and Jewish-owned department stores.5 
Soon after their arrival in the United States, two of the saboteurs, Dasch and Burger, decided to betray their mission to the U.S. government. It is unclear why they turned. Most historians believe they were motivated by fear of betrayal by the other saboteurs, or by fear of detection by U.S. officials. Whatever their reason, Dasch and Burger telephoned the FBI office in New York to announce their plot. When they were dismissed as cranks, Dasch traveled to Washington, where FBI agents took his story more seriously. The FBI interviewed Dasch for five days about the saboteurs' plans, and then rounded up his seven accomplices. 
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover announced the capture of the eight Nazi Saboteurs on June 27, 1942. Hoover insinuated that the arrests resulted from the FBI's infiltration of the Nazi system. But he revealed little actual information beyond the names of those involved, how they landed, the weapons they possessed, and their sabotage aims. Nonetheless, the nation reacted to the news with enormous joy. "The little that [Hoover] told was enough to make headlines of a size that had hitherto been reserved for the war's major battles.... With no information about how the success had been achieved, the public took the fnoerwAsmaseruicnadnenGia-bmleenp.r'6oof that Nazi fiendishness was no match 
The newspaper reports of the saboteurs' capture insisted that the eight men would face the death penalty. Within the government, however, there was considerable uncertainty about how to prosecute and punish the saboteurs. One complicating factor was that the laws applicable in civilian trials did not permit the death penalty for the non-U.S. citizen defendants. Another was a concern that Article III of the Constitution required the government to try the American citizens for treason. 
"If there was doubt in the Justice Department, there was none among politicians, the press and most of the public."7 Almost everyone seemed to call for the saboteurs' execution-the sooner the better. The Washington Post reported that "[d]emands immediately arose among members of Congress for swift justice to the saboteurs-for the death penalty if the law permits it."8 The general public favored death for the saboteurs by a 10-1 margin. A Newsweek essay entitled Death for the Saboteurs argued that "[w]e ought to meet this threat with the most swift and the most ruthless punishment which the law permits."' "Life Magazine headlined its story of the capture: The Eight Nazi Saboteurs Should Be Put To Death."'1 
President Roosevelt agreed. "Offenses such as... these are probably more serious than any offense in criminal law," he wrote to Attorney General Biddle on June 30. "The death penalty is called for by usage and by the extreme gravity of the war aim and the very existence of our American government. [The saboteurs] should be tried by court martial."' 2 Biddle concurred that a military commission is preferable because of greater flexibility, its traditional use in cases of this character and its clear power to impose the death penalty. 3 
& LEGAL CULTURE 
On July 2, Roosevelt issued two proclamations that together established a Military Commission to try the eight saboteurs. One proclamation established the jurisdiction of the Military Commission and purported to preclude judicial review of its decisions. 14 
judges, prosecutors, and defense counsel. It also outlined the structure of the Commission in very general terms."i 
Roosevelt's announcement that a Military Commission would try the saboteurs "met with general satisfaction in Washington, as it will throughout the country," wrote Lewis Wood, the New York Times Washington correspondent. 6 "The Presidential action calmed the fears of many who realized the delays and technicalities incident to civil trials."' 7 
Wood wrote: "Expectation.., that the Administration would seek the death penalty for the Hitler spies before the military commission chosen by the President sounded a heartening note at a moment when indignant Americans everywhere were demanding this extreme punishment for the audacious criminals. Americans wanted to hear the roar of rifles in the hands of a firing squad, and the government has apparently agreed that this is the proper course." s8 [a]ll persons who are subjects, citizens, or residents of any nation at war with the United States or who give obedience to or act under the direction of any such nation, and who during time of war enter or attempt to enter the United States or any territory or possession thereof, through coastal or boundary defenses, and are charged with committing or attempting or preparing to commit sabotage, espionage, hostile or warlike acts, or violations of the law or war, shall be subject to the law of war and to the jurisdiction of military tribunals; and that such persons shall not be privileged to seek any remedy or maintain any proceeding directly or indirectly, or to have any such remedy or proceeding sought on their behalf, in the courts of the United States, or of its States, territories, and possessions, except under such regulations as the Attorney General, with the approval of the Secretary of War, may from time to time prescribe. 7 Fed. Reg. 5101 (July 2, 1942). 
shall, as occasion requires, make such rules for the conduct of the proceeding, consistent with the powers of military commissions under the Articles of War, as it shall deem necessary for a full and fair trial of the matters before it. Such evidence shall be admitted as would, in the opinion of the President of the Commission, have probative value to a reasonable man. The concurrence of at least two-thirds of the Members of the Commission present shall be necessary for a conviction or sentence. The record of the trial including any judgment or sentence, shall be transmitted directly to me for my action thereon."). 
The saboteurs' trial began on July 8 on the fifth floor of the Justice Department in a room whose windows were covered in heavy black curtains to block all daylight. Major General Frank McCoy, the Commission's presiding officer, closed the trial to the press and public due to the nature of the testimony, which involves the security of the United States and the lives of its soldiers, sailors and citizens. 19 McCoy released "communiqu6s" about the trial that contained adjournment times and other meaningless bits of information. He also let reporters view the empty trial chamber, and he released photographs of the trial and the defendants. But other than this, the trial process took place in complete secrecy. 
Although the Washington press corps complained about this secrecy,' ° many, and perhaps most, commentators did not object to it. Arthur Krock of the New York Times dismisse'd claims for open press coverage of the trial as "thoughtless."' The Nation noted that "[a]lien sabotage trials are obviously rich in information that can be of value to the enemy, particularly to other saboteurs still on the loose. '22 In this light, it viewed the ''meaningless communiques" emerging from the trial as a "victory" for the press.23 
The next piece of real public information about the Commission came three weeks later, when the Supreme Court announced that it would convene a special summer session to entertain the saboteurs' habeas corpus petitions challenging the legality of the military commission. Congress and the public were outraged by the Court's intervention. "The decision to seek recourse in the Supreme Court did not meet popular approval in Washington," reported the New York Times. "On the contrary, there is great dissatisfaction here with the length to which the [three-week military trial] has already proceeded.... On all sides hope was expressed that the Supreme Court would make short work of the move., 24 The Los Angeles Times believed that "[s]uch a hearing was totally uncalled for.... The Supreme Court should never have been dragged into this wartime military matter., 25 The DetroitFreePress agreed: "Realism calls for a stone wall and a firing squad, and not a lot of holierthan-thou eyewash about extending the protection of civil rights to a group that came among us to blast, burn, and kill.",26 So too did the Communist Daily Worker. "The unprecedented action," it said, "is in itself a victory for the enemies of America and the United States., 2 7 
Some newspapers were more supportive. Arthur Krock, who had earlier claimed that the secret military trial was legitimate and fair, saw the Supreme Court's intervention as a fine service to democracy at war. "Whatever disposition the Court shall make of the grave issues presented to it, the fact.. .will brighten the American history of a time when Cicero's apothegm-'inter anna silent leges'21-is the rule in almost every other land."2 9 The Washington Post,also a supporter of the military commission, defended Supreme Court review, noting that "the very circumstances that the Court is meeting to hear the petition-this after a long and exhaustive trial of the men by a military commission- shows that the saboteurs are being given their day in court." The Post added that "in a time when in so many parts of the world law has become a mockery and justice an obscenity, it will hearten freemen everywhere that here in this citadofelthoofselibwehrtoy sluawrreapntidti ojuusstliyceinsvtialldefdunocutriolann-devteondofours tihnejubrye.ne30fit 
unanimous per curiam order that the Military Commission was legally constituted and thus that the petitioners' were lawfully detained. The Court did not provide reasons for its conclusion, but indicated that it would do so at a later time. 
Most commentators viewed the Court's hurried review of the Commission approvingly. The New York Herald Tribune described the Court's action as a victory for civil liberties: The action of the Supreme Court was of real importance to the American people as a whole... [The Court] affirmed the right of the President to deny the civil courts of this country to those acting under enemy orders who... [violate] the laws of war. In other words, it gave no comfort to the guilty. But by the fact of their intercession the justices of America's highest court reaffirmed to innocent Americans that the law still stands as a shield over them, against malicious usurpation or the quick tempers and brash judgments of war time. 
its judicial system could give even an enemy invader a sporting chance to prove his innocence; even in war time we regarded as important the rights of the individual and shoot him offhand, as Nazi Germany would have done.d32id not 
In denying civil justice to the eight Nazi saboteurs, the Supreme Court did the expected thing.... To handle [the saboteurs] in the civil courts would be to help Hitler immensely, and that would be intolerable. We cannot afford to give our enemy, in our present pass, the slightest assistance. At the same time we are engaged in delivering the world from a tyranny in which the rights of the individual have no place. Those rights are enshrined in our reign of law. If we simply disregard the law, even in our treatment of our enemies, we shall be in danger of coming out of the war as Hitlerian as Hitler. That is why the admittance of the petitions for writs of habeas corpus to the Supreme Court was widely approved. 33 The Nation was also Supportive, though somewhat more impatient: 
A touch of the ludicrous is a small price to pay for maintaining the traditions of American judicial procedure. Whatever the fate of the Nazi invaders who landed on our beaches in the middle of June we need not begrudge them a few extra weeks of life involved in giving them a more fair trial. The niceties of jurisprudence, however, can be carried too far, and in this case the procedure was beginning to take on such overtones of fantasy that the Supreme Court's refusal to give the defendants standing in the civil courts came in the nick of time. . . . Had the Supreme Court granted [the saboteurs'] petitions, American soldiers would have to go into battle with John Doe summonses in place of rifles and a round of subpoenas in their cartridge belts. But the Supreme Court held firm, and Ringling Brothers need not worry turn Gargantua loose on a writ of habeas corpuasb.o34ut having to Unbenkownst to the public, the Military Commission trial ended three days after the Supreme Court announcement, on August 3, 1942. The Commission found all eight defendants guilty, recommended that they all be executed, and sent the 3,000-page record to the President for review. On August 8, President Roosevelt publicly announced that he had approved the commission's judgments but had commuted the sentences of Burger and Dasch (the turncoats) to life and thirty years imprisonment, respectively. By the time of the public announcement, the executions had been carried out. 
In their post-mortems, the major news organizations praised the Military Commission for its fairness and integrity, the Supreme Court for its quick review and approval of the Commission's legali3tyV,- and the entire process as a victory for democracy and justice. The Washington Post's analysis was typical: 
the eight Nazi saboteurs have been executed. [... ] It was hardly surprising, under the circumstances, that many an impatient voice was raised regarding the seeming laggardness of the procedure that was being followed and many an impatient demand was made that the culprits be summarily executed. That certainly was what would have occurred in Germany under similar circumstances. But drum-head trials and summary executions are not the American way. The very enormity of the crime these eight saboteurs had committed made it all the more essential, not for their sake but for ours, that their guilt be established beyond peradventure of a doubt, that they be given the benefit of able counsel, that all the facts be fully reviewed. All this was done. It was bound to take time. Yet, actually, justice was swift and sure. A month after the military commission first convened the verdict of this distinguished tribunal was carried out. Nothing was lost by this punctilious procedure. But Americans can have the satisfaction of knowing that even in a time of great national peril we did not stoop to the practices of our enemies. And those who may seek to follow in the steps of the eight will be under no illusion as to what is in store for them if they are caught. 3 6 The New Republic stated that the process revealed that "even in wartime and even toward the enemy we do not abandon our basic protection of individual rights. 3'7 The New York Herald Tribune, in an editorial entitled "Justice has Been Done," asserted: 
a terrible war, did not receive a full and fair trial. Nor, on the other hand, can it be said that the issue of the trial has jeoptaircdeizheadvethbeeesnafveitnydoicfattheed innattihoen.eyeAsmoefrtihceanwoprrlidn.c3i8ples of jusEven the condemned Nazis acknowledged that they had "been given a fair trial" and that their military lawyers had "represented our case as American officers unbiased, better that we could39expect and probably risking the indignation of public opinion. 
Almost three months after the saboteurs were executed, the Supreme Court released its unanimous opinion-Ex Parte Quirin40-explaining why the Military Commission was constitutionally valid. The Court first interpreted Roosevelt's preclusion of judicial review to permit review on habeas corpus. It then reasoned that Congress had authorized the use of military commissions to try violations of the laws of war, and that at least some of the acts allegedly committed by the defendants constituted such violations. 2 The Court distinguished a leading Civil War precedent, Ex ParteMilligan4,3 which had held that a U.S. civilian charged with conspiracy against the federal government could not be tried by a military commission when federal courts were "open to hear criminal accusations and redress grievances."44 Quirin held that Milligan involved an individual who was 4n5ot an enemy belligerent and thus not subject to the laws of war. 

1942 


Editorial, Justice Has Been Done, N.Y. Herald Tribune, Section II, 8 (Aug 9, 
The announcement of the Court's opinion in Quirin was reported with little fanfare. We found no editorial commentary about the opinion in any of the mainstream periodicals mentioned above. The ACLU's Wartime Civil Liberties Reports covering the years 1942 and 1943, which contained lists of "deplored" and "regretted" civil liberties violations by government officials (including the Supreme Court), failed even to mention Quirin4.6 Moreover, the legal commentary that emerged in the law reviews in the years following Quirin,generally "applauded" the decision. 47 "Because most legal commentators agreed with what the Chief Justice was trying to accomplish, they found unobjectionable both the Quirin ruling and the way which he had justified it."'48 In the context of the events of late 1942, the decision in Quirin to limit Milligan and to uphold the validity of Roosevelt's Military Commission was not viewed as a big deal. 
II. 9/11 AND THE REACTION TO THE BUSH 
MILITARY ORDER 
The reaction to President Bush's Order to establish Military Commissions was much different from the reaction to Roosevelt's. The public supported the Bush Military Commission proposal by a greater than 2-1 margin.4 ' Though significant, this support is more ambiguous and less enthusiastic than the public support Roosevelt received in 1942. But the real differences in reaction were in Congress and especially the mainstream press and members of the legal academy. These institutions reacted with vehement, and sometimes strident, opposition. The New York Times typified the reaction of many newspapers: (1943). 
conclusion, see, for example, Cyrus Bernstein, The Saboteur Trial: A Case History, 11 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 131 (1943); Robert E. Cushman, Ex Pane Quirin et al-The Nazi Saboteur Case, 28 Cornell L.Q. 54 (1942); George Schilling, Saboteurs and the Jurisdictionof Military Commissions, 41 Mich. L. Rev. 481 (1942); Note, 17 Tulane L. Rev. 475 (1943); Note, 31 Geo. L.J. 90 (1942). For more critical contemporary perspectives, see Edward S. Corwin, Total War and the Constitution 118 (Alfred Knopf, 1947); Charles Barber, Trialof Unlawful Enemy Belligerents,29 Cornell L.Q. 53 (1944). 

Harvard University's Kennedy School, 64% answered "'yes," and 26% answered "no," to the question "Do you favor or oppose military tribunals for non-citizens suspected of terrorism who are captured outside the United States or arrested inside the nation's borders?" See NPRIKaiser/KennedySchool Poll on Civil Liberties, as reported in NPR, Poll: Security Trumps Civil Liberties (Nov 30, 2001), available at <http://www.npr.org/news/ specials/civillibe rtiespoll/01 1130. poll.html>. 
terrorists is a dangerous idea .... In his effort to defend America from terrorists, Mr. Bush is eroding the very values and principles he seeks to protect, including the rule of law. The administration's action.. .do[es] an end run around the Constitution.... [B]y ruling that terrorists fall outside the norms of civilian and military justice, Mr. Bush has taken it upon himself to establish a prosecutorial channel that answers only to him. The decision is an insult to the exquisite balancing of executive, legislative and judicial powers that the framers incorporated into the Constitution. With the flick of a pen, in this case, Mr. Bush has essentially discarded the rulebook of American justice painstakingly assembled over the course of more than two centuries. In the place of fair trials and due process he has substituted a crude and unaccountable system that any dictator would admire.... Using secretive military tribunals would ultimately undermine American interests in the Islamic world by casting doubt on the credibility of a verdict against Osama bin Laden and his aides. No amount of spinning by Mr. Bush's public relations team could overcome the impression that the verdict had been dictated before the trial began. Reliance on tribunals would also signal a lack of confidence in the case a~ainst the terrorists and in the nation's democratic institutions. 
The New York Times dismissed the Roosevelt precedent for military tribunals as "an embarrassing skirting of the legal process." Other prominent newspapers reacted in a similar fashion. 2 
Many members of Congress also reacted critically to the Order. Democratic representative Conyers, the ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee, called the order "a civil liberties calamity" that puts "the executive branch in the unattainable role of legislator, prosecutor, judge and jury., 53 Representative Kucinich described the Bush Order as "Kafka's The Trial writ large," and added that "we should not let the actions of terrorists cause us to reject our American system of justice.,1 4 Representative Bob Barr, the conservative republican from Georgia, stated the "executive order takes your breath away, if you read the details of it."55 Democratic Senator Leahy accused the Bush administration of ignoring "the checks and balances that make up our constitutional framework," adding that it improperly "cut out Congress in determining the appropriate tribunal and procedures to try terrorists," and "sends a terrible message to the world that, when confronted with a serious challenge, we lack confidence in the very institutions we are fighting for.1156 
Finally, the legal academy came out strongly against military commissions. Most strikingly, a letter to Senator Leahy, drafted by Yale Law School professors and students, and signed by over 700 law professors and lawyers, claimed that Bush's Order authorized the creation of institutions that were "legally deficient, unnecessary, and unwise." It added that Bush's Military Order "undermines the tradition of [s]eparation of [p]owers" because, in contrast to Roosevelt's Commission, which was based on an "express[] grant[]" of legislative authorization, the Bush Order was "without congressional approval." The letter added that "the use of military commissions would be unwise, as it could endanger American lives and complicate American foreign policy." The letter concluded: "The proposal to abandon our existing legal institutions in favor of such a constitutionally questionable endeavor is misguided. Our democracy is at its most resolute when we meet crises with out bedrock ideals intact and unyielding."5 7 Many law professors echoed the same themes in editorials across the country. 8 
III. WHY THE DIFFERENT REACTIONS? 
The reaction to President Bush's Military Order presents the following puzzle. In 1942, FDR's creation and use of a military commission was widely viewed as legitimate, appropriate, constitutionally valid, authorized by Congress, consistent with American democratic and rule-of-law values, protective of civil liberties, and helpful to the war effort. In 2001, Bush's Order to establish military commissions was widely viewed (at least among elites) to be illegitimate, inappropriate, unprecedented, unauthorized, unconstitutional, undemocratic, violative of basic civil liberties, harmful to the war effort, and self-defeating. Why were the seemingly similar Military Orders greeted with such different elite reactions? 
We begin with four explanations that have some surface appeal but that cannot, we believe, explain the different reactions to the Roosevelt and Bush Orders. 

Many people, including some distinguished professors of law, have argued that Congress granted Roosevelt the authority to establish military commissions to try Nazi saboteurs, while President Bush's Order lacked congressional approval.59 On this view, the reason for the different reactions lies in significant differences in the legal basis for the two orders. But there are no such differences. The Bush Order was premised on 10 U.S.C. §821, which states that the creation of statutory jurisdiction for court martials does not "deprive military commissions.., of concurrent jurisdiction with respect to offenders or offenses that.., by the law of war may be tried by military commissions. 6 ° Roosevelt's Order was premised on the identicallyworded predecessor to this statute, Article 15 of the Articles of War-the very statute that a unanimous Supreme Court in Quirin held was "explicit[]" congressional authorization for the President to establish military commissions.6' 
Far from being on more tenuous ground than the Roosevelt Order, one could plausibly argue that the Bush Order is on firmer legal ground in light of the relevant precedents. When Roosevelt created his Military Commission, the leading precedent was Milligan. Bush's military commissions, by contrast, could rely on the more recent, more supportive, and probably more relevant Quirin precedent. Because Quirin was on the books when Bush created his commissions but not when Roosevelt created his, Bush's commissions have stronger grounding in Supreme Court precedent. 
In addition, although Quirin held that Congress had affirmatively authorized military commissions in Article 15 of the Articles of War, Article 15 is probably best read merely as a congressional refusal to abroate a prior non-statutory jurisdiction for military commissions. . The Quirin Court thus may have erred in concluding that Congress had, at the time of the Quirin decision, authorized the President to establish military commissions. But Congress re-enacted Article 15 in 1950, recodifying it at 10 U.S.C. §821 against the background of the Quirininterpretation. The legislative history to this reenacted provision suggests that Congress was aware of, and accepted, Quirin's interpretation of the provision.63 And this, in turn, makes it more plausible today than at the time of Quirin that Congress has in fact authorized the President to establish military commissions. Hence the Bush Order has two bases of support that the Roosevelt Order lacked: Quirin itself and a clearer congressional authorization.64 offenses against the law of war before such commissions."). 
35055 (1952); see also statement of the Judge Advocate General of the Army, Brig. Gen. Enoch H. Crowder, S. Rep. No. 130, 64th Cong. 1st Sess. 53, 40-41 (1916) (in context of Article 15, asserting that military commission "has not been formally authorized by statute," but noting that Article 15 was designed to make clear that the "common law of war jurisdiction was not ousted"); Madsen, 343 U.S. at 353 (referring to General Crowder's testimony concerning Article 15 as "authoritative"). 
1st Sess. at 13 (June 10, 1949) ("The language of [Article of War] 15 has been preserved because it has been construed by the Supreme Court. (Ex Parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1 (1942))."); H. Rept. 491, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 81st Cong., 1st Sess. at 17 (April 28, 1949) (same). 
on Article 15 concerning a law of war violation, but also on Articles 81 (relieving the enemy) and 82 (spying). See Katyal and Tribe, 111 Yale L.J. at 1281-90 (cited in note 2). It is true that charges were brought against the saboteurs under Articles 15, 81, and 82. But three passages in Quirin suggest that the Court thought-rightly or wrongly-that Article 15 itself authorized military commission trials for violations of the law of war: A. "By the Articles of War, and especially by Article 15, Congress has explic 
Our point here is not to argue that Bush's Order was in fact on firmer legal ground than Roosevelt's. There are other issues that may affect the legality of the two commissions in different ways. 61 Our point is simply to show that differences in the legality of the two commissions simply cannot explain the differences in reaction to them. In fact, we believe that far from explaining the different reactions to the Roosevelt and Bush orders, the perceived legal differences between the two orders are a product of those different reactions. During World War II, the weaker points in the Executive's position did not receive thorough critical scrutiny, to say the least. By contrast, skepticism about the Bush Order resulted in intense concern with the legal technicalities and a high degree of doubt about plausible legal arguments. The very fact that some people now doubt and seek to confine the reasoning of Quirin66 attests to our basic claim: A decision of a unanimous Supreme Court, welcomed at the time, is now seen, in many quarters, as an alarming and even dangerous precedent. 
Another potentially relevant difference between 1942 and 2001 can be found in international law. In 1955, the United States ratified the 1949 Geneva Conventions on the Protection of Prisoners of War, and in 1992 the United States ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights ("ICCPR"). Neither of these treaties was in force in 1942; both of them potentially affect the legality of the Bush Military Order under international law. Can the Bush Order's possible illegality under international law explain the differences in reaction? 
We doubt it. The main reason is that the severest reactions to the Bush Order, in November and December 2001, were premised on violations of American constitutional and civil liberties traditions, and not on violations of international law. For the most part, the people who criticized Bush's Order did not invoke the Order's potential international law difficulties. When complaints based on international law arose in early 2002, they did so mostly in connection with the treatment of "detainees" in Guantanamo, not with respect to military commissions. International law arguments have remained at the periphery of the debate within the United States about the legality of military commissions. 
Moreover, it is hard to see how the international law changes affect the validity of the military commissions, as opposed to the proceduresthe commissions must employ. Assuming that the Geneva Convention applies to the al Qaeda and Taliban detainees (a contested point), the Convention contemplates the use of military commissions, and thus does not call their legality per se into question." Thus a broad-scale dismissal of military commissions (as opposed to commission-related complaints about access to counsel and federal appellate review) could not be based on the Geneva Convention. As for the ICCPR, it says nothing about military commissions. While it does guarantee certain basic procedural rights such as the right to choose counsel and be presumed innocent,68 it also recognizes that a state party to the treaty may "derogate" from these obligations if it certifies that an emergency affecting the safety of the nation so requires.6 9 
military commission nor attempted to derogate from the ICCPR. 
Once again our point is not to argue that the Bush Order was in fact legal under international law, for this claim raises many complicated issues that are far beyond our concern here. Our point is simply that whatever the validity of the international law objections to military commissions, differences in international law in 1942 and 2001 do not adequately explain the different reaction of elites in the United States. 
In 1940 FDR was elected to his third term in a landslide in 1940; in 2000 Bush won controversially and lost the popular vote. Attorney General Biddle was a well-respected establishment figure; he was also a member of the ACLU and NAACP, and was in general "revered by liberals."7° Attorney General Ashcroft, while an establishment figure in many ways, is viewed with suspicion by the civil liberties left and some on the libertarian right. In the 1940s, actions by the Executive branch met with a much greater presumption of approval, at least within elite circles. Perhaps there is a kind of heuristic at work in the contemporary reaction. If Bush and Ashcroft are in favor of doing something that might be objectionable from the standpoint of civil liberties, some people might think it reasonable to assume that the action is, in fact, objectionable from that standpoint. A similar heuristic may have been at work in the 1940s. If Roosevelt and Biddle were in favor of doing something that might be objectionable from the standpoint of civil liberties, many people thought it reasonable to assume that the action is not, in fact, objectionable from that standpoint. The heuristic does the work of a more fine-grained analysis. 
We think that this difference has some explanatory value. Distrust of Bush and Ashcroft by some elites was hardly irrelevant. But the point is insufficient by itself. Counterfactuals are notoriously hazardous, but imagine, for example, if a President Gore and his Attorney General (Reno? Tribe?) were responsible for a military order akin to that issued by President Bush. The critical reaction would have been diminished in some circles, but it would have been increased in others. We strongly suspect that it would have been far closer to the reaction to the Bush Order than to the Roosevelt Order. 
There were many salient differences between the authorizations for the Roosevelt and Bush military commissions. Roosevelt's was much briefer than Bush's. Unlike Bush's, Roosevelt's applied to U.S. citizens. But Roosevelt's had a far narrower scope. It applied only to persons who entered the United States to commit sabotage and related acts. Perhaps most important, Roosevelt's authorization specifically named the eight saboteurs who would be tried by Military Commission. The Bush Order, by contrast, applied not just to al Qaeda members and others who committed terrorist acts against the United States, but also to anyone who "aided or abetted" the commission of terrorist acts or "knowingly harbored" terrorists. And it did not include the names of any persons who would be tried before military commissions. 
The important point is that it was clear from the beginning who would be tried before the Roosevelt Military Commission. The defendants were in hand and widely known to be saboteurs; there was no real doubt about their guilt; and their names were included in the set of proclamations establishing the Commission. By contrast, the persons to whom the Bush Order might apply, and their factual guilt, remain uncertain. We speculate that the critical reaction to the Bush Order would have been radically diminished if it applied only to people who were already under arrest for helping to plan the September 11 attack. One of the palpable concerns of the critics is that military commissions might convict the innocent. 71 There was no serious question about the essential guilt of those tried before Roosevelt's Commission. And there is a psychological point as well: A vivid sense of the identity of the perpetrators could well heighten the sense that an expeditious proceeding is appropriate, and under the right conditions, such a sense could also weaken the protests of those who insist on what they see as procedural requirements. 
But again, this cannot be the whole picture. Here as elsewhere, counterfactuals are notoriously hard to assess. But is it plausible to think that military commissions would have been uncontroversial in 2001 and 2002 if the defendants were identified, were in custody, and were widely viewed to be guilty? It note 52) (urging that under military tribunals "innocent people likely will be convicted and punished" because "[t]he nature of the rules almost guarantees mistakes"). might well be that the identification of the perpetrators would, in many circles, have fortified the insistence on the need for an ordinary civil trial. We think that the most important and instructive differences lie elsewhere. 
We now turn to two explanations that we think better account for the differences in reaction in 1942 and 2001. 
The capture of the Nazi saboteurs was one of the first pieces of good news in an unprecedentedly large-scale war that had not gone well during the first half of 1942. The future of the Nation was at serious risk, and everyone was aware of that fact. World War II was a "total war" that mobilized the entire Nation. Nearly everyone had relatives or acquaintances involved in the fighting, and tens of thousands of Americans had been killed or captured by the summer of 1942. On the home front, there were daily reminders of the war, including rubber shortages, gas rationing, and wage and price controls. Most people had a genuine fear of invasion by the Japanese on the west coast; and on the east coast German submarines had sunk hundreds of ships. Everything was disrupted; all of life was changed. There was no ambiguity about whether the Nation was at war, or about whether the nation's survival was at stake. 
The events following 9/11 are much different- certainly thus far. 9/11 has required relatively few sacrifices or changes in American life. There is a general (though diminishing) fear among the population. And there have been (relatively minor) disruptions at airports. But we have seen none of the mobilization and sacrifice (or call to sacrifice) that characterized World War II, and the United States has suffered only a comparatively small number of military casualties. The main imperative to the civilian population following 9/11 was not "sacrifice," but rather "spend." Many continue to question whether military action is an appropriate response to 9/11, whether we can truly be at "war" against non-state actors like al Qaeda, and whether the 9/11 attacks represent a true threat to the Nation's survival. 
These radical differences in war contexts unquestionably help explain the different reactions to the 1942 and 2001 Order establishing military commissions. For those who view the stakes to be lower now than they were perceived to be in 1942, it is altogether natural to question the wisdom of military commissions. Of course it would be extreme to suggest that the Nation's prospects for success in World War II would have been seriously compromised by the use of ordinary civil courts. But in 1942, the widespread perception of a threat to national survival made it far harder for people to insist on the use of those courts. For better or for worse, solicitude for the interests of accused belligerents will diminish when the risks to the Nation seem most serious and tangible. If the current situation does not seem like a genuine war, then civilian rather than military trials seem more appropriate. If the stakes of the conflict are relatively low, then the justification for diminishing civil liberties and protecting secrets is relatively weak. If 9/11 is not a genuine threat to the nation's survival, then the usual tradeoffs of ordinary civilian trials-in which erroneous acquittals are the price we pay for procedures that diminish the risk of erroneous convictions -seem appropriate. 
Some platitudes are worth repeating: When a nation believes that its future is at risk, it will not be so careful about the protecting the perceived interests of those who are, or who might well be, involving in creating the relevant threat. But here too a cautionary note is appropriate. Suppose that the threat posed by the events of 9/11 were thought to be far greater than they now are. Would military commissions be widely approved? As widely as in 1942? This is doubtful. To be sure, the reaction to military commissions would be more muted if, for example, terrorists exploded a nuclear suitcase bomb, killing 100,000 people. Hence the perception of a lesser threat, in 2001 and 2002, is a contributing factor to the public reaction. But it is hardly all of the picture. 
It is not possible to account for the different reactions to the Roosevelt and Bush Orders without emphasizing large social and related legal changes within the last sixty years. President Roosevelt acted before Vietnam, before the revelations of Hoover's domestic espionage, and before Watergate. To say the least, this was a time when the press, Congress, and intellectuals had a much higher regard for the Executive branch and the Military. 
In July 1942, Arthur Krock defended the elaborate secrecy of the Nazi saboteur trial on the following terms: "The FBI vouches for the need of secrecy and the administration's lawyers support the legality of the procedure. Unless these lead to clear abuses, neither is likely to be called into broad question., 72 A passage of this sort in the New York Times is unimaginable in the 1960s and 1970s, Executive branch officers -Democrat or Republican, liberal or conservative -receive diminished levels of trust, at least when there is a plausible claim that civil liberties are at risk. Compare in this regard the frequent suggestion that President Bush's Order called for "secret military trials"-a claim that was not supported by the Order itself, which did not mandate secrecy. 
But the cultural difference is not adequately described as involving a mere reduction in trust. It involved at the same time a massively strengthened commitment to individual rights, not only within the culture but within the legal system itself. Begin with culture: In 1942, "neither the country, nor its political and intellectual leaders, nor such organizations as the American Civil Liberties Union, were truly libertarian in their outlook. 7 3 In 1942, restrictions on free speech did not produce a firestorm of public protest. Libelous speech was commonly regulated, without discernible public objection. Commercial speech received no protection at all, while sexually explicit speech was heavily controlled, and there was little organized cultural opposition to these practices. Of course this was an era of racial segregation, and public opposition to discrimination was far more tepid than it is today. Nor did the public insist on what we now take to be minimal procedural safeguards for the accused. There is a large question about why, exactly, the culture has shifted in the direction of more solicitude for civil liberties and civil liberties. Undoubtedly World War II itself played a role, encouraging American culture to attempt to distinguish itself radically from those of regimes that did not respect freedom. We cannot fully address the causal question here; but it is clear that the shift has been massive. 
fundamentally different from what it is today. The Court that (July 
BriefAuthority 234-35 (Doubleday, 1962). wrote Quirin was the same Court that supported the Japanese exclusion in Korematsu. Indigent defendants did not yet have a right to counsel.7 4 Within the states, the exclusionary rule was yet to be created.75 Police abuses had not yet been held to be generally violative of the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.76 In fact the criminal procedure revolution was decades away. 17 
In addition, habeas corpus review has changed significantly since 1942. Beginning a few months after Quirin was decided, the Supreme Court began its dramatic extension of habeas corpus from a review of jurisdictional defects in prior judicial proceedings to something closer to post-conviction federal review of the merits of defendants' federal constitutional and statutory claims.78 This expanded conception of habeas was the procedural mechanism that made possible the extraordinary growth, in the late 1950s and 1960s, of constitutional protections for defendants in criminal cases. Although the Rehnquist Court has cut back on the scope of habeas corpus, the writ in its modern guise remains available for properly raised claims of constitutional deprivation. Moreover, the expansion of habeas was not limited to civilian trials. It has also extended to military trials of U.S. service members, even ones held abroad.7 9 
Finally, military justice itself has undergone a fundamental transformation since 1942. Congress's enactment of the Uniform Code of Military Justice ("UCMJ") in 1950 marked "the most important development in military justice since our country's founding." 80 The Articles of War regime that governed during World War II was a "command-dominated system... designed to secure obedience to the commander, and to serve the commander's will."'" Military justice during this period contained few of the procedural protections of the civilian criminal system, and was widely criticized as "harsh and arbitrary. ' 82 Following World War II, in which the U.S. military fought to preserve American freedoms, it was widely believed that these freedoms should extend to the military itself. 
The UCMJ applied the civilian concept of procedural justice in a way that was consistent with the special circumstances of the military.83 The UCMJ and its successor statutes (such as the Military Justice Act of 1968)84 established a powerful Court of Military Appeals, independent of command structures, that would eventually extend most conceptions of civilian due process to military courts. The Military Justice Act of 1983 continued this trend by authorizing Supreme Court review of the Court of Military Appeals. Today military justice remains different from civilian justice in important respects. But as Justice Ginsburg correctly noted in Weiss v. United States, "men and women in the Armed Forces do not leave constitutional safeguards behind.., when they enter military service," for the present system of military justice is "notably more sensitive to due process concerns than the one prevailing through most of our country's history."85 
In the past 60 years, in sum, the Nation has become far more committed to the independence of the federal judiciary and to a high degree of civil liberties and criminal procedural protections. The legal and social world of 2001 is radically different from the legal and social world of 1942. In this new world, it was much more natural to think that the displacement of civilian courts in favor of a more expeditious military procedure would offend constitutional values. 
DURING WARTIME 
The different reactions to the Roosevelt and Bush military commissions exemplify a persistent theme in the historical evolution of civil liberties during wartime in the United States. Dur81. Id. at3. 
Appealsfor The Armed Forces,1775-1980 ing every serious war in our nation's history, civil liberties have been curtailed. Following (usually not during) each war, elites regret these restrictions on civil liberties because the restrictions often seem-from the ex post perspective when the danger of war has passed and the true extent of the threats become known-to be unwarranted or extreme. During the next war, the perceived abuses during the last war are used as the baseline for determining which civil liberties restrictions are appropriate. This dialectic produces a ratchet effect, over time, in favor of more expansive civil liberties during wartime. Of course there is nothing inevitable to this process. We could imagine an opposite effect, in which a failure to provide adequate security was recognized as such, in hindsight, and in which the ratchet effect worked in the opposite direction. But in the American context, with a remarkable record of military success, the historical trend has been toward increasing suspicion of intrusions on civil liberty and civil rights, even when national security seems to be at risk. 
Arthur Krock of the New York Times again illustrates the point. In a column on July 14, 1942, Krock recalled a bill proposed by Senator Chamberlin during World War I to punish spies and disloyalists by court martial. The proposal, Krock noted, came in 1918, when "a wave of hysteria about spies and sabotage has swept the country.,1 6 The bill died after President Wilson opposed it on the ground that it was unconstitutional, inconsistent "with the spirit and practice of America," and in any event unnecessary in light of the Espionage Act and Sabotage Act. 
Krock recounted this episode in order to show, in the midst of the saboteurs trial, that "the country seems to have grown up" since 1918 with respect to civil liberties. "No such proposal [like Chamberlin's] or anything remotely like it has been responsibly put forth in Congress or among the public," he noted. He continued: 
the proceedings of the military commission [for the Nazi saboteurs]. The contrast is very great between this deliberate search for truth and justice in a case where more summary methods might easily have been invoked and what Mr. 
Chamberlain would have done to anyone merely charged with (July 14, 1942). far lesser crimes twenty-four years ago. 87 
From today's perspective, much of Krock's piece seems peculiar. Wilson's favorable invocation in 1918 of the Espionage Act in an argument protective of civil liberties appears ironic, even weird, to the modern observer. For the Espionage Act was amended in May 1918 to include the Sedition Act, a statute that formed the basis of some of the most notorious, and widely regretted, anti-free speech prosecutions in U.S. history.8" But the contemporary supporters of the Sedition Act, many of whom viewed themselves as "enlightened liberals" protective of the First Amendment, 9 were no doubt implicitly comparing their acts to the last great war, in which Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus, arrested civilians and tried them in military commissions, seized newspapers and suspended their mailing privileges, and much more.9 Similarly, many today have difficulty understanding how Krock could view a (literally) secret military commission as a dignified and deliberate search for truth. But Krock's claim seemed natural in 1942, for his implicit baseline of comparison was the World War I experience.91 
The Krock episode illustrates what Chief Justice Rehnquist has described as a "generally ameliorative trend" in civil liberties during wartime. 92 Rehnquist notes that World Wars I and II were each, by comparison to the prior war, characterized by increased congressional and judicial involvement in the protection of civil liberties, and diminished governmental attempts to suppress criticism of the war effort. 93 To Rehnquist's catalogue we add the more general point that restrictions of civil liberties that came to be regretted after the war were never again repeated. No President has ever repeated Lincoln's suspension of the writ of habeas corpus, his military trials for civilians in the United States, or his brutal suppression of newspapers. We have never again seen loyalty prosecutions as in World War I, and we are unlikely to do so. The same is true of the World War II exclusion of Japanese-Americans. 
This brings us back to the Bush Military Order. Following World War II, many criticized the use of some military commissions during the War, especially the ones in Japan. But the commissions were not condemned with the same vehemence, and were not looked back upon with the same sense of shame, as Lincoln's suspension of the writ, or the World War I speech prosecutions, or the World War II Japanese exclusion Order. In the post-war period, military commissions were not generally viewed as a horrible "mistake" never to be repeated again. As we noted above, in 1950 Congress recodified the statute that supported the military trial of the Nazis, and in the process appeared to embrace Quirin's interpretation of affirmative congressional authorization for military commissions. And in sharp contrast to, say, Korematsu, Quirinhas often been cited without embarrassment by the Supreme Court as good law.94 In this light, it is perhaps not surprising that the Bush military commissions, though subject to criticism, was not unthinkable in 2001, and indeed attracted some support among some elites. 
It remains to be seen whether the President will use military commissions to prosecute those connected to the 9/11 attacks. If he does not, one important reason will be the changed circumstances -including changed legal and cultural circumstanceswe have outlined. If he does, the commissions will look far more like civilian courts than past commissions. Department of Defense regulations provide that commission trials are open except when necessary to protect national security or the safety of participants. The regulations also presume the innocence of the accused, require proof beyond a reasonable doubt, require the prosecutor to provide the accused with access to all evidence to be introduced at trial, including exculpatory evidence, forbid adverse inferences to be drawn from the accused's failure to testify, 425 U.S. 25, 34 (1976); Parkerv. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 768 (1974) (Douglas, J., dissenting); Gosa v. Mayden, 413 U.S. 665,685-686 (1972); United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 377 (1968); Reid v. Covert, 354 U.S. 1, 37 n. 68 (1957). By contrast, compare the treatment of Korematsuin, for example, Stenberg v. Carhart,530 U.S. 914, 953 (2000) (Scalia, J., concurring); Skinner v. Railway LaborExecutives' Ass'n, 489 U.S. 602, 635 (1989) (Marshall, J., dissenting); Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469, 501 (1989). We should note that there was one dimension along which Quirin was deeply regretted ex post, namely, the haste in which the decision was reached, and the unfortunate circumstance of writing and releasing the opinion after six of the eight saboteurs had been executed. See Danelski, 1 J. S. Ct. Hist. 61 (cited in note 3). provide the accused with a military attorney and allow him to choose another attorney, require a 2/3 vote for conviction and a unanimous vote for a death sentence, and require at least two levels of review, including one level that can (but need not) contain civilian judges.95 While these procedures fall short of civilian standards (especially with respect to evidence rules, the jury, and judicial review), they are in most respects like military trials under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and they provide far greater procedural safeguards than any previous military commission, including Nuremberg. These procedural advances can be seen as a result of the factors we have discussed. In short, changes in the use and structure of military commissions fit the general trend described here: 
So too do the other restrictions that the Bush administration has placed on civil liberties. Civil libertarians have condemned the Bush administration's monitoring of attorney-client phone calls, its treatment of the Guantanamo prisoners, its detention of alleged "dirty bomber" Jose Padilla as an "enemy belligerent," and its detentions of Muslims on technical immigration violations. We do not express a view on these practices; nothing said here is meant to approve of them, for approval would require a detailed analysis of each. But compared to past wars led by Lincoln, Wilson, and Roosevelt, the Bush administration has, thus far, diminished relatively few civil liberties. Even a conservative Executive branch, it seems, is influenced by the general trend towards protections of civil liberties during wartime. 
There is a potential danger here. The danger is that in an age of anthrax, nuclear suitcases, and other easy-to-conceal weapons of mass destruction, the threat posed by al Qaeda and other terrorists might warrant tradeoffs between liberty and security that are inconsistent with ordinary respect for civil liberties. It is always difficult to gauge the seriousness of wartime threats to security in the midst of the war. The problem is significantly exacerbated in the context of asymmetrical warfare involving suicidal terrorists. Whether the government has made the proper tradeoff between liberty and order can be known only ex post. The ameliorative trend in civil liberties is a testament to our extraordinary constitutional traditions and legal culture-and perhaps above all to the post-World War II shift in legal understandings. It is customary, and sensible, to fear that an dfenselink.mil/news/Mar2002/d20020321ord.pdf.>. overestimation of the current threat will lead us to abridge civil liberties in unjustifiable ways. But it is not senseless to fear as well that the gravitational pull of this trend might, in this or other circumstances, lead some to underestimate the threat we actually face. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The different reactions to the Roosevelt and Bush Orders illuminate a great deal about the relationship between war and civil liberties, and about cultural and legal change over time. We have argued that perceived legal differences between the Orders, far from explaining the different reactions, are a product of those different reactions. The enthusiasm for the Roosevelt Order, and the critical reaction to the Bush Order, can be explained partly by the much greater perception of threat in 1942 than in think, lies in the fact that with respect to actions of the Executive branch that might endanger civil liberties, the Nation is now far less trusting of government, and far more solicitous of the accused, than it was sixty years ago. This change counts as a genuine revolution not only in law but also in cultural attitudes. An exploration of the radically different attitudes toward essentially identical legal acts is a remarkable illustration of this revolution. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. American Academy of Arts & Sciences and MIT Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Daedalus. 
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Cass R. Sunstein on a 
danger of deliberative 
a highly publicized shooting local high school, a group of people 
most of them tenta the community, tively in favor of greater gun control, comes to discuss new 
the possibili gun control meas 
in if anything, will happen views as a result of this dis to punitive misconduct behavior 
The likely behavior of individuals in much 
neglected group polarization. es serious dangers democratic 
questions of deliberation, settings. 
phenomenon This reveals a striking but 
:that of phenomenon about 
the potential even in some rais 
In brief, the phenomenon of group po larization means that the members of a deliberating toward amore group predictably extreme 
point of their pre-deliberation the Texas that meets move in the di views. rection 
Thus, debate come more and extent of group polarization. 
of individuals have a comparatively toward current favorable 
attitude of the Bush ad tax rates. When involved, duce ments. 
group significant a rhetorical deliberation shifts in individual advantage will pro 
is judg 
Group polarization work in feuds, ethnic strife, and war. One is inevitably at and international of the characteristic of this features of feuds is that members ministration, whose members likely to create a strong tendency Gulick), it is urged 
have a built-in victory Reflections from World War II, that demo 
II (Adsystems advantage war over their nondemocratic during adversaries, cratic 
systems are discussed vance, occur, making corrected. 
simply members group polarization of the group 
If certain group identity." 
with liberating many ers, views will not merely but instead shifted to more points. itself 
perhaps is good - but it is certainly if diverse 
social groups predictable creasingly treme views. democracy? 
We noting Constitution erative combines of reflection party while cism. What called drawing democratic 'groupthink' attention opposing mechanisms, 
and ever more How does all this bear on the theory of might approach that question by that the framers of the American democracy, accountability attempted that is, a system with ameasure to create a delib 
that and reason-giving. From 
deliberation, the standpoint of political the central problem error and social fragmentation to result when like-minded lated from others move rections ment pools simply and parochial because 
people in extreme of limited influences. 
are likely insu di argu is that widespread Compare tion, which a system of one-party stifles dissent in part be domina cause it refuses to establish way, emergence of divergent it intensifies positions 
within space for the 
; in this polarization 
external also disabling Irvin Janis some years ago can be understood 
criti to the ways 
inwhich institutions can be subject the as to some of the same problems. 
How can this be prevented? 
is tomaintain sibility erable diversity inwhich different 
deliberating to their own internal reach different subject might ultimately In a remarkable pressures, conclusions and a system and checks and balances, 
One 
pos of consid groups, groups, whether isolate themselves views. This freedom structure, Internet. stitution cameralism passions, tion, would 
point of association, and the architecture has implications bureaucratic of the 
for Indeed, the framers of the Con understood 
the system of bi as a check on the risk that in the form of group polariza 
lead to ill-considered deci sions from one or another house. society's while also tremism violence. 
No resulting 
But a simple tional design. argument 
pools ing enclaves will increase the diversity aggregate 
increasing and instability, 'argument the danger pool' 
of ex ultimately even algorithm conundrums. 
is available 
to solve the likely to produce unfortunate correctives can be introduced effects, simply by at one point depends very much on the nature exposing group members, or another, to arguments to which are not antecedently inclined. of deliberation, as a social phenomenon, on social context 
they The value 
and the na of the process ture of the participants. 
Here institutions are crucial. 
spaces for deliberat ing groups without insulating members from those who have views, 
and without 
insulating from the views of those lesson involves 
institu To the extent that limited and social influences are 
& uncertainty group 
opposing those out 
Inwar, significant role was much scientists 
shared it for the Allied that war, science technological role. InWorld advances 
War play a 
II, that larger than ever before, a great deal of the cred victory. During had sufficient from prestige establishment the holder of twenty-one patents, author of over two hundred scientificpapers, and a member of theNational Academy of Sciences and theNa tionalAcademy of Engineering. He has done research in several interdisciplinary areas, includ ingmagnetically of supersonic high-intensity molecular beams; 
Outrage is a common reaction to perceived wrongdoing. Those who feel outrage are often motivated to injure or punish wrongdoers, whether through violence, law, or otherwise. But how are legal outcomes affected by outrage? Inside and outside oflaw, how do people translate their outrage into more tangible penalties? How does group discussion affect outrage? Are groups more outraged than individuals or less so? 
In this Article I attempt to make some progress on these questions. For a number of years, I have been engaged in a series of experimental studies of punitive damage awards with Daniel Kahneman, David Schleade, and Ilana Ritov.' The goal of those studies has been to uncover some of the sources of unpredictability in such awards and also to understand the sources of low and high awards. The resulting work, much of it highly technical, seems to me to have broader implications for a range of issues in both law and politics. Many public officials and juries are charged with the task of "mapping" some factual or moral judgment onto a numerical scale, involving dollars or years. If punishment judgments are typically a function of outrage, the problems found injury behavior might well have analogies in criminal sentencing and administrative fines. And if punitive awards are erratic, for predictable reasons, might not the same be true for awards involving libel, intentional infliction of emotional distress, sexual harassment, and more? 
In any case, outrage, in mild and less mild forms, seems to help produce behavior in many domains. If we know something about the dynamics of outrage, we might be able to understand behavior that is otherwise inexplicable. An especially important issue involves the relationship between individual action and group action. If groups moderate outrage, or increase it, then we might be able to see what produces radicalism, extremism, and even violence and terrorism. In investigating some of these issues, I draw throughout on our empirical findings, *Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department ofPolitical Science, University of Chicago. This text is the basis for the Leary Lecture, delivered at the S.J. Quinney College of Law at the University of Utah on September 10, 2002. 
'See Daniel Kahneman et al., Shared Outrage and ErraticAwards: The Psychology of PunitiveDamages,16 J.RISK& UNCERTAINTY 49 (1998); David Schkade et al., DeliberatingAbout Dollars: The Severity Shift, 100 COLUM. L. REV. 1139 (2000); Cass R. Sunstein et al., Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071 (1998) [hereinafter Sunstein et al., AssessingPunitiveDamages];Cass R. Sunstein et al., Do People Want Optimal Deterrence?, 29 J. LEGAL STUD. 237 (2000) [hereinafter Sunstein et al., Optimal Deterrence?];Cass R. Sunstein et al., PredictablyIncoherentJudgments, 54 STAN. L. REV. 1153 (2002). Many of these papers are collected in CASS R. SUNSTEIN ET AL., PUNITIVE DAMAGES: How JURIES DECIDE (2002) [hereinafter SUNSTEIN ET AL., PUNITIVE DAMAGES]. 
717 but in a way that involves my own extrapolations, some of them admittedly speculative. 
The simplest lessons are that punitive awards are rooted in outrage; that levels of outrage command a degree of agreement among diverse Americans, at least in some domains; but that people have a great deal of difficulty in "mapping" their outrage onto a bounded scale. Among other things, we find that the process of group discussion dramatically changes individual views by making people move toward higher dollar awards. In other words, groups often go to extremes.2 The point has large implications for the role of outrage in deliberation and the effect of deliberation in altering outrage. We also find that people's judgments about cases, viewed one at a time, are very different from their judgments about cases seen together. Making one-shot decisions, people produce patterns that they themselves regard as arbitrary and senseless. The point has large implications for the aspiration to coherence within the legal system. 
More particularly, our principal findings are as follows:3 " " " " * 
In making moral judgments about personal injury cases, people's judgments are both predictable and widely shared. The judgments of one group of six people, or twelve people, nicely predict the judgments of another group of six people, or twelve people. These shared judgments cut across demographic differences, so that there is no difference, in the relevant cases, between rich and poor, old and young, white and African-American, poorly educated and well-educated. 
In making punitive damage awards about personal injury cases, people's judgments are highly unpredictable and far from shared. People do not have a clear sense of the meaning of different points along the dollar scale. Hence dollar judgments of one group of six people, or twelve people, do not well predict the dollar judgments of other groups of six people, or twelve people. As compared with the median of predeliberation judgments, the effect of deliberation is to increase dollar awards, often quite substantially. Group discussions have the remarkable effect of raising group members'judgments about appropriate punishment. And when people are outraged, group discussion makes them more outraged still. 
People care about deterrence, but they do not think in terms of optimal deterrence. People are intuitive retributivists, and they reject some of the most common and central understandings in economic and utilitarian theory. People's judgments about cases in isolation are systematically different from their judgments about cases taken together. The consequence of the system 2The point is discussed in more detail in ROGER BROWN, SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY: THE SECOND EDITION 200-45 (1986). 
3These findings are based on the studies cited supra note 1. of "one at a time" judgments is to produce a pattern of outcomes that seems incoherent to the very people who make those judgments. 
Now for some details. For purposes of the present discussion, I will speak broadly and in qualitative terms; readers interested in numbers and statistical analysis might consult the papers from which I shall draw. 
Suppose that people are asked to rank a set of personal injury cases, or libel cases, or cases involving sexual harassment or damage to the environment. Suppose, too, that people are asked to rate those cases, in terms of appropriate punishment, on a bounded numerical scale-say, 0 to 8, where 0 means "punished not at all," 4 means "punished moderately," and 8 means "punished extremely severely." Will people agree? Will the decision of one group of six, or twelve, provide good predictions about what other groups of six or twelve will do? The answer will depend on whether the social norms that govern moral outrage and intended punishment are widely shared. If they are shared, we should not expect sharp divergences in terms of both ranking and rating. 
Undertaking a series of studies of citizen judgments, we found that at least in some domains, the relevant norms are indeed widely shared. In personal injury cases, the judgment of any particular group of six is highly likely to provide a good prediction of the judgment of any other group of six. In this sense, a "moral judgment" jury is indeed able to serve as the conscience of the community. 
Indeed, we can go further. Members of different demographic groups show considerable agreement about how to rank and rate personal injury cases. Thousands of people were asked to rank and rate cases. Information was elicited about the demographic characteristics of all of those people. As a result, it is possible, with the help of the computer, to put individuals together, so as to assemble all-male juries, all-female juries, all-white juries, all-African-American juries, all-poor juries, all-rich juries, all-educated juries, all-less-educated juries, and so forth. Creating "statistical juries" in this way, we found no substantial disagreement, in terms of rating or ranking, within any group. In personal injury cases, people simply agree. 
Subsequent work has broadened this finding, showing that people agree on how to rank tax violations, environmental violations, and occupational safety and 'For more detailed discussion of the methods and findings presented in Parts I and 11,see the experimental studies cited supra note 1. health violations. From this evidence, it seems reasonable to hypothesize that in a wide range of domains, people will agree how to rank and rate cases. The moral norms within a heterogeneous culture are, to that extent, widely shared, and strikingly so. Now this does not mean that people will agree on how to rank cases from different categories (a point to which I will return).' Nor does it mean that small groups will always agree on how to do the ranking. But it does mean that within each category, agreement is the rule, not the exception. 
What about dollars? Do the broadly shared norms also produce regularity in jury verdicts? One of our central findings is that it does not. 
With respect to dollars, both individuals and jury-size groups are all over the map. Even when moral rankings are shared-as they generally are-dollar awards are extremely variable. A group that awards a "5" for defendant's misconduct might give a dollar award of $500,000, or $2 million, or $10 million. A group that awards a "7" might award $1 million, or $10 million, or $100 million. In fact, there is so much noise in the dollar awards that differences cannot be connected with demographic characteristics. It is not as if one group-whites, for example-give predictably different awards from another-say, African Americans or Hispanics. We cannot show systematic differences between young and old, men and women, well educated and less well educated. The real problem is that dollar awards are quite unruly from one individual to another and from one small group to another. 
What accounts for this? Why do people share moral judgments but diverge on dollar awards? The best answer is that the effort to "map" moral judgments onto dollars is an exercise in "scaling without a modulus." In psychology, it is well known that serious problems will emerge when people are asked to engage in a rating exercise on a scale that is bounded at the bottom but not at the top and when they are not given a "modulus" by which to make sense of various points along the scale.6 For example, when people are asked to rate the brightness of lights, or the loudness of noises, they will not be able to agree if no modulus is supplied and if the scale lacks an upper bound. But once a modulus is supplied, agreement is substantially improved. Or if the scale is given an upper bound, and if verbal descriptions accompany some of the relevant points, people will come into accord with one another. 
The upshot is that much of the observed variability with punitive damage awards-and in all likelihood with other damage awards too-does not come from differences in levels of outrage or social norms. It comes from variable, and 5See infra Part IV. 
6For a discussion on problems with "mapping," see Kahneman et al., supra note 1,at 53-55, 74-75; Sunstein et al., Assessing PunitiveDamages,supra note I, at 2106-07. inevitably somewhat arbitrary, "moduli" selected by individual jurors and judges. If the legal system wants to reduce the problem of different treatment of the similarly situated, it would do well to begin by appreciating this aspect of the problem. The point applies to many legal problems, including criminal sentences, pain and suffering awards, administrative penalties, and damages for libel, sexual harassment, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In these areas as well, those entrusted with the task of "mapping" lack a modulus with which to discipline their decisions. An empirical study of pain and suffering awards finds that at least forty percent of the variance cannot be explained by differences in case characteristics.7 A legal system that does not give guidance for "mapping" is bound to create similar problems in other areas. Indeed, the rise of guidelines for criminal sentencing can be understood as responsive, at least in part, to exactly this problem. 
II. WHAT Do GROUPS Do? THE EFFECTS OF DELIBERATION 
The findings thus far did not involve deliberating juries. They were based on the judgments of individuals placed by computer into small groups with individual views being "pooled" to create a verdict. The result was to create "statistical juries" whose verdict consisted of the view of the median juror, which seemed to provide a reasonable estimate of what the jury itselfwould do. But how does group deliberation affect outrage? In a subsequent study, involving several thousand people, we found that the median juror is not, in fact, a good predictor of the ultimate verdict of the jury. What we found does not falsify the findings just described; in a way, it reinforces them. But it also says a great deal about the effects of deliberation on moral outrage. 
The study tested the effects of deliberation on both punitive intentions and dollar judgments. The study involved about three thousand jury-eligible citizens; its major purpose was to determine how individuals would be influenced by seeing and discussing the punitive intentions of others.8 To test the effects of deliberation on punitive intentions, people were asked to record their individual judgments privately, on a bounded scale, and then to join six-member groups to generate unanimous "punishment verdicts." Hence, subjects were asked to record, in advance of deliberation, a "punishment judgment" on a scale of 0 to 8, where 0 indicated that the defendant should not be punished at all and 8 indicated that the defendant should be punished extremely severely. After the individual judgments were recorded, jurors were asked to deliberate to a unanimous "punishment verdict." It would be reasonable to predict that the verdicts ofjuries would be the median of punishmentjudgments ofjurors; but the prediction would be badly wrong. 
Two findings are especially important. First, deliberation made the lower punishment ratings decrease when compared to the median of predeliberation judgments of individual jurors, while deliberation made the higher punishment ratings increase when compared to that same median. When the individual jurors favored little punishment, the group showed a "leniency shift," meaning a rating that was systematically lower than the median predeliberation rating of individual members.9 But when individual jurors favored strong punishment, the group as a whole produced a "severity shift," meaning a rating that was systematically higher than the median predeliberation rating of individual members.' 
When the median juror judgment was 4 or more on the 8-point scale, the jury's verdict was above the median predeliberation judgment of individuals." Consider, for example, a case involving a man who nearly drowned on a yacht that was defectively constructed. 2 People tended to be outraged by the idea of a defectively built yacht, and groups became far more outraged than their median members.' 3 But when the median juror judgment was less than 4, the jury's verdict was below the median judgment of individuals. 14 Consider a case involving a shopper who was injured in a fall when an escalator stopped suddenly.' 5 Individual jurors were not greatly bothered by the incident, seeing it as a genuine accident rather than a case of serious wrongdoing; and groups were more lenient than individuals. 6 
The second important finding is that dollar awards of groups were systematically higher than the median of individual group members-so much so that in twenty-seven percent of the cases the dollar verdict was as high as, or higher than, that of the highest individual judgment, predeliberation. 7 The basic result is that deliberation causes awards to increase, and it causes high awards to increase a great deal. The effect of deliberation, in increasing dollar awards, was most pronounced in the case of high awards. For example, the median individual judgment in the case involving the defective yacht was $450,000, whereas the 91d. at 1152,1154-56. 'o1d. "Id 21d. at 1151-52. 131d 141d '16511dd. 7Id. at 1140,1163. median jury judgment in that same case was $1 million. 8 But awards shifted upwards for low awards as well.' 9 Consider three examples of extreme severity shift from the raw data: " " 
A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000, $300,000, $2 million, $10 million, $10 million, and $10 million reached a verdict of $15 million; A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000, $500,000, $2 million, $5 million, and $10 million reached a verdict of $50 million; A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $2 million, $2 million, $2.5 million, $50 million, and $100 million reached a verdict of $100 million.20 Notably, the degree of dispersion between individual predeliberation judgments did not contribute to greater or lesser shifts as a result of deliberation. In other words, juries whose members were in rough agreement (i.e., had a low standard deviation) about dollars or punishment did not show a different shift from groups whose members were in substantial disagreement about dollars or punishment. 
How can this pattern be explained? What is the relationship between outrage and processes of group interaction? 
With respect to punishment ratings, the answer lies in the phenomenon of group polarization. This is the pervasive process by which group members end up in a more extreme position in line with the predeliberation tendencies of group members. It is now well-known that if a group has a defined median position-if, for example, people in the group tend to think that global warming is a serious problem or that gun control is bad idea-members will shift toward a more extreme version of what they already think.2' Consider some examples of the basic phenomenon, which has been found in over a dozen nations: 22 (a) a group Ild. at 1152. t91d " 201d. at 1155. 
"1For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go to Extrem22eSse,e11B0ROYWALNE, sLu.pJ.r7a1no(t2e002,0)a.t 222. These nations include the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Germany, and France. See, e.g., Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What to Think By Knowing Who You Are: Self-categorizationand the Nature of Norm Formation, Conformity and GroupPolarization,29 BRIT. J.SOc. PSYCHOL. 97, 112-17 (1990) (New Zealand); Johannes Zuber et al., Choice Shift and Group Polarization:An Analysis of the Status of Argument and Social DecisionSchemes, 62 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 50, 58-60 (1992) (Germany). Of course, it is possible that some cultures would show a greater or lesser tendency toward polarization; this would be an extremely interesting area for empirical study. of moderately profeminist women will become more strongly profeminist after discussion; 23 (b) after discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid;24 (c) after discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African Americans in American cities; 25 (d) after discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question. 6 As statistical regularities, it should follow, for example, that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort will, after discussion, sharply oppose the war; that those who believe that global warming is a serious problem are likely, after discussion, to hold that belief with considerable confidence; that people tending to believe in the inferiority of a certain racial group will become more entrenched in this belief as a result of discussion. 
In my view, there are large lessons here about the formation of outrage and attitudes generally, and, in particular, about the role of groups in forming the norms and views of group members. A homogeneous group might well lead members in quite extreme directions. After speaking with one another, likeminded people are apt to end up thinking what they thought before, but much more so. A heterogeneous group is far less likely to have this effect. 
What explains group polarization? Why does deliberation drive low punishment ratings down and move high punishment ratings up? There appear to be three answers2. The first involves the exchange of information within the group. In a group that favors a high punishment rating, group members will make many arguments in that direction and relatively few the other way. Speaking purely descriptively, the group's "argument pool" will be skewed in the direction of severity. Group members, listening to the various arguments, will naturally move in that direction. As with punishment ratings, so too with much else: feminism, global warming, capital punishment, affirmative action, and so forth. The initial dispositions of group members will determine the proportion of arguments in the various directions. And individuals will respond, quite rationally, to what they have heard, thus moving in the direction suggested by the dominant tendency. 
The second explanation involves social influences. Most people want to be a certain way and also to be perceived in a certain way. If you are in a group that is outraged and wants to punish someone severely, you might find it 23David G. Myers, Discussion-inducedAttitude Polarization,28 HuM. REL. 699, 707-13 (1975). 
24BROWN, supra note 2, at 223-24. 
25David G. Myers & George D. Bishop, DiscussionEffects on RacialAttitudes, 169 SCd. (n.s.) 778, 727618d-7.9 (1970). 
27For further discussion of the first two explanations, see BROWN, supra note 2, at 230-39. uncomfortable to be urging relative leniency. To protect your reputation, and perhaps your self-conception, you might move, if you move at all, in the mostfavored direction. To be sure, some hardy souls will not move at all, and those who are self-identified contrarians might deliberately move in the opposite direction, rejecting the dominant view just because it is the dominant view. But what we observed, and what is universally observed, is that most of those who move tend to go in the group's preferred direction-and that as a result, the group will be more extreme than its members before deliberation began. With respect to outrage, the lesson is clear. To preserve their preferred self-image, individuals, finding themselves in an outraged group, will tend to become more outraged still. There is a clue here about the wellsprings of "runaway juries," crowd-control problems, unjustified extremism, and even terrorism (as we shall soon see).28 
The third explanation begins by noting that people with extreme views tend to have more confidence that they are right and that as people gain confidence, they become more extreme in their beliefs.2 9 The intuition here is simple: Those who lack confidence, and who are unsure what they should think, tend to moderate their views. It is for this reason that cautious people, not knowing what to do, are likely to choose the midpoint between relevant extremes. 30 But if other people seem to share one's view, that person is likely to become more confident that that view is right-and hence to move in a more extreme direction. In a wide variety of experimental contexts, people's opinions have been shown to become more extreme simply because their view has been corroborated and because they have been more confident about learning of the shared views of others.3' If a person is unsure whether he should be outraged, he might become far more outraged when he learns that others are outraged too. The agreement increases confidence and hence extremity. 
In the context of punitive damage awards by juries, a particular finding deserves emphasis. Thus far, the discussion of the relevant study has stressed how deliberation affected punitive intentions, measured on a bounded numerical scale. But jurors were also asked to record their dollar judgment, in advance of deliberation, and then to deliberate to reach dollar verdicts. As I have noted, the highest awards increased by the largest amount-but all awards increased.32 This 28See infraPart I. F. 
29See Robert S. Baron et at., Social Corroboration and Opinion Extremity, 32 J. EXPERIMENTAL SOC. PSYCHOL. 537, 558 (1996). 
287, 238'B7-a8ro8n(1e9t9a6l).,. supra note 29, at 558. 
32See supra text accompanying notes 17-20. might seem to be a surprise. An understanding of group polarization might suggest that low awards would drop and high awards would be raised, with the difference pivoting around some neutral point, say, $60,000. But this is not what was observed. 
Why did dollar awards systematically increase? A possible explanation, consistent with group polarization, is that any positive median award suggests a predeliberation tendency to punish, and deliberation aggravates that tendency by increasing awards. But even if correct, this explanation seems insufficiently specific. The striking fact is that those arguing for higher awards seem to have an automatic "rhetorical advantage" over those arguing for lower awards. A subsequent study of University of Chicago law students confirmed this finding, suggesting that given prevailing social norms, people find it much easier to defend high awards than the opposite.33 Similar findings have been made in seemingly distant areas. Suppose that doctors are deciding what steps to take to resuscitate patients; are individuals more or less likely to support heroic efforts? Evidence suggests that as individuals, doctors are less likely to do so than groups, probably because those who favor such efforts have a rhetorical advantage over those who do not.34 
Or consider the difference between individual behavior and team behavior in the Dictator Game.35 In this game, subjects are told they can allocate a sum of money, say $10, between themselves and some stranger. Contrary to the standard prediction, most subjects do not keep all or almost all of the money for themselves, choosing instead to keep somewhere between $6 and $8.36 How is individual behavior affected once people are placed in teams? The answer is that they choose still more equal divisions. 37 This result can be explained by reference to a rhetorical advantage, disfavoring the suggestion of selfishness, even within the group.38 Within the relevant population, and many imaginable other groups, people do not want to appear to be greedy. Of course the outcome, and the effect of group influence, would change if the dictator team had some reason for hostility to the beneficiaries of their largesse. We can easily imagine a variation of the Dictator Game in which, for example, people of one group were deciding how much to allocate to another group that was thought to be far wealthier. In this variation, the rhetorical advantage might favor greater selfishness. 33See Schkade et al., supra note 1,at 1161-62. 
34See Caryn Christenson & Ann Abbott, Team Medical Decision Making, in DECISION MAKING IN HEALTH CARE: THEORY, PSYCHOLOGY, ANi) APPLICATIONS 267, 273-76 (Gretchen Chapman & Frank Sonnenberg eds., 2000). 
35Timothy N. Cason & Vai-Lam Mui, A Laboratory Study of Group Polarisation in the Team Dictat3o6SreGeaimd.ea,t110476E8C-7O3N.. J. 1465, 1465-66 (1997). 
371d. 
3xCason and Mui themselves explain the outcome in terms of social comparison, a closely related account. See id. 
What produces a rhetorical advantage? The simplest answer points to existing social norms, which of course vary across time and place. Among most Americans, existing norms make it easier to argue, other things equal, for higher penalties against corporations for egregious misconduct; but it is possible to imagine subcommunities (corporate headquarters?) in which the rhetorical advantage runs the other way. In extreme cases, those with a rhetorical advantage are on the correct side of a social taboo, whether mild or strong. In any case it is easy to imagine many other contexts in which one or another side has an automatic rhetorical advantage. Consider, as possible examples, debates over whether there should be higher penalties for those convicted of drug offenses, or whether tax rates should be reduced; in modem political debates, those favoring higher penalties and lower taxes seem to have the upper hand. Of course there are limits on the extent of change that can be made. But when a rhetorical advantage is involved, group deliberation will produce significant shifts in individual judgments. Undoubtedly, legislative behavior is affected by mechanisms of this sort, and it is likely that many movements within judicial panels can be explained in similar terms. 
Are rhetorical advantages unhelpful or damaging? In the abstract, this is an impossible question to answer, because shifts have to be evaluated on their merits' and in substantive terms. Perhaps the higher punitive awards that follow deliberation are simply better; so too, perhaps, for the movements by doctors, taking more heroic measures, and by groups deciding how equally to spread funds. The major point is that such advantages exist; and it would be most surprising if they were always benign. There is a minor point as well: With respect to dollars, the severity shift produces an increase in variance and unpredictability that is an increase over the already-high levels of unpredictability shown by "statistical juries." This is an independent problem, one to which I will return. 
When we consider the ingredients of punishment judgments, group polarization and rhetorical advantage have large implications for behavior inside and outside the courtroom. Apparently, people who begin with a high level of outrage become still more outraged as a result of group discussion. Moreover, the degree of the shift depends on the antecedent level of outrage; the higher the antecedent outrage, the greater the shift as a result of internal deliberations. 39 39See Schkade et al., supra note 1,at 1152 (showing that in top five outrage cases, mean shift was 11%, higher than in any other class of cases). The effect is more dramatic still for dollars; high dollar awards shifted upwards by a significant margin. See id. This finding is closely connected to another one: Extremists are most likely to shift, and likely to shift most, as a result of discussions with one another. See JOHN TURNER ET AL., REDISCOVERING THE SOCIAL GROUP: A SELFThere is a point here about the sources not only of severe punishment, but also of crowd behavior, vengeance, rebellion, and even violence, for outrage lies behind these as well.4" If like-minded people-those predisposed to be outraged-are put together, significant changes are to be expected. Moving well beyond the domain of punitive damages, I offer some speculative remarks on possible extensions here. 
It should be easy to see that group polarization is inevitably at work in feuds, ethnic and international strife, and war. One of the characteristic features of feuds is that members of feuding groups tend to talk only to one another, fueling and amplifying their outrage, and solidifying their impression of the relevant events. Group polarization occurs every day within Israel and among the Palestinian Authority. Many social movements become possible through the heightened effects of outrage on group members;4 consider the movement for rights for deaf people, which was greatly enhanced by the fact that the deaf have a degree of geographical isolation. 42 And group polarization is not a social constant. It can be increased or decreased, and even eliminated, by certain features of group members or their situation. Consider three factors in particular. 
Extremists are especially prone to polarization. It is more probable that they will shift, and it is probable that they will shift more. When they start out at an extreme point, and are placed in a group of like-minded people, they are likely to go especially far in the direction with which they started.43 As I have suggested, there is a lesson here about the sources of terrorism and political violence in general, a lesson to which I shall return.44 And because there is a link between confidence and extremism, the confidence of particular members also plays an important role; confident people are all the more prone to polarization.45 CATEGORIZATION THEORY 154-59 (1987). 
4'See Russell Hardin, The Crippled Epistemology of Extremism, in POLITICAL EXTREMISM AND R4A1STeIOeNEAdLnITaYU3ll,m1a6n(nA-MlbaerrgtaBlirte&tonCeatssal.Re.dSsu.,n2st0e0in2,). Inequality and Indignation, 30 PHIL. & Pun. AFF. 337, 360 (2001). 
42See Sharon Groch, Free Spaces: Creating Oppositional Consciousness in the Disability Rights Movement, in OPPOSITIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS 65, 67-72 (Jane Mansbridge & Aldon Morris eds., 2001). 
43This is a finding in the study of punitive damage awards, where groups with extreme medians showed the largest shifts. See Schkade et al., supra note 1,at 1152. For other evidence, see TURNER ET AL., supra note 39, at 158. 
"4S5Seeee HMaardryinla, supra note 40, at 16-19; infra Part II.F. 
Zaleska, The Stability of Extreme and Moderate Responses in Different Situations, in GROUP DECISION MAKING 163, 163-64 (Hermann Brandstitter et al. eds., 1982). 
If members of the group think that they have a shared identity and a high degree of solidarity, there will be heightened polarization.46 One reason is that if people feel united by some factor (for example, politics or necessity), dissent will be dampened. Hence if members of the deliberating group are connected by affective ties, polarization will increase.47 If they tend to perceive one another as friendly, likeable, and similar to them, the size and likelihood of the shift will increase.48 The existence of such ties reduces the number of divergent arguments and also intensifies social influences on choice. One implication is that mistakes are likely to be increased when group members are united mostly through affective ties and not through concentration on a particular task; it is in the former case that alternative views will less likely find expression.49 It follows that people are less likely to shift if the direction advocated is being pushed by unfriendly group members; the likelihood of a shift, and its likely size, are increased when people perceive fellow members as friendly, likeable, and similar to them.5" A sense of "group belongingness" affects the extent of polarization.5 l In the same vein, physical spacing tends to reduce polarization; a sense of common fate and intragroup similarity tend to increase it, as does the introduction of a rival "outgroup.' 52 
An interesting experiment attempted to investigate the effects of group identification by manipulating two variables. 3 First, some subjects were given instructions in which group membership was made salient (the "group immersion" condition), whereas others were not (the "individual" condition). For example, subjects in the group immersion condition were told that their group consisted solely of first-year psychology students and that they were being tested as group members rather than as individuals. Second, some subjects were "deindividualized" by having to work on computers in separate rooms, whereas others were asked to work in a single office with desks facing each other (the "Abrams et al., supranote 22, at 112-16. 
47See Brooke Harrington, The Pervasive Effects of Network Content 2 (2000) (unpublished manus4c8ript, on file with Utah Law Review). 
DECISIONS 93, 107-08 (Hermann Brandstitter et al. eds., 1978); see alsoTURNER ETAL., supranote 39, at 154-59 (attempting to use this evidence as basis for new synthesis, labeled "a selfcategorization theory of group polarization"). 
49See Harrington, supra note 47, at 220-26. 
5°See Brandstatter, supranote 48, at 107-08; see also TURNER ET AL., supranote 39, at 158 (implying that group of comparative extremists will show comparatively greater shift toward extremism). 
55211TdU.RNER ET AL., supra note 39, at 151. "individualized" condition). In the de-individualized condition, visual anonymity was increased. All conditions were held constant in one respect: Every subject was told that people "like them" tended to support one or another view. The relevant issues involved affirmative action, government subsidies for the theatre, privatization of nationalized industries, and phasing out nuclear power plants. 
The results were quite striking. Polarization generally occurred. But there was the least such polarization in the individual/individuated condition; group polarization was greatest in the de-individuated/group immersion condition, when group members met relatively anonymously and when group identity was emphasized. Interestingly, there was no significant difference in polarization between the two individuated conditions (with and without emphasis on group immersion). 4 From this experiment, it is reasonable to speculate that polarization is highly likely to occur, and to be most extreme; when group membership is made salient. 
Over time, group polarization can be fortified through "exit," as members leave the group because they reject the direction in which things are heading." If exit is pervasive, the tendency to extremism will be greatly aggravated. The point bears on the beliefs and actions of some religious groups, cults, dissident groups, and political outsiders of multiple sorts. As ambivalent members leave, the median group member becomes more extreme (and outraged), and interactions breed more extremity still. At the same time, a number of exits might well breed stronger intergroup norms of solidarity, thus stifling dissent. Political extremism and violence are a-predictable result.56 
I have referred in several places to the relationship among outrage, group polarization, and terrorism. It will be useful to offer some notes on this topic, partly because it is of independent interest and partly because the processes involved in terrorism can find analogues in far more benign processes.57 When groups become caught up in hatred and violence, it is rarely because of economic ' 41d. at 130. 55See Hardin, supra note 40, at 9. 56See id "In this section I draw on substantially similar material that appears in Cass R. Sunstein, Why They Hate Us: The Role ofSocial Dynamics, 25 HARV. J.L. & PUB.POL'Y 429, 435-39 (2002). deprivation58 or primordial suspicions;" it is far more often a product of social mechanisms.6" Indeed, unjustified extremism frequently results from a "crippled epistemology," in which extremists react to a small subset of relevant information, coming mostly from one another.6 
A central point is that terrorist leaders act as polarization entrepreneurs. They create enclaves of like-minded people. They stifle dissenting views and do not tolerate internal disagreement. They take steps to ensure a high degree of internal solidarity. They restrict the relevant argument pool and take full advantage of reputational forces, above all by using the incentive of group approval. Terrorist acts themselves are motivated .by these forces and incentives. Consider, for example, the following account: 
Terrorists do not even consider that they may be wrong and that others' views may have some merit .... They attribute only evil motives to anyone outside their own group. [The] common characteristic of the psychologically motivated terrorist is the pronounced need to belong to a group . . . . Such individuals define their social status by group acceptance. 
Terrorist groups with strong internal motivations find it necessary to justify the group's existence continuously. A terrorist group must terrorize. As [sic] a minimum, it must commit violent acts to maintain group self-esteem and legitimacy. Thus, terrorists sometimes carry out attacks that are objectively nonproductive or even counterproductive to their announced goal.62 
In fact, terrorist organizations impose psychological pressures to accelerate the movement in extreme directions. Here, too, group membership plays a key role. Thus: 
Another result of psychological motivation is the intensity of group dynamics among terrorists. They tend to demand unanimity and be intolerant of dissent. With the enemy clearly identified and unequivocally evil, pressure to escalate the frequency and intensity of operations is ever present. The need to belong to the group discourages resignations, and the fear of compromise disallows their acceptance. ' 8See Alan B. Krueger & Jitka Maleckova, Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism: Is There a Causal Connection? 29 (2002) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). 
59SeeTimur Kuran, EthnicNorms andTheirTransformationThrough ReputationalCascades, 27 J. LEGAL STUD. 623, 648 (1998). 
'See Sunstein, supranote 57, at 429-35. 61See Hardin, supranote 40, at 18-20. 
62TERRORISM RESEARCH CENTER, THE BASICS OF TERRORISM Part 2: The Terrorists, available at http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/2468/basics.html (n.d.). Compromise is rejected, and terrorist groups lean toward maximalist positions.... In societies in which people identify themselves in terms of group membership (family, clan, tribe), there may be a willingness to self-sacrifice seldom seen elsewhere.6 3 
Training routines specifically reinforce the basic message of solidarity amidst outrage and humiliation. Hitler similarly attempted to create group membership, and to fuel movements toward extremes, by stressing the suffering and the humiliation of the German people. This is a characteristic strategy of terrorists of all stripes, for humiliation fuels outrage. 64 "Many al-Qaida trainees saw videos... daily as part of their training routine. Showing hundreds of hours of Muslims in dire straits-Palestinians ... Bosnians ... Chechens ... Iraqi children-was all part of al-Qaida's induction strategy. 65 In the particular context of Al Qaeda, there is a pervasive effort to link Muslims all over the globe, above all by emphasizing a shared identity, one that includes some and excludes others. Thus Osama bin Laden "appeals to a pervasive sense of humiliation and powerlessness in Islamic countries. Muslims are victims the world over ... Bosnia, Somalia, Palestine, Chechnya, and... Saudi Arabia.... [H]e makes the world simple for people who are otherwise confused, and gives them a sense of mission., 66 Hence there are unmistakable cult-like features to the indoctrination effort: "[T]he military training [in Al Qaeda camps] is accompanied by forceful religious indoctrination, with recruits being fed a stream of anti-western propaganda and being incessantly reminded about their duty to perform jihad. ' 67 
Intense connections are built into the structure: "The structure of Al Qaida, an all-male enterprise,... appears to involve small groups of relatively young men who maintain strong bonds with each other, bonds whose intensity is dramatised and heightened by the secrecy demanded by their missions and the danger of their projects. 68 
This discussion, brief and speculative as it is, should be sufficient to show the central role of outrage and group dynamics in producing terrorists, and indeed in answering the much-disputed question, "Why do they hate us?" Terrorists are made, not born. More particularly, terrorists are made through emphatically social 631d. 
'On humiliation, see AVISHAI MARGALIT, THE DECENT SOCIETY 9-27 (Naomi Goldblum trans., 1996). 
"Giles Foden, Secrets ofa TerrorMerchant, MELBOURNE AGE, Sept. 14, 2001, http://www.theage.com.au/news/world/2001/09/14/FFX 1 ONZFJRC.html. 
6676SJteeffprheyenBGarrtehyol&et,DMipeetshhodGtaodthheer,MInasdindeesBs,iNnELWaSdWenE'EsKA, cOadcte.m2i2e,s2o00f1T,erarto5r5,.THE SUNDAY TIMES6(8VLOitNhaDlOCN.),NOadckt.ar7n,i,20H0o1w,atto 1W0.in OverFoesandInfluence Their Minds,THE SUNDAY TIMES OF INDIA, Oct. 7, 2001, 2001 WL 28702843 (quoting Lionel Tiger, Darwin Professor of Anthropology, Rutgers University). processes. Things could easily be otherwise. Timur Kuran has shown that "ethnification"--close identification with one's ethnic group, in a way that involves hatred of others-is not a matter of history but of current social processes, closely akin to those discussed here.69 With relatively small changes, a nation that suffers from intense ethnic antagonism could be free from that scourge. So too, I am suggesting, for terrorism. If enclaves of like-minded and susceptible people are an indispensable breeding ground for terrorism, then it is easy to imagine a situation in which nations, not radically different from the way they are today, could be mostly free from terrorist threats. 
The simplest and most important lesson for law and policy is that if a nation aims to prevent terrorist activities, a good strategy is to prevent the rise of enclaves of like-minded people. Many of those who become involved in terrorist activities could end up doing something else with their lives. Their interest in terrorism comes, in manycases, from an identifiable set of social mechanisms (generally from associating with extremist leaders and like-minded others). If the relevant associations can be disrupted, terrorism is far less likely to arise. 
Now let us return to the question of punishment. On the economic account, the state's goal when imposing penalties is to ensure optimal deterrence. To increase deterrence, the law might increase the severity of punishment or instead increase the likelihood of punishment. A government that lacks substantial enforcement resources might impose high penalties, thinking that it will produce the right deterrent "signal" in light of the fact that many people will escape punishment altogether. A government that has sufficient resources might impose a lower penalty but enforce the law against all or almost all violators. 
In the context of punitive damages, all this leads to a simple theory: The purpose of such damages is to make up for the shortfall in enforcement. If injured people are 100% likely to receive compensation, there is no need for punitive damages. If injured people are 50% likely to receive compensation, those who bring suit should receive a punitive award that is twice the amount of the compensatory award. The simple exercise in multiplication will ensure optimal deterrence. 
But there is a large question whether social norms and the theory of optimal deterrence can fit together. Do people want optimal deterrence? Do they accept or reject the economic theory of punishment? 
We attempted to cast light on this question through two experiments.7" In the first, we gave people cases of wrongdoing, arguably calling for punitive damages, 69See Kuran, supra note 59, at 648-49. 
70The two experiments are discussed in Sunstein et al., Optimal Deterrence?,supra note 1, and SUNSTEIN ET AL., PUNITIVE DAMAGES, supra note I, at 132-41. and also provided people with explicit information about the probability of detection. Different people saw the same case, with only one difference: varying probability of detection. People were asked about the amount ofpunitive damages that they would choose to award. Our goal was to see if people would impose higher punishments when the probability of detection was low. 
In the second experiment, we asked people to evaluate judicial and executive decisions to reduce penalties when the probability of detection was high and to increase penalties when the probability of detection was low. We wanted people to say whether they approved or disapproved of varying the penalty with the probability of detection. 
Our findings were simple and straightforward. The first experiment found that varying the probability of detection had no effect on punitive awards. Even when people's attention was explicitly directed to the probability of detection, people were indifferent to it. People's decisions about appropriate punishment were unaffected by seeing a high or low probability of detection. Outrage is what matters, not the probability of detection. The second experiment found that strong majorities of respondents rejected judicial decisions to reduce penalties because of high probability of detection-and also rejected executive decisions to increase penalties because of low probability of detection. In other words, people did not approve of an approach to punishment that would make the level of punishment vary with the probability of detection. What apparently concerned them was the extent of the wrongdoing, and the right degree of moral outrage-not optimal deterrence. 
The most general conclusion is that social norms do not coexist comfortably with optimal deterrence theory. People seem to be intuitive retributivists. They come to the social role of juror with moral intuitions inconsistent with the economic theory of deterrence. Those intuitions are grounded in outrage. Facts of the case that dampen or weaken outrage will have an effect on punitive intentions. And those intentions will interact in complex ways with dollar awards, precisely because of the difficulty of translating moral outrage into a number that can be used by the legal system. 
IV. COHERENCE, CATEGORIES, AND CONTEXT 
I have suggested that people have a fairly easy time rating and ranking cases within a single category. Hence they share judgments about the outrageousness of a defendant's conduct in a personal injury case. But do people sharejudgments about how to compare a personal injury case with a libel case? Can people compare cases across categories? Probably most important: What would they think of the pattern that they produce if, as is usual, they tend to decide cases one at a time? The question seems quite important, because it bears on the question whether the legal system can produce coherent patterns in which distinctions, between plaintiffs and defendants alike, make a degree of sense. 
We do not have full answers to these questions, but suggestive evidence has started to emerge. The simplest point is that when people are trying to rank cases from different categories, they have far more difficulty, in the sense that they are unsure exactly what to do. This lack of certainty translates into a lack of consensus. People agree much more on how to rank cases within a category than how to rank cases across categories. (I put to one side the evident difficulties in deciding what counts as a "category.") It is easy to design experiments in which people will simply disagree about whether (for example) a comparatively serious tax violation is worse, or not as bad, than a lawless act that harms the environment. Hence the social norms that govern cross-category comparisons are not as widely shared as the social norms that govern within-category comparisons. 
Perhaps this is not big news. A more striking finding is that people's judgments about cases, taken one at a time, are very different from their judgments about the same cases, taken in the context of a problem from another category. An example: People were asked to assess a case involving a personal injury on a bounded scale and also on a dollar scale. People were also asked to assess a case involving financial injury on a bounded scale and also on a dollar scale. When the two cases were judged in isolation, the financial injury case received a more severe rating and a higher dollar award. But when the two cases were seen together, there was a significant judgment shift in which people tried to ensure that the financial award was not higher than the personal injury award. People's decisions about the two cases were very different, depending on whether they saw a case alone or in the context of a case from another category. 
Exactly the same kind of shift was observed for judgments about two problems calling for government regulation and expenditures: skin cancer among the elderly and protection of coral reefs. Looking at the two cases in isolation, people wanted to pay more to protect coral reefs and registered more satisfaction from doing that. But looking at the two cases together, people were quite disturbed at this pattern and generally wanted to pay more to protect elderly people from skin cancer. Here too there was a significant shift in judgment. 
Is this a problem? And what accounts for the switch? Let me offer a preliminary account. When people see a case in isolation, they naturally "normalize" it by comparing it to a set of comparison cases that it readily calls up. If you are asked, is a German shepherd big or small, you are likely to respond that it is big; if you are asked, is a Volkswagen Beetle big or small, you are likely to respond that it is small. But people are well aware that a German shepherd is smaller that a Volkswagen Beetle. People answer as they do because a German shepherd is compared with dogs, whereas a Volkswagon Beetle is compared with cars. So far, so good; in these cases, everyone knows what everyone else means. We easily normalize judgments about size, and the normalization is mutually understood. (John Stockton, who is about six feet tall, is a very small basketball player.) What happens, in ordinary communication, is innocuous. It does not breed error or confusion. 
In the context of legally relevant moral judgments, something similar happens, but it is far from innocuous. When evaluating a case involving financial injury, people apparently "normalize" the defendant's conduct by comparing it with conduct in other cases from the same category. They do not easily or naturally compare that defendant's conduct with conduct from other categories. Because of the natural comparison set, people are likely to be quite outraged by the misconduct, if it is far worse than what springs naturally to mind. The same kind of thing happens with the problem of skin cancer among the elderly. People compare that problem with other similar problems-and conclude that it is not so serious, within the category of health-related or cancer-related problems. So too with personal injury cases (normalized against other personal injury cases) and problems involving damage to coral reefs (normalized against other cases of ecological harm). 
When a case from another category is introduced, this natural process of comparison is disrupted. Rather than comparing a skin cancer case with other cancers, or other human health risks, people see that it must be compared with ecological problems, which (in most people's view) have a lesser claim to public resources. Rather than comparing a financial injury case to other cases ofbusiness misconduct, people now compare it to a personal injury case, which (in most people's view) involves more serious wrongdoing. As a result of the wider viewscreen, judgments shift, often dramatically. 
I believe that this uncovers a serious problem with current practice in many domains of law. The problem is that when people assess cases in isolation, their viewscreen is narrow, indeed limited to the category to which the case belongs, and that as a result, people produce a pattern of outcomes that makes no sense by their own light. In other words, the overall set of outcomes is one that people would not endorse, if they were only to see it as a whole. Their considered judgments reflect the very pattern that they have produced, because of a predictable feature of human cognition. The result is a form of incoherence. We can find that incoherence not only injury verdicts, but also in administrative fines and in criminal sentencing, where no serious effort has been made to ensure that the overall pattern of outcomes makes the slightest sense. Indeed there is reason to believe that the pattern, in many domains, is quite senseless. And it may not be too much of a stretch to suggest that the same is true of reactions, some of the time, by both individuals and institutions-that people are quite outraged about behavior that, in a broader or different comparison set, would outrage them little or not at all. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this Article Ihave attempted to cast some light on the relationship among outrage, punitive intuitions, group deliberation, coherence, and several other issues in law and legal theory. We have seen that diverse people rank and rate cases, within a single category, in a similar way; that they produce erratic dollar awards largely because of the difficulty of using a dollar scale; and that with respect to moral judgments, discussion moves people toward a more extreme point in light of their initial predisposition. We have also seen that with respect to dollars, discussion increases awards; that existing norms fit poorly with optimal deterrence theory; and that one-shot judgments produce patterns that people would reject, if only they were to see them. I have also offered some extensions and speculations. Perhaps most importantly, I have suggested that outrage is highly vulnerable to group influences and that a set of like-minded people is highly likely to go to extremes. The point helps to explain behavior within ordinary legislatures as well as behavior by political extremists of all kind. 
These are descriptive points. It is far from clear what, if anything, should be done by way of legal reform. But in the context of civil litigation, it would be reasonable to conclude that a system of one-shot judgments by juries, scaling in the dark and offered no comparison cases, is not likely to be a sensible way to produce civil fines. Arbitrariness and incoherence are almost inevitable. In the abstract, a more bureaucratic approach, allowing a degree of rationalization, would seem to be far superior. Of course, I cannot defend such an approach in this space; bureaucracies have notorious problems of their own, not least because they can be out of touch with prevailing social norms. But with an understanding of the problems discussed here, perhaps we can make better sense of some of the largest movements in twentieth century law, which consisted precisely in an effort to replace one-shot jury decisions with institutions that are accountable and subject to prevailing norms, but also able to overcome serious cognitive problems faced by isolated individuals and groups.71 On this view, the proper response to such problems consists in better institutional design. It would not be at all surprising if the twenty-first century saw bolder movements in the same general direction. 
71See, e.g., PRICE V. FISHBACK & SHAWN EVERETT KANTOR, A PRELUDE TO THE WELFARE STATE: THE ORIGINS OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION (2000) (discussing rise of workers' compensation programs in early twentieth century America). 
Cass R. Sunstein 
What is the place of social and economic guarantees in a democratic constitutional order? Do such guarantees place a special strain on the judiciary? Do they help poor people? What is the relationship between such guarantees and doctrines involving state action and the horizontal application of constitutional norms? 
Mark Tushnet does not attempt to answer these questions directly. But he casts new light on them by analyzing a number of cases in which courts have, or have not, taken their constitutions to alter background rules of property, contract, and tort. Tushnet contends that the rise of the activist state, understood as some form of social democracy, unsettles preexisting understandings of the relationship between constitutional norms and the private sector. In the classical liberal state, the constitution does not apply horizontally; there are no economic guarantees; and what counts as state action is relatively clear. But once the state assumes "affirmative obligations," constitutional norms might well be triggered, and the state's failure to alter the background rules of property and contract law might well raise serious constitutional problems. To borrow from Tushnet's summary of his complex account: In a "thin social democratic nation," such as Canada, courts are placed in a new and extremely difficult position, being forced either to "enforce obviously arbitrary lines between what they treat as state action and what they do not," or to work out "the set of entitlements people should have in a thicker social democracy." 
Much of what Tushnet says is highly illuminating, but I think that there are several gaps in his discussion. I emphasize two points here. First, the classical liberal state assumes affirmative obligations, and does so no less than the social democratic state. The obligations are different, but they are not less affirmative. The widespread neglect of this point, within the legal and political culture, has led to serious failures in analysis, and the failures are not innocuous. Second, state action is always present. * 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School, Department of Political Science and the College, University ofChicago. 
Mark Tushner, State Action, Social Welfare Rights, and the Judicial Role: Some Comparative Observations, 3ChiJ Intl L 435 (2002). 
HeinOnline -- 3 Chi. J. Int'l L. 465 2002 
CbicagoJournaoff Internationa(Law The constitutional question, in any system that has a state action requirement, is not whether there is state action, but whether the relevant state action is unconstitutional. That is a hard question on the merits, but it is not a hard state action question. A thin social democracy may struggle with constitutional issues, but by virtue of its status as a thin social democracy, it ought not to have any special struggle with questions involving state action or horizontal effect. A nation that currently embraces social democracy might create, at the constitutional level, social and economic rights, or it might not. A nation that currently rejects social democracy might offer, at the constitutional level, social and economic rights, or it might not. The legal questions involve the merits. 
I now offer some details about these two points. 
1.The so-called activiststate isno more activist than what preceded it. Tushnet speaks of the "rise of the activist state," which he contrasts with the "classical liberal state." In his2 view, the "activist state ...is defined by the fact that it has affirmative obligations." This is the conventional understanding. But the conventional understanding is an unfortunate way of seeing the relevant categories. Most of the so-called negative rights require governmental assistance, not governmental abstention. Those rights cannot exist without public assistance. Consider, for example, the right to private property. As Bentham wrote, "Property and law are born together, and die together. Before laws were made there was no property; take away laws, and property ceases."' In the state of nature, private property cannot exist, at least not in the way that it exists in a free society. In the state of nature, any property "rights" must be protected either through self-help-useful to the strong, not to the weak-or through social norms. This form of protection is far too fragile to support a market economy or indeed the basic independence of citizens. As we know it, private property is both created and protected by law; it requires extensive governmental assistance. 
The same point holds for the other foundation of a market economy, the close sibling of private property: freedom of contract. For that form of freedom to exist, it is extremely important to have reliable enforcement mechanisms in the form of civil courts. The creation of such mechanisms requires action, not abstention. Nor is the point-the dependence of rights on public assistance-limited to the foundations of a market economy. Take, for example, the right to be free from torture and abuse, perhaps the defining "negative" freedom. Of course it is possible to say this right is a "negative" safeguard against public intrusion into the private domain. But as a practical matter, this right requires a state apparatus willing to ferret out and to punish the relevant rights violations. If the right includes protection against private depredations, it cannot exist simply with governmental abstention. If the right is limited to 
Id at 442 (emphasis in original). 
Jeremy Bentham, The Theory of Legislation 113 (Harcourt, Brace 1931) (C.K. Ogden, ed) (Richard Hildreth, trans, from Etienne Dumont, ed). 
VOL 3 N. 2 State .Action is ,A(ways Present protection against public abuse of power, it can be satisfied by abstention; but in practice, abstention from torture and abuse must be guaranteed by a public apparatus that will deter and punish misconduct. Some rights require the government to protect against its own rights violations. If we go down the list of conventional private rights, we will see this same point at every turn. 
There is a larger implication, with direct relevance to the question of social and economic rights. All constitutional rights have budgetary implications; all constitutional rights cost money.' If the government plans to protect private property, it will have to expend resources to ensure against both private and public intrusions. If the government wants to protect people against unreasonable searches and seizures, it will have to expend resources to train, monitor, and discipline the police. If the government wants to protect freedom of speech, it must, at a minimum, take steps to constrain its own agents; and these steps will be costly. It follows that insofar as they are costly, social and economic rights are not unique. 
Now it is possible that such rights are unusually costly. To ensure, for example, that everyone has housing, it will be necessary to spend more than must be spent to ensure that everyone is free from unreasonable searches and seizures. But any such comparisons are empirical and contingent; they cannot be made on an a priori basis. We could imagine a society in which it costs a great deal to protect private property, but not so much to ensure basic subsistence. 
the relevant constitutionalguarantees. Much discussion of the state action question, and the "horizontal" application of constitutional norms, seems to me confused, because it disregards the extent to which the state is present in the arrangements under challenge. I do not think that Tushnet neglects this point, but I believe that the failure to recognize it accounts for serious conceptual problems in the United States and in Canada, and undoubtedly elsewhere. 
Suppose, for example, that an employer refuses to hire women, or discharges people who disclose that they are homosexual. If the employer's acts are challenged on constitutional grounds, we might ask whether constitutional norms apply to the employer's action. But we might also ask whether the constitution permits the existing background law, undoubtedly a product of the state, to authorize the relevant decisions by the employer. If an employer is discharging people, or refusing to hire them, and is being allowed to do so, it is not because nature has decreed anything. It is because the law has allocated the relevant rights to the employer. The legitimacy of that allocation is a constitutional question to be decided on the merits. We do not have to worry much about whether there is state action or whether the constitution's norms apply horizontally. 
This is the theme of Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost ofRights: Why Liberty Depends on Taxes (Norton 1999). 
Fall 2002 
To see the point, let us add some more detail, drawing on a contrast to which Tushnet draws attention. In the first case, a state has no discrimination law, and an employee is discharged on the ground that she is homosexual. Has the constitution been violated? To know, we have to know the meaning of the provision on which the employee is relying. Suppose that it forbids states to deny people the "equal protection of the laws," or something similar. The question would then be whether the use of employment law to allow this particular discharge is a violation of that guarantee. If we conclude that it is not, it might be because the relevant provision does not forbid the (neutral?) use of employment law to grant employers the power to hire and fire as they choose. 
Now suppose that the government has enacted a law forbidding discrimination on the basis of race, but not forbidding discrimination on any other ground. Suppose that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is alleged to have occurred. Is the government, in this case, any more "activist" than in the previous case? I do not believe so. Is there more likely to be a constitutional violation in this case, holding all else constant? Referring to Canadian law, Tushnet suggests that the answer is yes. If so, I think that there are two reasons. The first is that the second statute involves a new form of discrimination: The state has discriminated, in a sense, against sexual orientation discrimination, by treating it as more acceptable than race discrimination. The second reason is that the very existence of the prohibition on race discrimination shows that the state does not think that the background rules are sacrosanct. It is willing to compromise them when an antidiscrimination policy justifies the compromise. And if this is so, then a judicial decision calling for the extension of that policy would not seem to endanger extremely important social interests. I speculate that an understanding to this effect also lies behind some of the Canadian decisions. 
It is not clear to what extent these points challenge Tushnet's claims. I do not believe that a "thin social democracy' has any new or special reason to struggle with questions involving state action, horizontal application, or social welfare rights. Social democracy or not, thin or not, any constitutional order has to grapple with the meaning of its fundamental document. A society might repudiate social democracy entirely, but its constitution, properly interpreted, might require minimum welfare guarantees or protection against employment discrimination. A society might be, for a time, a thin social democracy, but it might also be free to abolish welfare entitlements and face no constitutional obstacles when it allows, or does not allow, employment discrimination. Tushnet might be right to suggest that there is an empirical connection between what he (misleadingly) calls an activist state and some of the conundrums he describes. But I do not believe that there are any logical connections here. The real question is the merits-the meaning of the constitution. '-9O( 32(O. 2 State .Action is .Aways Present 
One final point. In 1932, Franklin Delano Roosevelt emphasized that the exercise of property rights "might so interfere with the rights of the individual that the Government, without whose assistance the property rights could not exist, must intervene, not to destroy individualism, but to protect it." In this way, Roosevelt stressed the omnipresence of state action-the dependence of property rights on government, without whose assistance the property rights could not exist." I believe that Roosevelt's emphasis on this point helped pave the way toward his remarkable endorsement, in 1944, of a Second Bill of Rights, including a wide range of social and economic guarantees-an endorsement that helped in turn to influence the development of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and dozens of constitutions all over the world. But to elaborate this claim would take me well beyond the present discussion. My principal submissions here are that state action is always present and that the constitutionality of the relevant action is a question on the merits-not to be obscured by asking whether a nation's statutory law is committed to social democracy. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 128.240.233.146 on Tue, 15 Mar 2016 21:01:19 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Letters may be mailed to One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20004-3027, or sent via facsimile, to (202) 691-4036, ore-mail, to wq@wwic.si.edu. 
The writer's telephone number and postal address should be included. For reasons of space, letters are usually edited for publication. Some letters are received in response to the editors' requests for comment. 
According to Peter Berkowitz and Benjamin Wittes ["The Professors and Bush v. Gore" WQ, Autumn '01 ], my "work dripped with disdain for the conservative majority" of the Supreme Court long before Bush v. Gore. This is simply not true. 
In fact, a forthcoming book of mine goes out of its way to defend the Supreme Court's decisions in the area of campaign finance. In contrast to the harsh judgments of Buckley v. Valeo (1976) and its progeny that generally prevail in the academy, I defend the basic principles of the Court's jurisprudence. In contrast, I challenge the authors to point to a single essay or book of mine that engages in disdainful criticism of a major area of the Rehnquist Court's work. 
I leave it to your readers to compare my essay in the London Review of Books with the Berkowitz/Wittes characterization of my arguments concerning the 2000 election. This can be done by searching www.lrb.co.uk. But it is harder to check on their broad-brush mischaracterizations, and so it seems appropriate to set this part of the record straight. 
Bruce Ackerman Yale University Law School 
New Haven, Conn. 
Peter Berkowitz and Benjamin Wittes are certainly right to say that "scholars who assume the office of public intellectual must exercise a heightened degree of care and restraint in their public pronouncements." But they do not live up to their own standards. 
As Berkowitz and Wittes well know, my little piece in the Chronicle of Higher Education was a response to the editors' somewhat whimsical request for a very brief essay on how historians in the far distant future would regard Bush v. Gore. I chose to accept the invitation with an obviously whimsical piece from an imaginary historian. The piece was not intended to reflect my own considered views on the subject. (Anyone who doubts the element of whimsy should consult the piece itself, with its multiple references to made-up events in the first half of the 21st century.) By contrast, my comments on National Public Radio did reflect my own views, indeed, the same view that I have elaborated in my academic writing: On the one hand, the Court, with its decision on Bush v. Gore, might well have done the nation a big favor, and no one should accuse the justices of partisan motives. (In his strident book on Bush v. Gore, Alan Dershowitz sharply criticizes me for saying this.) On the other hand, the Court s reasoning was embarrassingly weak as a matter of law, and for this reason it has serious problems from the standpoint of legitimacy. 
Berkowitz and Wittes take the hilarious step of juxtaposing my comments on NPR with my science-fictional piece in the Chronicle, thus manufacturing a conflict between "two seemingly irreconcilable views" and lumping me together with scholars making "flamboyant assertions supported only by their authority." Berkowitz and Wittes are certainly entitled to defend Bush v. Gore against its critics. But they should be more careful about converting disagreements on the merits into attacks on the good faith of their fellow citizens. They should exercise a heightened degree of care in their public pronouncements. 
Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago, III. 
Wilfred M McClay has written a perceptive and poignant essay ["History for a Democracy," WQ, Autumn '01] advocating a long-needed great awakening for the place of history in American life. Endorsing his plea, I add a few words. 
When Lincoln said we must "disenthrall ourselves," it was from the "dogmas" of the past and not from the past itself, for in the same speech he declared, "We cannot escape history." Similarly, John Adams stated that we must "disabuse" ourselves of the past. "The dogma of Aristotle is the most unphilosophical of the world, the most inhuman and cruel. Until this wicked position, which is worse than the slavery of the ancient republics, or 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Law and Philosophy. http://www.jstor.org DoestheConstitutioncreatea rightto haveanequalchanceto have one's vote count?Is therean equalprotectionproblemif, for no apparenrteason,Linda'svoteis morelikelyto countthanJane's? 
I believe that the answer to both questions is "Yes."With this answer,I hope to put the 2000 election entirelyto one side, and to mount a qualified defense of the basic holding in Bush v. Gore.1 I suggest that the case is best understoodas an initial and properly tentativestep towardrecognizinga new, but highly appealing, constitutionalright. Because of some unusualfeatures in Bush v. Goreitself, I will not arguethatthe case was correctlydecided.Nor do I mean to defend the justices who joined the majorityopinion, or to suggest that their votes were motivatedby the argumentI will offer; it is hardlyunfairto be suspicious aboutthose justices' surprisingenthusiasm for a new and quite aggressive use of the equalprotectionclause. But I will suggest thatthe Court'sdecision is rooted in a principlewith both considerableappealand genuine constitutionalstatus. 
In brief,the Court'sdecision shouldbe takento suggest a constitutional right to the equal chance to have one's vote counted. Indeed, I will suggest that the Court's decision might suggest a still broader constitutionallyright, involving an equal chance in the context of many constitutionallyprotectedinterests.I will also attemptto supportthe minimalistcharacterof the opinion in Bush v. Gore,suggestingthatthe Court'snarrowopinioncan be defended as a sensible response to the Court'slack of informationaboutthe * KarlN. LlewellynDistinguisheSderviceProfessorL, awSchoolandDepartmentofPoliticalScience,UniversityofChicagoF.orsomesectionsofthispaperI, havedrawnonCassR.SunsteinO,rderWithouLtaw,68U ChiLRev757(2001), whichapproacheBsushv.Gorefromaverydifferenatngle.I amgratefutloColin Macleodforvaluablecommentsona previousdraft. 
1 121S Ct525(2000). ^ 
LawandPhilosophy21: 121-135,2002. ? 2002KluwerAcademicPublishers.PrintedintheNetherlands. appropriatereachof the principlethatit announced.In the process, I hope to cast some new light both on equality in voting and on minimalismas an approachto opinion-writing. 
I. THE APPEAL OF BUSH V GORE 
Constitutionaldoctrineprovidesa rangeof protectionsfor the right to vote. For example, the poll tax is unconstitutional,2and states must obey a principle of "one person, one vote."3In the last two decades, courts have moved very little beyond these basic rights. However,it shouldbe clear that thereremainnumerousdisparities in the treatmentof both votersandballots- andhence thatexisting doctrinefails to exhaustthepossible contentof anequalityprinciple in the contextof voting. 
Considera few illustrations.Some people live in areasthatuse state-of-the-arttechnology, making it highly likely that almost all votes in those areaswill count. Otherpeople live in areas with far more primitivetechnology,makingit highly likely thatsome votes in those areas will not count.4 Some people must use ballots that are confusing, and that will predictablyensure that a numberof votes will fail to register;otherpeople, in the same election in the same states, will use ballots that are not confusing, and that will baffle hardlyanyone.Presidentialelections are national,but voters in Alabamawill have very differentballots andvery differenttechnologies from voters in New York,and the resultwill be that some votes will be muchmoreequalthanothers. 
In addressingone or more of these inequalities, courts could easily havebuilt,long ago, on existing cases so as to createa constitutionalprinciplegiving each citizen an equalprobabilityof having her vote actually counted in the ultimate tabulation.In fact, it is not easy to see why, before Bush v. Gore, some such right was not recognized or even urged. The likely answer is that lawyers and judges usually think of rights as involving outcomes, ratherthan probabilities,so that a state would not violate the equal protection clause so long as it offered each citizen the ability to cast a ballot, subject to existing technology and the one person-one vote rule. But in the context of a challenge to an affirmativeaction scheme, the Courthas emphasizedthat the Constitutioncreates a right not to an outcome, but to an equal chance.5 It would not be a huge stretchfrom this idea to an equal rightto the chance to have one's vote actuallycount. This equalrightmight well be accompaniedby somethinglike a "good chance"to have one's vote actuallycount, thoughin most real-worldcircumstances,the probabilitywould be sufficientlyhigh, andinequalityis the seriousproblem. 
Of course it is not entirely clear what this principlewould ultimately be takento mean. Perhapsthe relevantrightshouldbe only presumptive,allowing governmentto show legitimate reasons for any inequalities in the probabilityof votes actually counting. But if voting qualifiesas a fundamentalright,as everyoneagrees, there does seem to be a constitutionaldifficultyin any situationin which some people's ballots are more likely to count than others, if no strongreasonjustifies the difference. 
It is possible to understandBush v. Goreas embodying,in an initial and sensibly limited way, the principlejust sketched.Announcing its fundamentalmotivation,the Courtwrote, "Theright to vote is protectedin more thanthe initial allocationof the franchise.Equal protection applies as well to the mannerof its exercise. Having once grantedthe right to vote on equal terms, the State may not, by later arbitraryand disparatetreatment,value one person's vote over that of another."Recall that the Florida SupremeCourt had asked for a manualrecount in four disputedcounties, but without specifying how it would be decided whetherballots would count. The Court'sconcern was that no official in Floridahad generated standardsby which to discipline the relativelyopen-endedinquiry into "the intent of the voter."In the Court'sview, "Florida'sbasic command ... to considerthe 'intentof the voter'" was "standardless" and constitutionallyunacceptablewithout"specificstandards 
to ensure its equal application .... The formulationof uniform rules based on these recurringcircumstancesis practicableand,we conclude,necessary."6Withoutsuchrules,similarlysituatedballots, andhence similarlysituatedvoters,wouldbe treateddifferently,and for no evidentreason. 
The Courtofferedsome detailson the resultingequalityproblem. "Amonitorin Miami-DadeCountytestifiedat trialthathe observed thatthreemembersof the countycanvassingboardapplieddifferent standards in defining a legal vote."7 Standardseven appeared to have been changed "duringthe counting process," with Palm Beach Countybeginning"theprocess with a 1990 guidelinewhich precludedcountingcompletely attachedchads,"then switching"to a rule that considereda vote to be legal if any light could be seen througha chad,"then changing "backto the 1990 rule,"and then abandoning"any pretense of a per se rule."8A serious problem was that "thestandardsfor acceptingor rejectingcontestedballots mightvarynotonly fromcountyto countybutindeedwithina single countyfromone recountteamto another."9This too was not merely speculation."BrowardCountyused a moreforgivingstandardthan Palm Beach County, and uncovered almost three times as many new votes, a result markedlydisproportionateto the differencein populationbetweenthe counties."10 
The Court also found a constitutionalviolation in the unequal treatmentof "overvotes"(meaning ballots that machines rejected because more than one vote had been cast) and "undervotes" (meaning ballots on which machines failed to detect a vote, and which had been orderedto be re-examined).The Court objected that "the citizen whose ballot was not read by a machinebecause he failed to vote for a candidatein a way readableby a machine may still have his vote counted in a manualrecount;on the other hand, the citizen who markstwo candidatesin a way discerable by the machinewill not have the same opportunityto havehis vote count, even if a manualexaminationof the ballot would revealthe 6 121 S Ct. at 529-530. 7 Id. at 529. 8 Id. 9 Id. at 531. 10 Id. requisiteindicia of intent.Furthermoret,he citizen who markstwo candidatesonly one of which is discernableby the machine, will have his vote counted even though it should have been read as an invalidballot."1lHere we seem to have an explicit recognitionof a constitutionalrightto have an equalopportunityto ensurethatone's vote is actuallycounted. 
To this, the Courtadded"furtherconcerns."12These includedan absenceof specificationof "whowouldrecountthe ballots,"leading to a situationin which untrainedmembersof "adhoc teams"would be involved in the process.13And "while otherswere permittedto observe,they were prohibitedfrom objectingduringthe recount."14 Thus, the Courtconcludedthatthe recountprocess "is inconsistent with the minimumproceduresnecessaryto protectthe fundamental right of each voter in the special instance of a statewiderecount underthe authorityof a single statejudicial officer."15 C. Minimalismin Action: Shallowand Narrow This then, is the basic holding of Bush v. Gore. If the presidential controversyis bracketed,the holding appearsto be quiteplausible. To be sure, the Courtdid breaknew ground.While previouscases suggested that people could not be deprivedof the right to vote, and even that each vote must count as one, no prior decision had suggested that the Constitutionrequiredan equal probabilitythat a vote would count. Recognizing the novelty of its approach,the Courtseemed well awarethatits suggestion,if takenas broadlyas possible, could have explosive implicationsfor the future,throwing muchof stateelection law intoconstitutionaldoubt.HencetheCourt went to greateffortsto limit the reachof its holding:"Thequestion beforethe Courtis not whetherlocal entities,in the exercise of their expertise, may develop different systems for implementingelections. Instead,we arepresentedwith a situationwhere a statecourt with the powerto assureuniformityhas ordereda statewiderecount 
Id. 2 Idat531. 13 Id. 14 Id. 15 Id. with minimalproceduralsafeguards."16Thus, the Courtattempted to limit its rulingto the particularproblembeforeit: (a) a statewide recount(b) before a singlejudge. 
In this way, the Court ensured that its decision was narrow ratherthanwide - narrowin the sense that it covered the problem at hand without also covering other,apparentlysimilar problems. The narrow ruling ensures that Bush v. Gore is an illustration of the kind of judicial minimalismthat characterizesthe current Court.17If narrownessis a plausible response to ignorance about the consequences of a wider ruling, the Court'seffort to settle the case, without ruling on much more, is not so hardto understand. Of course skeptics might urge thatthe narrownessof the judgment shows that the Courtdid not take its own principlevery seriously. This may be true;the futurewill tell. All I meanto suggest is thata narrowrulingmakesa certainsense. I will returnto thispointbelow. 
At the same time, the Court'sopinion was shallow ratherthan deep, in the sense that it lacked much in the way of theoretical ambition.The Courtsimply assertedthata manualrecount,without a clearstandardfor determiningthe intentof the voter,was constitutionallyunacceptable.It said little aboutwhatthe equalityprinciple shouldbe takento mean,in the contextof voting or elsewhere, and relied insteadon what it apparentlytook to be ordinaryintuitions. The Courtwas thereforeableto producean "incompletelytheorized agreement"on its equal protectionruling, attractingsupportfrom sevenjustices;thebroadsupportforthatrulingseems attributablea, t least in part,to the fact thatthe Courtdid not offer a deep or contentious argumenton its behalf. If incompletelytheorizedagreements have theirvirtues,18thenthe minimalismof the Court'sapproachis not hardto defend. 
D. A ThoughtExperiment:TheProblemWithoutthe Context To see the appealof the Court'sapproach,on the issue of principle andscope, let us put asidethe contextof a hotlycontestedpresidential election, and imagine that in a relativelyobscureand colorless election - involving, say, Iowa's Attorney General - a state court 16 Id. 17 See Cass R. Sunstein,One CaseAtA Time(1999). 18 As urgedin CassR. Sunstein,LegalReasoningandPolitical Conflict(1996). requireda manualrecount.Supposethatthe statecourtalso failed to providestandardsto determinewhatwouldbe countedas enoughto show the "intentof the voter,"andthatin the recount,it was alleged that similar ballots were being treatedaltogetherdifferently.In a case of this kind, it is easy to imagine thata federalcourtmight be convincedto rule thatthe absenceof standardswas constitutionally defective. 
If the equal protectionruling has some appealin the context of the election of the Attorney General of Iowa, it is also possible to see why a court might want to limit the reach of its holding, even to makethe underlyingjudgmentas narrowas possible. In any state, similarlysituatedvoters are, much of the time, being treated differently.As the Florida controversyshows, voters in different counties will often use differentballots. The differencemay mean that some voters will be confused, and theirintendedvote will fail to count, simply because of the particularballot selected by their county.Recall too thatbecause of the differentqualityof different technologies, some ballots are less likely to count thanothers.Are these inequalitiesunconstitutional?To say the least, an affirmative answerwouldplace courtsin a difficultmanagerialposition.In some situations,there might be special reasons to allow the inequalities to continue.For example, a judicial requirementof equality might requirepoor areas to purchaseand use expensive technology, and this requirementmightdivertlimitedresourcesfromotherdomains, involvingfood andshelter.Because the litigantsareunlikelyto raise these issues in advance,a courtmighttakestepsto narrowthe reach of its decision, andto leave otherquestionsundecided. 
Of coursea narrowdecision mightbe challengedas insufficiently principled. Perhaps it could be thought that if there is a constitutional right to have an equal chance to have one's vote count, then the Courtshould simply say so. Butjudge-madelaw typically operatesthroughnarrow,case-specificrulings,andfor good reasons. Judgesare not philosopher-kings;they have limitedtime and capacities; they lack the informationthatwouldpermitthemto know,at the time of one ruling, aboutthe appropriatereach of the principle thatgovernsthecase athand.19WhatI am suggestingis thata ruling 19 Thesepointsareelaboratedin id. andCass R. Sunstein,One CaseAtA lime (1999). in the Iowa case, and the decision in Bush v. Gore, can be seen as an initial stage towardthe recognitionof a principlewhose precise contours should be determinedonly throughconfrontationwith a wide rangeof contexts. 
II. PROBLEMS AND DEFECTS My hope is thatthe discussionthusfarhas been sufficientto establish the plausibilityof the equal protectionruling in Bush v. Gore and of the Court'seffort to ensure that its decision did not extend far. (Recall that I am not saying anythingaboutthe motivationsof the justices who joined the majorityopinion.) But there are two problemswiththiseffortto defendBushv. Gore.Takentogether,the problemssuggest thatif (as I am urging)thereis a rightto an equal chance to have one's vote count, the Court'sdecision might well have compromisedthat right more severely than a manualrecount would have done. The appropriatesolutionwas to remandthe case to Floridato continuethe recountundersufficientlyspecific standards.I emphasizethis point not to criticizethe Court,butto obtaina betterunderstandingof the righton which I am focussing:the right to have an equalchanceto have one's vote counted. 
Why was the Florida SupremeCourtconcernedabout allowing a manualrecount?The best explanationwould emphasizethe possibility that such a recount would count votes that machines fail to register.Underthe conditionsin Florida,the very refusalto have a manualrecountwould compromise,and did compromise,the right to have an equal probabilitythatone's vote will count. Indeed,the Court'sdecision might well have createda problemof inequality even more severethanthe problemthatit attemptedto solve. There are a numberof complexities here;political scientist HenryBrady summarizesthe evidence with the suggestion that "by any reckoning, the machinevariabilityin undervotesandovervotesexceeds the volatilitydue to differentstandardsby factorsof ten to twenty. Far more mischief, it seems, can be created by poor methods of recordingandtabulatingvotes thanby manualrecounts."20 
More particularlyt,herewere severalinequalitiesin the certified vote in Florida.Underthatvote, some machinescountedvotes that were left uncountedby othermachines,simply because of different technology. Where optical scan ballots were used, for example, voters were far more likely to have theirvotes countedthanwhere punch-cardballots were used. In Florida, fifteen of every onethousandpunch-cardballots showed no presidentialvote, whereas only three of every one-thousandoptically scannedballots showed no such vote. In all likelihood, these disparitieswould have been reducedwith a manualrecount.If the principleof Bush v. Gore is taken seriously,manualrecountsmight even seem constitutionally compelled. But the Court's decision, forbiddingmanualrecounts, ensuredthatthe relevantinequalitieswould not be corrected. 
Therewereotherproblems.Intherecountthatproducedthecertified vote, some counties merely checked the arithmetic,whereas othersputballotsthrougha tabulatingmachine.Theresultis a significantdifferencein the effect of the recount.In anycase, the manual recountwas picking up manyvotes thatmachinesfailed to include. As Pamela Karlanhas written,the Court"neverreally confronted the magnitudeof the inequalitiesproducedin the first instance by Florida's use of differentvoting technologies in differentparts of the state. The BrowardCounty recount discerned votes on about 20 percentof the undervotedballots, while the Palm Beach County recount,using a more stringentstandard,recoveredvotes on about 10 percentof the undervotedballots."21 
If the constitutionalproblemconsists of the differenttreatmentof the similarlysituated,thenit seems entirelypossible thatthe manual recount,underthe admittedlyvague "intentof the voter"standard, would have made things better ratherthan worse - and that the decisionof theUnitedStatesSupremeCourtaggravatedtheproblem of unjustifiedinequality.Now perhapsthe best responseis that,what particularlyconcernedthe Courtwas not the fact of inequality,but 20 HenryE. Brady,EqualProtectionfor Votes(unpublishedmanuscript,Dec. 11,2000). 
21 See PamelaKarlan,The Newest EqualProtection,in The Vote77, 90 (Cas R. SunsteinandRichardA. Epsteineds. 2001). the combinationof inequalityandprocessfailure,througha manual recount that seemed to have due process-type problems. Indeed, the Court did speak in due process terms on several points. But its holding was basedon unjustifiedinequalities,andon thatcount, the certifiedvote hadformidableproblems.This does not meanthat therewas no problemwith the manualrecount,butit bearsdirectly on the issue of remedy,to which I now turn. 
If the equalityprinciplerequiresan equalchancefor votes to count, and if a manual recount would thus be unconstitutionalwithout clear standards,what is the appropriatefederalresponse?Thereare questionshere of bothFloridalaw andfederalconstitutionallaw. 
The SupremeCourt halted the manual recount for one simple reason:The Courtthoughtit clear that the FloridaSupremeCourt would interpretFloridalaw so as to halt the process. As the Court wrote, "The Supreme Court of Florida has said that the legislatureintendedthe State's electors to 'participate[ ] fully in the federalelectoralprocess .... Because it is evidentthatany recount seeking to meet the December 12 date will be unconstitutionalfor the reasons we have discussed, we reverse the judgment of the SupremeCourtof Floridaorderinga recountto proceed."22Thus, the Courtconcludedthat as a matterof Floridalaw, a continuation of the manualrecount"couldnot be partof an 'appropriate'order authorizedby" Floridalaw.23 
Especially if there is a constitutionalright to an equal chance to have one's vote count, this seems to have been a blunder.The Florida courts had never been asked to say whether they would interpretFloridalaw to requirea cessationin the countingof votes, if the consequence of the counting would be to extend the choice of electorspast December 12. In fact, the FloridaCourt'spervasive emphasison the need to ensurethe inclusionof lawful votes would seem to indicate that if a choice must be made between the safe harborand the inclusion of votes, the latter might have priority. NotwithstandingwhatI havesaidhere,it is hardtojustify theUnited StatesSupremeCourt'sfailureto allowtheFloridaCourtto consider 22 Bush v. Gore, 121 S Ct at 533. 23 Id. this issue of Floridalaw.The morenaturalremedywould havebeen to say that a manualrecountcould continue, but only pursuantto standardsthatwould ensureagainstunjustifiedinequality. 
All this leaves some simple conclusions. It was plausiblefor the Bush v. Gore Courtto recognize a constitutionalright to an equal chance to have one's vote count.The Courtwas quitecorrectto see thatthis rightraises seriousquestionsabouta standard-freerecount, especially when the record shows that the absence of standards will result in genuine inequality.But the Courtwas wrong to focus myopically on the problemsintroducedby the standardlessrecount, withoutseeing thatsimilarproblemsof inequalityexisted underthe certifiedvote, and could be curedby a standard-governedrecount. The correctremedy was thereforeto remandto Floridafor such a recount.On this count,the Court'sdecision cannotbe justified.24 
With each passing day, the remedy issue is becoming ancient history.Forthe future,whatmattersis notthe remedy,butthe underlying right.What is its nature?Whatis its ultimatereach?I offer a few speculationshere. 
III. RIGHTSTOPROBABILITIES? A. Voting In Bush v. Gore, the Court attempted,in conventionalminimalist fashion,to limit the reachof its decision. But it shouldbe clearthat the attemptmight not prove successful. To know whetherBush v. Gore should be taken as unique or instead as the initial step in a long line of cases, we need to know whetherother situations,also involvingan apparentviolationof the as-yet-undefinedright,can be meaningfullydistinguished.Considerthe following cases, given in descendingorderof closeness to Bush v. Gore itself: in separatecounties, and no single judge oversees the entire process. percent of votes; wealthy counties have newer machinerythat 24 I discuss this point in more detail in Sunstein, Order WithoutLaw, supra note*. successfully counts 99 percentof votes. Those in poor counties mounta constitutionalchallenge,claimingthatthe differencein rejectionratesis a violationof the EqualProtectionClause. does not involve poor and rich counties. It is simply the case that some areasuse machinesthathave a near-perfectcounting rate,andothersdo not.Thedistributionof machinesseems quite random. versionof the controversial"butterflyballot";most do not. It is clear thatwherethe butterflyballot is used, an unusualnumber of voters are confused, and do not successfully vote for the candidateof theirchoice. Does this violate the equalprotection clause? machinery from that used by citizens in New York. The consequence is that citizens in Alabama are far more likely to have their votes uncountedthan citizens in New York.Do they have a valid equal protectionclaim?Whatif the statistical disparityis very large? 
The Bush v. Gore Court'ssuggestion thatordinaryvoting raises "many complexities" is correct; but how do those complexities justify unequaltreatmentin the cases just given? The best answer would point to three practical points: logistical considerations, which can makeit hardto provideuniformity;budgetaryconsiderations, which can makeit difficultfor some areasto providethe same technologyas others;andthetraditionof local control,whichmakes federaljudges reluctantto mandatesimilartreatmentof people in different areas. In case (1), logistical considerationsare the only distinguishingfeature from Bush v. Gore, and it is hard to argue thatthose considerationsshouldbe decisive. It is certainlyfeasible, in case (1), to ensurea degreeof uniformity. 
unusualfor federal courts to requiredifferentcounties to have the same technology.Wealthycounties might preferto purchasemore expensive machinery,whereas poorer communities might devote theirlimitedresourcesto otherproblems.Perhapsjudicialcautionin cases ( entirelyclear.Case ( it thereforeseems a strongercase forjudicial involvementthancase ( comparative disadvantage.But can the randomnessbe justified? On what grounds?It is not clear thatthe traditionof local controlshould be sufficient.In case ( and it would be easy to imagine a plausibleconstitutionalattackif votersin one areaare subjectto confusingballots not used in other counties.Case (5) is the least likely settingforjudicial involvement, simply because of the longstandingpractice of state control over ballots andtechnologies, andbecausea constitutionalattackon that practicewould place courtsin an uncomfortablemanagerialrole. 
My goal here is to give a flavorof the relevantquestions,not to resolve them. But at the very least, Bush v. Gore plainly suggests the legitimacyof both state andnationalactiondesigned to combat disparitiesof this kind.It is for this reasonthatthe Court'sdecision, howevernarrowlyintended,set out a rationalethatmightwell create an extremely important(and appealing) innovationin the law of voting rights. Perhapslegislatureswill respondto the invitationif courtsrefuse to do so. 
In fact, the Court's rationale might extend more broadly still. Outsidethe context of voting, governmentsdo not impose the most severely imaginableconstraintson official discretion,andthe result is to deprive people of equal probabilitiesof facing constitutionally significant burdens and receiving constitutionallysignificant benefits.Because discretionexists, the similarlysituatedaretreated differently.25 
In the abstract,the question might seem fanciful; but related constitutionalchallenges are hardlyunfamiliar.In the 1960's and 1970's,therewas an effortto use the Due Process andEqualProtection Clauses to try to ensure more rule-bounddecisions, in such contexts as licensing and admissionto public housing.26Plaintiffs 25 This is the basic theme of KennethCulp Davis, DiscretionaryJustice: A PreliminaryInquiry(LouisianaState 1969). 
26 Horsby v.Allen, 326 F2d 605 (5th Cir 1964); Holmesv. NYCHA,398 F2d 262 (2d Cir 1968). arguedthatwithoutclearcriteriato disciplinethe exerciseof discretion, therewas a riskthatthe similarlysituatedwould not be treated similarly,and that this risk was constitutionallyunacceptable.But outsideof the most egregioussettings,these effortsfailed,27apparently on the theorythatrule-bounddecisions producearbitrariness of theirown, andcourtsarein a poorpositionto know whetherrules are betterthandiscretionaryjudgments.Does Bush v. Gore require courtsto extendthe limitedprecedentshere? 
Perhapsnot. Perhapsit can be suggestedthatbecause the choice between rule-boundand more discretionaryjudgments is difficult in many cases, judicial deference is generally appropriate- but not when fundamentalrights, such as the right to vote, are at risk. If so, Bush v. Gore has a limited scope. But the scope is still quite large. Perhapsthe most obvious example is the "beyond a reasonabledoubt"standardfor criminal conviction, a standard that differentjuries will inevitably interpretin different ways. Is this unacceptable?A possible answer is that no more rule-bound approachwould be better, all things considered. This is a difference fromBush v. Gore, whereit was easy to imagine a rule-bound approachthat would add constraintson discretionwithout sacrificing any importantvalue. But does this mean thatmethodsmustbe in place to ensureagainstdifferentialtreatmentof those subjectto capital punishment?To life imprisonment?I cannot resolve these questions here. But for better or for worse, the rationalein Bush v. Gore, sympatheticallyviewed, appearsto make it necessary to considerthese issues anew. 
CONCLUSION In this essay, I have attemptedto defendtwo aspectsof the Court's opinion.First,I have urgedthatthe equalprotectionclause is plausibly readto createan equalchance to have one's vote actuallycount - and that the context of a manualrecount,before a single judge, is an exceedingly strongone for the initialrecognitionof thatright. 
27 Forexamplesof unsuccessfulattemptsto challengeunconditioneddiscretion violativeof EqualProtectionin thesecontexts,see Phelps v.HousingAuthorityas of Woodward7,42 F2d 816 (4th Cir 1984);AtlantaBowling Center,Inc v.Allen, 389 F2d 713 (5thCir 1968). Second, I have urged that the minimalistcharacterof the Court's opinion also makes a great deal of sense, because in a single case, let aloneone decidedundersuchpressure,it is simplytoo difficultto decide the reachof the equal protectionholding.If we put together the equal protection principle with some enthusiasmfor judicial minimalism, we will be well on the way toward a sympathetic understandingof muchof the opinionin Bush v. Gore. 
At the same time, I have urgedthatthe defense of the outcome ultimately fails. The decision to stop the manual recount created equal protectionproblemsat least as great as those that the Court attemptedto prevent.Therewas no sufficientreasonnot to remand the case to permit votes to be counted under a properly disciplined process. But in a way, these qualificationsare a matter of detail. Once the PresidentialElection of 2000 is put to one side, it is possible to see that in the domainof voting, as in many other contexts, the right to an equal chance has large and inadequately appreciatedpossibilities. 
THE LAWS OF FEAR 
Publications Ltd. Pp. xxxvii, 473. £19.95. 
"The nation is quickly buying up stocks of gas masks, shelves are being stripped of antibiotics,and bottled water may not be far behind. Many travelers have canceled trips by airand taken trains or cars instead, even across the country. New Yorkers fearfid of an attack on the subways insist on riding in cars on traffic-choked streets. Doctors in Boston report that patients with minor ailments like colds and sore throats have been calling out of fear that they may have been sickened by a toxic chemical or lethal germ introduced by terrorists. Meanwhile, business at McDonald's and Haagen-Dazs is thriving. What does this say about how people respond to potential threats to their health and lives?"1 "With the deaths of two people from shark attacks over the Labor Day weekend, the summerlong fascination with these fear-inducing creatures of the deep has turned into a near obsession as Americans wonder whether the oceans are safe for recreation and sport. But to scientists who study sharks and their occasionallytragic interactionswith humans, the numbers of shark attacks and fatalities appear well within the range of normal. What is out of the ordinary is the amount of attention being paid to them.... A person is 30 times more likely to be struck by lightning than bitten by a shark .... 2 "At the Siting Board's open houses, people would invent scenariosand then dare Board members and staff to say they were impossible. A person would ask, 'What would happen if a plane crashed into a concrete bunker filled with radioactive waste and exploded?' We would explain that while the plane and its contents might explode, nothing in the disposalfacility could. And they would say, 'But what if explosives had mistakenly been disposed of and the monitoring devices at the facility had malfunctioned so they weren't noticed?' We would head down the road of saying that this was an"e3xtremely unlikely set of events. And they would say, 'Well, it could happen, couldn't it?" * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Daniel Kahneman, James Krier, Howard Margolis, Martha Nussbaum, Richard A. Posner, and Paul Slovic for very helpful comments on a previous draft. Participants in work-in-progress lunches at Columbia University and the University of Chicago Law School also provided a great deal of help. A discussion with Christopher Hsee was extremely helpful. Some of the arguments in this Review are developed at greater length in CASS R. SUNSTEIN, RISK AND REMsON: SAFETv, LAW, AND THE ENVIRONMENT (forthcoming 2002). 
1 Jane E. Brody,Don't Lose Sight of Real, Everyday Risks, N.Y. TIMES, Oct. 9, 2001, at F6. 2 Stevenson Swanson, High-Profile Attacks Feed Shark Fears,Experts Say, CHI. TRIB., Sept. 5, 2oo, at i. 
3 JOHN WEINGART, WASTE IS A TERRIBLE THING To MIND 362 (2001). 
In the late I98Os, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) embarked on an ambitious project, designed to compare the views of the public and EPA experts on the seriousness of environmental problems. 4 The project revealed some striking anomalies, for the two groups sharply diverged on some crucial issues.5 
With respect to health risks, the public's top ten concerns included radioactive waste, radiation from nuclear accidents, industrial pollution of waterways, and hazardous waste sites.6 But in the view of EPA experts, not one of these problems deserved a high level of concern.' Two of the public's top concerns (nuclear accident radiation and radioactive waste) were not even ranked by EPA experts. 8 Of health risks considered by the public, among the lowest ranked were indoor air pollution and indoor radon - even though both were ranked among the worst environmental problems by expertsY The EPA concluded that there was a remarkable disparity between the views of the public and the views of its own experts.' 0 It also noted, with evident concern, that EPA policies and appropriations seemed to reflect the public's preoccupations, not its own." If regulatory law and policy reflect what has been called a combination of "paranoia and neglect,"1 2 the public's own concerns may be largely responsible. 13 
In the domain of risks, the persistent split between experts and ordinary people raises some of the most interesting problems in all of social science. For purposes of understanding these disputes, we might distinguish between two approaches: the technocratic and the populist. Good technocrats emphasize that ordinary people are frequently illinformed and urge that the task of regulators is to follow science and evidence, not popular opinion. 1 4 From the technocratic standpoint, a crucial question is what the facts really show. When people are mistaken on the facts, they should be educated so that they do not persist in their errors. Of course, technocrats acknowledge that science will 4 Leslie Roberts, Countingon Science at EPA, 249 SCIENCE 616, 616 (i9go). 5 Id. at 66-r7. 6 Id. at 66. 7 Id. 8 Id. 9 Id. 10 Id. 11 See id. 
12 John D. Graham, Making Sense of Risk: An Agendafor Congress, in RISKS, COSTS, AND LIVES SAVED: GETTING BETTER RESULTS FROM REGULATION 183, 183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., I996). 
13 Of course, interest groups play a large role, both independently and in dampening and heightening public concern. 
14 See, e.g., STEPHEN BREYER, BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE: TOWARD EFFECTIVE RISK REGULATION 33-51 (1993); HOWARD MARGOLIS, DEALING WITH RISK: WHY THE PUBLIC AND THE EXPERTS DISAGREE ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 166-89 (1996). often leave gaps. They know that science alone cannot determine the proper course of action. But they urge that facts are often the key issue and that whenever possible government should follow the evidence rather than public beliefs. Technocrats also insist that when people know the facts, they will often have a clear sense of what to do. 
For their part, populists tend to distrust experts and to think that in a democracy, government should follow the will of the citizenry rather than that of a technocratic elite. 15 In their view, law and policy should reflect what people actually fear, not what scientists, with their inevitably fallible judgments, urge society to do. Populists insist that the very characterization of risks involves no simple "fact," but a host of normative judgments made by so-called experts. To take just one example, while experts usually emphasize the number of fatalities involved in an activity, they could as easily select alternative measures, such as the number of life-years at risk, the percentage of people at risk, or the percentage of the exposed population at risk. According to many populists, risks do not exist "out there," and any judgment about risk is subjective rather than objective in character.1 6 If expert judgments inevitably involve values of one kind or another, it might seem only sensible to say that popular opinion should be a central ingredient in law and policy. For populists, ordinary intuitions and concerns have normative force and deserve to count in the democratic arena. 
To resolve the disagreement, it would be valuable to have a clearer sense of what, exactly, accounts for the split between experts and ordinary people. Is one or another group mistaken? Are ordinary people systematically ill-informed, and if so, why? Are intuitions likely to reflect false judgments of fact, or worthy judgments of value? What 15 See, e.g., ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS 195-203 (I993); Lisa Heinzerling, PoliticalScience, 62 U. CHI. L. REV. 449 (1995) (reviewing BREYER, supranote 14). In Justice Breyer's confirmation hearings, Senator Joseph Biden remarked: The American people have no doubt that more people die from coal dust than from nuclear reactors, but they fear the prospect of a nuclear reactor more than they do the empirical data that would suggest that more people die from coal dust, from having coalfired burners. 
They also know that more lives would be saved if we took that 25 percent we spend in the intensive care units in the last few months of the elderly's lives, that more children would be saved. But part of our culture is that we have concluded as a culture that we are going to, rightly or wrongly, we are going to spend the money, costing more lives, on the elderly... 
I think it is incredibly presumptuous and elitist for political scientists to conclude that the American people's cultural values in fact are not ones that lend themselves to a cost-benefit analysis and to presume that they would change their cultural values if in fact they were aware of the cost-benefit analysis. 
Nomination of Stephen G. Breyer To Be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States: Hearings Before the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary,1o3d Cong. 310 (1994). I take up the relationship between Breyer's views of risk and Slovic's findings at pp. i166-67, below. 
16 This is Paul Slovic's view, which I discuss further below. PAUL SLOVIC, THE PERCEPTION OF RISK 392 (2000). [VoI. 115:11'9 does it mean to say that expert judgments are based on values? Once we answer these questions, there will remain normative problems about what to do in the face of the relevant divisions. Perhaps what matters is not whether people are right on the facts, but whether they are frightened (an obvious possibility in a nation facing a risk of terrorism). Perhaps ordinary people have a special rationality, as worthy in its own way as that of experts. 7 Certainly experts can have their own biases and agendas.1 8 Perhaps the real issue is how to increase the public's role in risk regulation so that government will respond to its concerns. 
In this Review, I attempt to make some progress in answering these questions for purposes of law and policy, above all by attending to psychological evidence on people's perceptions of risk. I do so largely by focusing on the work of the psychologist Paul Slovic and his collaborators, as catalogued in Slovic's recent book, The Perception of Risk. Of all those who have contributed to an understanding of the division between experts and ordinary people, Slovic and his collaborators have been the most systematic and wide-ranging. They have produced a series of empirical studies designed to understand perception of risk - to see when people are frightened and when they are not, and exactly why. Slovic's own views defy easy categorization, but he has strong populist leanings. Slovic denies that risks can be assessed in objective terms (p. 369). In some of his most striking chapters, Slovic claims that ordinary people display a rival rationality that is worthy of consideration and respect (p. 23). Insisting that "risk" is not simply a matter of numbers, Slovic argues that a good system of risk regulation should be democratic as well as technocratic - and that it should pay a great deal of attention to what he sees as the structured and sometimes subtle thinking of ordinary people (p. 231). 
The Perception of Risk is an illuminating and important book, written over a number of years and with many coauthors. 19 It covers a great deal of ground. Among other things, Slovic deals with the "social amplification" of risk (pp. 232-45); "intuitive toxicology" (pp. 285315); trust and distrust (pp. 316-26); risk-taking by adolescents (pp. 364-7 i); smokers' (lack of) awareness of the risks of smoking (pp. 36417 Clayton P. Gillette & James E. Krier, Risk, Courts, and Agencies, 138 U. PA. L. REV. 1027, 1071-85 (i99o). 
18 For a popular treatment, see SHELDON RAMPTON & JOHN STAUBER, TRUST US, WE'RE EXPERTS! How INDUSTRY MANIPULATES SCIENCE AND GAMBLES WITH YOUR FUTURE (2oo), and in particular the authors' alarming accounts of the link between corporate funding sources and purportedly objective research outcomes, id. at 2 15-2 1. 
19 I refer to the author of the chapters discussed in this Review as "Slovic" for ease of exposition, although Slovic collaborated with other authors on all but seven of the twenty-six chapters. For present purposes, it is worthwhile to single out Sarah Lichtenstein and Baruch Fischhoff, with whom Slovic has collaborated on many occasions. 71); differences across lines of race and gender (pp. 390-412); and the role of emotions in assessing, taking, and avoiding risks (pp. 413-29). In this space it would be foolhardy to try to examine all of these issues in detail. Instead, I focus on Slovic's own unifying theme: the difference between the risk perceptions of experts and those of ordinary people. I also try to connect Slovic's claims to issues in law and policy, issues with which he deals only briefly.20 Psychological evidence has implications for many recent problems, emphatically including those raised by the threat of terrorism. It is noteworthy in this connection that Slovic's work is already having a significant impact on discussions within the federal government. 2 1 
In my view, though not necessarily in Slovic's, the overriding lesson of these essays is that ordinary people often deal poorly with the topic of risk. This fact stems from predictable features of human cognition. For example, people often neglect probabilities, focus on worst case outcomes, and use heuristics that can lead to massive errors. They are also subject to social influences that can lead them astray. This lesson has major implications for private and public law. First, Slovic sheds new light on why the system of legal regulation has taken its current form, showing some of the cognitive mechanisms that produce both paranoia and neglect. Second, Slovic helps to show how government could produce more helpful and effective warnings about risks. Some of his principal lessons involve how to make law and policy work better including how to structure information campaigns, which are unlikely to succeed unless we have a sense of how people perceive risks. Third, I believe that Slovic establishes, perhaps unintentionally, why sensible policymakers should generally follow science and evidence, not the public. This point bears on the design of government institutions as well as the functioning of Congress, regulatory agencies, judges, and 20 Since the original publication of the essays in this book, Slovic has produced a considerable amount of new work, much of which deals with the affect heuristic, discussed in Part II, pp. 1137-44, below. See, e.g., Paul Slovic, CigaretteSmokers: Rational Actors or Rational Fools?, in SMOKING: RISK, PERCEPTION, & POLICY 97, 105-07 (Paul Slovic ed., 2001); Paul Slovic, Melissa Finucane, Ellen Peters & Donald G. MacGregor, The Affect Heuristic, in INTUITIVE JUDGMENT. HEURISTICS AND BIASES (T. Gilovich, D. Griffin & D. Kahneman eds., forthcoming 2002) (manuscript, on file with the Harvard Law School Library). 
21 See, e.g., National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7013-15 (Jan. 22, 2001) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, 142) (providing a sensitivity analysis involving voluntariness and controllability in connection with valuing the benefits of arsenic regulation); U.S. ENVTL. PROT. AGENCY, GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING ECONOMIC ANALYSES 91 & n.36 (2ooo) [hereinafter EPA, ECONOMIC ANALYSES] (referring to Slovic's work), available at http://yosemitei.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/guidelines#download; see also SCIENTIFIC ADVISORY BD., U.S. ENVTL. PROT. AGENCY, VALUING THE BENEFITS OF FATAL CANCER RISK REDUCTION: AN SAB-REPORT ON EPA'S WHITE PAPER 2 (2oo0) (noting a disagreement within the Scientific Advisory Board about whether the literature supports adjustments in valuation of risk based on risk characteristics other than timing). even juries. More generally still, there are many problems with ordinary intuitions, which provide the starting point for the assessment of central issues in many fields. Intuitions about probabilities often go awry; 2 the same may well be true for intuitions in general, including moral intuitions. The respect accorded to intuitions - in law, philosophy, and elsewhere - has yet to take adequate account of what has been learned about cognitive errors and biases.23 
I make two basic objections to this admirable book. The first and more general is that some of Slovic's own findings seem to raise questions about his claim to have found a "rival rationality." Whatever Slovic's intentions, much of the importance of his work lies in the strong empirical support that it provides for a more technocratic view of regulation, one that draws ordinary intuitions into grave doubt. My second and more specific objection is that Slovic says too little about the social mechanisms by which individuals come to decide whether a risk is serious or trivial. These mechanisms have multiple connections with the cognitive points that Slovic emphasizes. Discussion with others, for example, can make a risk both vivid and salient, and when individuals see a risk as both, they are likely to talk to others, thus increasing both vividness and salience. When like-minded people discuss issues together, they may move one another in extreme directions. As we shall see, both of these objections have implications for law and for government institutions. 
This Review comes in several parts, separating Slovic's claims into various categories. I begin with the simpler and more established claims and follow with the more complex and contested ones. In each Part, I offer an outline of the relevant claims, evaluate them, and discuss some of their implications for law. Part I deals with the idea of cognitive heuristics, or mental shortcuts. My emphasis here is on the "availability heuristic," by which people think a risk is more serious if an example can be readily brought to mind. This Part also deals with what Slovic calls "intuitive toxicology," consisting of a set of simple intuitions by which people assess certain risks. Part II explores the role of emotions and, in particular, Slovic's more recent claim that the "affect heuristic" helps to explain people's reactions to risks. Part III discusses Slovic's "psychometric paradigm," the basis for his effort to claim that ordinary people have a "rival rationality" consisting of a value-laden approach to risk competing with that of experts. Part IV discusses some of Slovic's fascinating findings about demographic dif22 See MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at 166-89. 
23 Valuable discussions of the role of intuitions can be found in MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at 49-69, and Jonathan Baron, Nonconsequentialist Decisions, i7 BEHAV. & BRAIN SC. I, I-io (1994). ferences, knowledge of risks, and trust. Finally, Part V offers a brief, general discussion of issues of law and policy. 
In several chapters, Slovic emphasizes that people use heuristics, or mental shortcuts, to assess the presence and magnitude of risks.2 4 As Slovic makes clear, he owes a large debt here to Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, who have uncovered several heuristics that people use to assess probabilities.2 5 Consider, for example, the "availability heuristic," in accordance with which people assess the probability of an event by seeing whether relevant examples are cognitively "available" (PP. 37-38). Thus, for example, people are likely to think that on a random page more words begin with the letter r or k than have either letter in the third position - even though those consonants are more often in the third position than in the first.2 6 
In the relevant experiments, Kahneman and Tversky explored cognition in general. They did not deal with policy issues or with people's evaluations of social risks. Slovic's major contribution is to show the great importance of the availability heuristic in helping to generate ordinary judgments about risks to health, safety, and the environment. But Slovic also shows a more general way that ordinary people go wrong. They rely on "intuitive toxicology," which contains a range of scientifically implausible judgments, many of them apparently working as mental shortcuts (p. 291). Moving beyond individual cognition, Slovic also calls attention to the "social amplification" of risk. In this Part, I outline Slovic's findings and offer one criticism, or perhaps a friendly amendment: Slovic pays too little attention to the social forces that drive people to fear, or not to fear, certain hazards. I provide a brief discussion of how this gap might be filled. 
In Slovic's view, "[t]he notion of availability is potentially one of the most important ideas for helping us understand the distortions likely to occur in our perceptions of natural hazards" (p. 14). These distortions have concrete consequences for behavior. For example, the [VOL. 115'.1119 decision to buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experiences (p. 40). If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase insurance. In the aftermath of an earthquake, insurance for earthquakes rises sharply - but it declines steadily from that point, as vivid memories recede. It is sensible to think that the lax security measures at airports before the terrorist attacks on September 1i, 2001, had a great deal to do with the lack of cognitively available incidents in recent years, which lulled people into a false sense of immunity. Many experts had insisted that the threat of terrorism on airplanes was significant.2 7 
Note that the use of the availability heuristic, in these contexts, is hardly irrational.2" Both insurance and precautionary measures can be expensive, and what has happened before often seems to be the best available guide to what will happen again. Imperfectly informed people might do well to rely on the availability heuristic. The problem is that the availability heuristic can lead to serious errors of fact, in terms of both excessive fear and neglect. 
Do people know which risks lead to many deaths and which risks lead to few? They do not. In fact, they make huge blunders. 29 In some especially striking studies, Slovic demonstrates that the availability heuristic helps to explain people's mistakes in assessing the frequency of various causes of death. In one study, participants were told the annual number of deaths from motor vehicle accidents in the United States (at the time about 5o,ooo) and then were asked to estimate the number of deaths from forty other causes (pp. lO6-O7). 30 In 27 See, e.g., U.S. COMM'N ON NAT'L SEC./21ST CENTURY, ROADMAP FOR NATIONAL SECURITY: IMPERATIVE FOR CHANGE (2001) (report of a bipartisan commission chaired by Gary Hart and Warren Rudman), available at http:llwww.nssg.govlphasell.pdf; see also GEN. ACCOUNTING OFFICE, SECURITY BREACHES AT FEDERAL AGENCIES AND AIRPORTS 2 (May 25, 2000) (finding two commercial airports vulnerable to weapons and chemical agents). 
28 Kahneman and Tversky emphasize that the heuristics they identify "are highly economical and usually effective" but also that they "lead to systematic and predictable errors." Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 25, at 2o. Gerd Gigerenzer, among others, has emphasized that some heuristics can work extremely well and has used this point as a rejoinder to those who stress the errors introduced by heuristics and biases. GERD GIGERENZER, ADAPTIVE THINKING: RATIONALITY IN THE REAL WORLD (2oo); GERD GIGERENZER, PETER M. TODD & THE ABC RESEARCH GROUP, SIMPLE HEURISTICS THAT MAKE US SMART (r999). For a helpful recent discussion, see Kahneman & Frederick, supra note 24. Even if many heuristics mostly work well in daily life, a sensible government can do much better than to rely on them. 
29 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, Jurors,Judges, and the Mistreatment of Risk by the Courts, 30 J. LEGAL STUD. 107, 130-34 (2001). 
30 There is an important point here, not discussed by Slovic: people have little idea what number is in the ballpark, and they need some kind of "anchor," in the form of an annual death toll for some familiar activity, to ensure that the numbers are not completely random. See Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition another study, people were given two causes of death and asked to say which produces more fatalities (p. 38). People made large mistakes, and when they did so, the availability heuristic was partly responsible. "In keeping with availability considerations," Slovic writes, "overestimated items were dramatic and sensational whereas underestimated items tended to be unspectacular events which claim one victim at a time and are common in non-fatal form" (p. 107). Specifically, participants significantly overestimated highly publicized causes of death, including tornadoes, cancer, botulism, and homicide. By contrast, they underestimated the number of deaths from strokes, asthma, emphysema, and diabetes. At the same time, people tended to think that the number of deaths from accidents is higher than the number of deaths from disease, whereas the opposite is true. In the same vein, participants mistakenly believed that more people die from homicides than from suicides. Availability can also "lull people into complacency," as when certain risks, not easily accessible, seem invisible. What is out of sight is "effectively out of mind" (pp. lo8-O9); recall here the case of inadequate security measures at American airports. 
These points suggest that highly publicized events make people fearful of statistically small risks.3 1 Both law and policy are likely to be adversely affected by people's use of mental shortcuts. Public officials, no less than ordinary people, are prone to use the availability heuristic. 32 And in a democracy, officials, including lawmakers, will respond to public alarm. If citizens are worried about abandoned hazardous waste dumps, we might well expect that substantial resources will be devoted to cleaning them up, even if the risks are relatively small. 33 Similar problems will appear in courts, with juries and judges taking "phantom risks" quite seriously.3 4 There is also a lesson for potential entrepreneurs about how to attract public attention to a risk: make a vivid example of its occurrence highly salient to the public. and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071, 2109-10 (1998); see also Viscusi, supranote 29, at 131 (providing the number of annual auto deaths to anchor the analysis). 
31 For a vivid demonstration in the context of catastrophes, see Jacob E. Gersen, Strategy and Cognition: Regulatory Catastrophic Risk (Aug. 2000) (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago) (on file with the Harvard Law School Library). 
32 See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascadesand Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. 683, 691-703 (I999); Roger G. Noll & James E. Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychologyfor Risk Regulation, 19 J. LEGAL STUD. 747, 749-60 (1990). 
33 See JAMES T. HAMILTON & W. KIP ViscusI, CALCULATING RISKS? THE SPATIAL AND POLITICAL DIMENSIONS OF HAZARDOUS WASTE POLICY (1999); Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 32, at 693-98. 
34 See The Legal Context, in PHANTOM RISK: SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE AND THE LAW 425, 425-28 (Kenneth R. Foster, David E. Bernstein & Peter W. Huber eds., 1993) (discussing scientifically unsupportable outcomes involving "traumatic cancer" and harm to immune systems); The Legal Context, in PHANTOM RISK, supra, at 137, 137-46 (discussing lawsuits with unclear scientific bases). This way of proceeding, far more than statistical analysis, is likely to activate public concern. 35 
Are ordinary people toxicologists? Slovic thinks so (p. 285). He uncovers the content of "intuitive toxicology" by comparing how experts (professional toxicologists) and ordinary people think about the risks associated with chemicals. The result is a fascinating picture. It is not clear what identifiable heuristics are at work in intuitive toxicology; it would be valuable to make more progress here. But it is clear that people are using mental shortcuts and that these shortcuts lead to errors. 
Slovic elicits the views of toxicologists and ordinary people on the following propositions, among others (pp. 290-98): 
i. If you are exposed to a carcinogen, then you are likely to get cancer. 
cancer in animals, then we can be reasonably sure that the chemical will cause cancer in humans. 
contaminated now than ever before. 

chemicals. 
several malformed children had been born there during each of the past few years. The town is in a region where agricultural pesticides have been used during the last decade. It is very likely that these pesticides were the cause of the malformations. 
When asked whether they agree, disagree, or have no opinion, ordinary people expressed agreement with many such statements by pluralities or even majorities (pp. 290-98). By contrast, toxicologists disagreed with such statements, usually by overwhelming majorities (pp. 290-98). 
What are ordinary people thinking? Can we discern some structure to their perceptions? There does seem to be a "carcinogens are deadly" heuristic here, which is responsible for agreement with the first three propositions set forth above. But three more fundamental beliefs seem to play a large role. First, many people appear to believe that risk is an "all or nothing" matter; something is either safe or dan3S As we shall soon see, there is a relationship between the availability heuristic and the important role of emotions, or affect,-in the assessment of risks. See infra Part 11, pp. 1137-44. gerous, and there is no middle ground.3 6 Second, many people tend to subscribe to the "zero-risk" mentality, at least in some domains, apparently believing that it is both possible and appropriate to eliminate risk entirely.37 This belief appears closely connected to the notion that risk is a matter of "all or nothing." Third, many people seem committed to a belief in the benevolence of nature. They think that the products of human beings and human activities are more likely to be dangerous than are the products of natural processes. 38 Here we can even identify a possible heuristic: natural processes are unlikely to create unacceptable risks.3 9 
Experts in toxicology believe that all three beliefs are false. Moreover, it seems clear that expert judgments are far more accurate than are those of ordinary people. Why do people think as they do? At least some of their beliefs might work well for nonspecialists in most contexts. 40 People want to know, for example, whether an activity is "safe," not the statistical probability of harm; and in many contexts, the excessively simple category of "safe" can tell them what they need to know. 4 1 The problem is that ideas of this kind lead to mistakes in contexts in which regulatory choices, and even some daily decisions, 36 This point is connected with an aspect of prospect theory, termed the "certainty effect," which finds that "people overweight outcomes that are considered certain, relative to outcomes which are merely probable." Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, in CHOICES, VALUES, AND FRAMES 17, 20 (Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky eds., 2000). 
37 See Viscusi, supra note 29, at 133-34 (discussing the zero-risk mentality in the context of judges and jurors). 
38 For an interesting challenge to the general belief in nature's benevolence from the perspective of ecology, see Daniel B. Botkin, Adjusting Law to Nature's Discordant Harmonies, 7 DUKE ENVTL. L. & POL'Y F. 25, 26-31 (i996). 
39 This idea might also be based on a moral judgment that the risks associated with nature should not be a source of intense human concern. Although I cannot establish the point, I believe that such a moral judgment is a holdover from certain theological positions. See JANET RADCLIFFE RICHARDS, HUMAN NATURE AFTER DARWIN 242-52 (2000). For the moment, consider also the possibility that emotional reactions play a significant role in intuitive toxicology, particularly in people's intense reactions to small exposures to carcinogens. See Yuval Rottenstreich & Christopher K. Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Risk, 12 PSYCHOL. SCI. 185, i86-88 (2001). I turn to the affect heuristic in section ILA, pp. 1137-39, below. 
40 This is a standard justification for most heuristics. See, e.g., Gerd Gigerenzer & Peter M. Todd, Fast and FrugalHeuristics: The Adaptive Toolbox, in GIGERENZER, TODD & THE ABC RESEARCH GROUP, supra note 28, at 3, 3-8; Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 25, at 20 ("These heuristics are highly economical and usually effective."). 
41 It cannot, however, be said that a belief in the benevolence of nature is a sensible heuristic. In fact, this is a dangerous idea, because the unnatural may very well be safer than the natural. See, e.g., JAMES P. COLLMAN, NATURALLY DANGEROUS: SURPRISING FACTS ABOUT FOOD, HEALTH, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 1-2, 29-33, 61-85 (2001) (discussing dangers in natural foods); ALAN MCHUGHEN, PANDORA'S PICNIC BASKET 233-37 (2ooo) (discussing hazards in organic food). For a criticism of the proposition that nature, left alone, produces the best environment for human and other creatures, see Botkin, supranote 38, at 26-3 I. have to be made. Nonspecialists may do well to rely on such principles, but policymakers should do a good deal better. 
Slovic also finds that experts do not entirely agree among themselves (pp. 292-93, 311-12). Most interestingly, toxicologists employed by industry are far more optimistic about chemical risks than are toxicologists employed by government or academic institutions; there is a large "affiliation bias," so that people tend to believe what their institutions would want them to believe (p. 311). 1 shall say more about this particular bias below. But the differences among toxicologists are dwarfed by the differences between toxicologists and ordinary people. Experts are likely to be biased by their work for an organization with a stake in the outcome - but even acknowledging this point, experts are, on many fundamental issues, in basic accord with one another. 
As Slovic is aware, mental shortcuts do not operate in a social vacuum; interpersonal influences play a large role. Most of the time, most of us lack independent knowledge of risks, and we must therefore rely on the beliefs of others in making our assessments. 
Slovic's principal treatment of this point comes in a discussion of what he terms the "social amplification of risk" (pp. 232-45). The primary purpose of this discussion is not to explain how social influences affect people's perception of risks, but instead to show what might be missed by conventional efforts to tabulate the costs and benefits associated with risks. For example, the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island "demonstrated dramatically that factors other than injury, death and property damage can impose serious costs and social repercussions" (p. 234). Although no one was killed or even harmed by the accident, it imposed "enormous costs" on the nuclear industry and society more generally, resulting in tighter regulations, decreased operation of reactors globally, heightened public opposition to nuclear power, and a less viable role for nuclear power as a major long-term energy source (pp. 234-35). Slovic is concerned that a conventional risk analysis, focusing on the likelihood and severity of injury, will overlook these kinds of consequences (p. 235). 
In some domains, however, Slovic finds that society systematically underestimates potentially serious harms, a phenomenon he terms "social attenuation of risk" (p. 235). As examples, Slovic offers indoor radon, smoking, and driving without a seat belt (p. 235). Certainly the terrorist attacks of September 2001 provide the most recent and salient illustration; those attacks produced harms of multiple kinds that extended well beyond the day of the attacks. A comprehensive account will take a long time to develop, but consider, for illustrative purposes, the following facts and projections, which were developed within a short period following the attacks: New York City was expected to forfeit between $i billion and $3 billion in lost revenue; 4 global airline losses were projected to exceed $io billion, with international carriers potentially losing $7.5 billion and U.S. carriers anticipating $5 billion in losses; 43 total "big company" layoffs were about 20o,00o, 4 4 with British Airways laying off 12.5% of its employees and decreasing flights by Io%, 4 5 and with American Airlines and Boeing each laying off at least 20,000 people; 46 car rental companies were expected to lose 5o-6o% of their business within the months following the attacks; 4 7 and the national government developed a $I5 billion package to assist airlines. 4 Of course, all this is just the beginning: the ripple effects of the attacks, both financial and psychological, extend to countless domains. 
Slovic is especially concerned with the "secondary impacts" of dangers whose effects are generally viewed more narrowly. The broader impact of a well publicized problem might include a sharp decline in social trust, an increase in liability and insurance costs, public pressure to impose new regulations, and even a period of social disorder. Because dramatic events are an important determinant of individual risk judgments, a highly publicized incident might exacerbate unwarranted or irrational fears. The flow of information, especially via the media, can be extremely important not only in spreading facts but also in shaping perceptions. Slovic's social amplification model embodies his effort to shed light on the processes by which "seemingly minor risks or risk events often produce extraordinary public concern and social and economic impacts, with rippling effects across time, space and social institutions" (pp. 244-45). 4 9 
Slovic's emphasis on social amplification of risks is a valuable supplement to his work on individual cognition. But his discussion neglects to address the social origins of individual belief. As we shall see, individuals contribute to the intensity of the very forces by which they are influenced. My aim here is to fill a gap in Slovic's presentation by offering a sketch of the relevant influences on individual beliefs. 
i. Informational Influences. - A good way to begin is to draw on emerging work on social cascades5 0 and to sketch an understanding of "risk perception cascades" in particular. The starting point is a simple recognition that in many domains people possess little first-hand information. Certainly this is the case for many hazards. Because few people have independently researched the dangers of arsenic in water, global warming, Lyme disease, airplane travel, or asbestos in the workplace, they must rely on the signals given by other people, as revealed by their behavior or their public statements. 
To see how risk perception cascades operate, consider a stylized example: Ann is unsure whether global warming is a serious problem, but Bob, whom Ann trusts, believes that it is. Influenced by Bob's views, Ann concludes that global warming is indeed a serious problem. Carl is inclined, on his own, to discount the risk; but confronted with informational signals given by the shared views of Ann and Bob, Carl might well come to believe that global warming is indeed a serious problem. Deborah, a skeptic about global warming, would need a great deal of confidence in the correctness of her view to reject the shared belief of Ann, Bob, and Carl. The members of this little community will come to share the belief that global warming is a matter of considerable concern. 5 ' 
Stylized though it is, this description reveals the dynamics of many social movements concerned with the evaluation of risk, s2 captured in the notion of an informational cascade. Most of us think and fear 50 See, e.g., Lisa R. Anderson & Charles A. Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory,87 AM. ECON. REV. 847 (1997); Abhijit V. Banerjee, A Simple Model of Herd Behavior, 107 Q.J. ECON. 797 (I992) (examining, through a model termed "herd behavior," the tendency of individuals to follow what others are doing rather than to assess independently what action to take); Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch, Learningfrom the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades, J. ECON. PERSP., Summer 1998, at 151; Andrew F. Daughety & Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment: Persuasive Influence and Herding Behavior by Courts, i AM. L. & ECON. REV. 158 (,999). 
51 See Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer & Welch, supra note 5o, at 15-63; David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influences, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in THE NEW ECONOMICS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR i88, igo-98 (Marianno Tommasi & Kathryn lerulli eds., '995). 
52 For several examples of grassroots environmental protection movements, see PENINA MIGDAL GLAZER & MYRON PERETZ GLAZER, THE ENVIRONMENTAL CRUSADERS (1998). what we do because of what we think other people think and fear. The spreading fear of Lyme disease is a case in point, with many people believing they have the disease and many doctors confirming this diagnosis, simply because they have heard from others that Lyme disease is associated with certain symptoms. 53 Because of the availability heuristic, the informational cascade may be greatly fueled if a salient event easily comes to mind.54 
not all that is at work; reputation matters too. Because most people care about how others view them, it is easy to imagine reputational cascades with respect to actions or stated beliefs.5 5 Suppose, for example, that Alan and Betty would think ill of anyone who argued that global warming is not a problem. Charles, who is unsure what to think about global warming, might be unmoved privately by the views of Alan and Betty and might even consider them fanatical. But Charles might nonetheless be unwilling to incur the scorn of Alan and Betty, or to appear ignorant or indifferent to the welfare of future generations. If so, Charles might not express opposition to a proposal to take dramatic steps to halt global warming and might even agree publicly with Alan and Betty that such steps are necessary. If Dana is otherwise undecided, she might be extremely reluctant to oppose Alan, Betty, and Charles publicly. Mounting reputational pressure might well lead Ellen, Frank, George, Helen, and many more to join the bandwagon. Eventually the result would be to change law and policy, as citizens support massive social efforts and ask their representatives to respond. 
I have suggested that with respect to risk, informational influences seem to be the most important factors in altering behavior, as individual fear grows with a sense that other (reasonable) people are frightened as well. But reputational influences matter too. If the example just given seems artificial, consider the comment of a medical researcher who questions the accuracy of many Lyme disease diagnoses: "Doctors can't say what they think anymore. If you quote me as saying these things, I'm as good as dead." 56 Or consider the remarks of a sociologist who has publicly raised questions about the health threats posed by mad-cow disease; he suggests that if you raise those doubts 53 See David Grann, Stalking Dr.Steere, N.Y. TIMES, July 17, 2001 (Magazine), at 52. On informational cascades among voters, political protestors, doctors, firms, and even animals, see Hirshleifer, supra note 5i, at 2oi-o6. 
54 See Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 32, at 712-15. 
55 See TIMUR KURAN, PRIVATE TRUTHS, PUBLIC LIES 26-30, 63-64, 356 nn.34, 42 (1995); Timur Kuran, The Unthinkable and the Unthought, 5 RATIONALITY & SOC'y 473, 487-88 (199563).Grann, supra note 53, at 56. [VoI. 115:111 9 publicly, "[y]ou get made to feel like a pedophile. '5 1 Or suppose that in October 200i a policy analyst objected that new security measures at airports would be unlikely to increase safety because, by reducing the convenience of air travel, they might lead more people to drive, thus causing a net loss of lives. Such an analyst might well remain silent out of a desire to avoid the opprobrium that would predictably follow. 
Lawmakers, even more than ordinary citizens, are vulnerable to reputational pressures. In fact, that is part of their job. Lawmakers might well support legislation to control risks that they privately know to be insignificant. In the context of regulation of hazardous waste dumps, reputational factors helped to fuel a cascade effect that eventually led to the enactment of the Superfund statute,5 8 which was designed to ensure the remediation of abandoned hazardous waste sites. The apparent adverse health effects of abandoned waste at Love Canal made it extremely difficult for government officials to resist public concern, even though the evidence of serious risk was far from clear.5 9 
But the problem of reputational pressure does not necessarily result in excessive legal controls. In a phenomenon similar to Slovic's social attenuation of risks, we can imagine "unavailability cascades," 60 in which an individual's relative indifference to statistically significant risks leads other people to be indifferent as well. Return again to American neglect of airport security, a problem that greatly concerned experts. Undoubtedly, informational and reputational forces help to account for public indifference to many hazards that trouble experts. 
There is an additional point. Some people are especially influential because they are known to be reliable, and here the informational "signals" of their statements and actions are especially loud. Some people are particularly influential because they can inflict high reputational costs on people who do not conform. For this reason, prestigious people are in a good position to fuel a cascade. 
Note that these points about social influences complement Slovic's cognitive claims, including the availability heuristic and intuitive toxicology. What is "available" is a function of informational and reputational forces. If people are spreading the idea that arsenic "causes cancer" and should therefore be banned, then the commonly held assumptions described by Slovic as intuitive toxicology will spread as 57 Andrew Higgins, It's a Mad, Mad, Mad-Cow World, WALL ST. J., Mar. 12, 2001, at Ai 3 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
58 42 U.S.C §§ 96oi-9675 (I994 & Supp. V 1999). 59 See Kuran & Sunstein, supranote 32, at 692-98. 
60 See id. at 730-31. if by contagion. 6 1 If people are talking about the risks associated with pesticides, disposable diapers, air travel, or shark attacks, those risks will be available in the public mind. The case of shark attacks offers an especially vivid example. 62 A LEXIS search found over iooo references to shark attacks between August 4, 2001, and September 4, 2001,63 and 126 references to "the summer of the shark, ''64 notwithstanding the absence of any reliable evidence of an increase in shark attacks in the summer of 2001.61 Predictably, there was discussion of new legislation to control the problem. 66 
polarization,"67 helps to strengthen social pressure. It is well established that when a group deliberates, group members tend to move toward a more extreme position in line with their predeliberation inclinations. 68 Thus, for example, people who tend to fear the effects of second-hand smoke, or who believe that pesticides carry significant risks, are likely 61 For a discussion of the controversy over the EPA's proposed arsenic regulations, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, go GEO. L.J. (forthcoming 2002) (manuscript at 22-25, on file with the Harvard Law School Library). 
62 As one journalist observes: 
A maritime expert said on last night's "NBC Nightly News" that more people die from bees, wasps, snakes or alligators than from shark attacks. 
But there's no ratings in bees. Unpleasant little critters, but not scary-looking enough. 
With "Jaws" music practically playing in the background, the media have turned this into the Summer of the Shark. Never mind that the number of attacks has actually dropped since last year. They're here, they're nasty and they could be coming to a beach near you. 
Howard Kurtz, Shark Tragedies Spark Increased Coverage, WASH. POST ON-LINE (Sept. 5, 2001), at http://www.washingtonpost.comlwp-dyn/articles/A44 720-200I Sep5 .html. 
63 The search was conducted in the ALLNWS file, using the search term "shark attack!" and the noted date restrictions. An identical search of sources dated between August 4, 2ooo, and September 4, 2000, found only 174 references to shark attacks. 
64 The search was conducted in the ALLNWS file, using the noted date restrictions. 65 See The International Shark Attack File, at http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/fish/Sharks/ISAF/ ISAF.htm (last visited Jan. 6, 2002) (offering comparative risk data showing, for example, that while there were 18 injuries and deaths from sharks in the United States in 1996, there were io,ooo injuries from buckets and pails; over 15oo injuries from toilet bowl products; and over i98,ooo injuries from nails, tacks, screws, and bolts). 
66 See, e.g., Maya Bell, Divers Defend Courting the Fish So Many Fear:A Wave of Recent Shark Attacks Has Brought South Florida Shark-Feeding Groups Under State Scrutiny, ORLANDO SENTINEL, Aug. 29, 2001, at Ai, 2001 WL 28413950. 
67 See ROGER BROWN, SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY: THE SECOND EDITION 200-45 (1986); Cass R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go to Extremes, iio YALE L.J. 71, 85-9o (2000). 
68 See BROWN, supra note 67, at 222-29; Sunstein, supranote 67, at 85-86. There is a lesson here for lawyers, particularly those who work in teams. Anecdotal evidence suggests that lawyers, simply by virtue of their working on a team, tend to gain confidence in their clients' positions. This can occur for opposing sides in the same case. Cf. Linda Babcock & George Loewenstein, Explaining BargainingImpasse: The Role of Self-Serving Bias, in BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS 355 (Cass R. Sunstein ed., 2000) (discussing the effects of self-serving bias without reference to group polarization). to believe, after discussion, that the relevant health dangers are more serious than they had previously thought. So too, people who tend to think that the risks of global warming have been exaggerated will likely believe, after discussion, that global warming is even less cause for concern. 69 
Considerable evidence from many different countries supports this basic prediction. 70 If like-minded people are talking with one another much of the time, it is especially likely that some groups of people will show heightened concern about certain risks, regardless of the evidence. It is also likely that other groups of people will show no concern at all, even if the evidence gives cause for alarm. There can be no doubt that group polarization has contributed to disagreements over proper risk regulation, with some groups, for example, thinking that global warming spells global disaster and others thinking that it is a fabrication of overzealous environmentalists.7 1 Indeed, Slovic's demonstrated "affiliation bias" undoubtedly has a close relation to group polarization; affiliates of an organization are all too likely to move to an extreme. More generally, when society shows alarm or indifference, group polarization will likely be part of the reason. 
In sum, Slovic performs a valuable service in showing how the availability heuristic and intuitive toxicology help to produce inaccurate judgments about risk. As compared with ordinary people, experts are better able to reach accurate judgments, if only because they have access to more information, making the easily recalled incident a less important determinant of judgment and producing greater accuracy than the rules of thumb on which ordinary people rely.72 Slovic is also correct to emphasize that social forces can amplify the effect of the availability heuristic. The principal gap in his discussion lies in his failure to explore those forces. There is much more to be done here, both at the level of theory and at the level of empirical detail. 
Slovic's psychological claims offer many clues to the development of regulatory policy - showing, for instance, how the vivid example can play a significant role in motivating the enactment of new legislation or new administrative regulations. Sometimes the use of such examples will be valuable because it will activate social concern about 69 There is no reason to think that experts are immune to group polarization; they are certainly vulnerable to cascade effects. See Hirshleifer, supranote 5i, at 204-05. 
70To summarize a complex story, group polarization occurs because of informational and reputational influences. See BROWN, supra note 67, at 212-22; Sunstein, supra note 67, at 88-90. 
71 The implications of group polarization extend well beyond regulation. See, e.g., Sharon Groch, Free Spaces: Creating Oppositional Consciousness in the Disability Rights Movement, in OPPOSITIONAL CONSCIOUSNESS: THE SUBJECTIVE ROOTS OF SOCIAL PROTEST 65, 69-74 (Jane Mansbridge & Aldon Morris eds., 2001) (discussing the rise of "deaf consciousness" as deaf people associate largely with each other). 
72 For a detailed treatment of lay-expert conflicts, see MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at IOI-I9. previously neglected problems. But sometimes it will lead to perverse results, in the form of massive expenditures on small or even nonexistent problems.7 3 I have argued here that some of the gaps in Slovic's presentation will be filled if we look more closely at social influences on behavior. 
As Slovic emphasizes, most psychological work on risk has focused primarily on cognition (p. 413), asking whether mental heuristics produce errors and how people depart from what is generally considered rational behavior. But thinking about perceived risks only in these terms seems incomplete. With respect to risks, many of our ordinary ways of speaking suggest strong emotions: panic, hysteria, terror.7 4 A central point here is that when strong emotions are at work, people tend to focus on the "worst case," in a way that makes the outcome, but not its probability,highly salient.7 5 Slovic explores a key question: how do people's feelings affect their reactions to risks? 
Slovic's interest in this topic appears to have been triggered by a remarkable finding: when asked to assess the risks and benefits associated with certain items, people tend to say that risky activities carry low benefits and that beneficial activities carry low risks (pp. 41516).76 It is rare that people will see an activity as both highly beneficial and quite dangerous, or as both benefit-free and danger-free. This phenomenon is extremely odd. Why don't people more frequently think that an activity is both highly beneficial and highly risky? Why do they seem to make a gestalt-type judgment, one that drives assessment of both risks and benefits? 
Aware that risk and benefit are "distinct concepts," Slovic thinks that "affect" comes first and helps to "direct" judgments of both risk and benefit. Hence he suggests an "affect heuristic," by which people have an emotional, all-things-considered reaction to certain processes and products. The affect heuristic operates as a mental shortcut for a more careful evaluation. Slovic finds that the affect heuristic even 73 See Noll & Krier, supra note 32, at 774 (discussing the benefits of "striking when the iron is cold'). 
74 See George F. Loewenstein, Christopher K. Hsee, Elke U. Weber & Ned Welch, Risk as Feelings, 127 PSYCHOL. BULL. 267, 267-68 (2001). 
75 Rottenstreich & Hsee, supra note 39, at i86-88. 
76 Note that the study clearly separates benefits and risks, marking them for independent analysis by participants. 2002] ple, we do not know what the dose-response curve looks like at low levels. We do not always know whether there is a safe threshold below which adverse effects are absent, whether adverse effects fall rapidly but do not disappear for low exposures, or whether the curve is simply linear.1 1' The choice among dose-response curves often depends on educated guesses and normative commitments, not science. 112 
These points establish that any description of risk contains value judgments, and at several levels. But they do not support Slovic's third claim, that "there is no such thing as 'real risk' or 'objective risk"' (p. 392). I am sure that Slovic would agree that smoking three packs of cigarettes per day for a period of years produces a real risk, one that is both objective and high, whether or not it can be quantified with precision. Slovic would also agree that swimming at the beach in Marblehead, Massachusetts, produces a real, but small, risk of being killed by a shark even if we are unable to quantify it. Of course, we can describe these risks, consistent with the evidence, in many different ways. But this point does not establish that risks are not real or that they are not objective. Indeed, Slovic agrees that "the dangers and uncertainties of life . .. are real" (p. 392). If dangers are real, so are risks. 
Now let us turn to the question whether ordinary people display a rival rationality. How do we know that ordinary people think that Slovic's qualitative factors are so important? The answer is not that people spontaneously point to such factors in explaining their assessments of risk. We do not have data to demonstrate that ordinary people have an accurate sense of the number of lives at stake, or that their all-things-considered evaluations show that they agree with experts on the numbers but introduce qualitative factors to evaluate risks. 1 3 Instead, the answer is that Slovic and his fellow experimenters expressly identified these factors, set them before experimental subjects, and asked their subjects to rate certain risks along these specific dimensions (pp. 203-o6). People were asked to rate, on a seven-point scale, various risks in terms of their catastrophic potential, their dreadedness, their threat to future generations, their controllability, and so forth (pp. 201-05). Is it at all surprising, or even informative, that the risks that people most fear tended to be rated most severely along these dimensions? 
111 See generally Sunstein, supranote 61 (manuscript at 25-28) (providing a detailed discussion, with many examples, of different types of dose-response curves). 
112 Id. (manuscript at 26). 113 In fact, Slovic finds that people do not know the actual numbers. See supra p. Ii26. 
Slovic finds that the most feared risks include DDT, nuclear power, pesticides, herbicides, and smoking (p. 143), whereas x-rays, microwave ovens, nonnuclear electric power, marijuana, and sunbathing rank far lower (pp. 144-45). He also finds that the most feared risks are considered more serious, along several of the "qualitative" dimensions, than are the least feared risks. But these findings do not establish that the qualitative dimensions are the grounds for people's rankings of these risks. People's evaluations of risks might well be explained by their general affect toward the product or activity in question. In fact, there is a real oddity in Slovic's list of factors: the absence of "magnitude of danger" as a reason for special concern. Whatever the nature of lay rationality, surely perceived magnitude of danger should count as an important factor. Its absence suggests that affect may be doing a lot of work. 
If a halo effect is involved, so that risks are subject to an overall affect, is it terribly surprising that certain risks receive bad ratings on most dimensions and others are regarded more favorably on most dimensions? When people fear DDT and pesticides, but not microwave ovens or sunbathing, it is probably because they have a rapid, intuitive response to these sources of risk, producing fear in some cases but not in others. If so, people are not making some richly rational judgment that some risks are controllable and others not, or that some of the relevant risks are equitably distributed and others not. Indeed, I predict that if people were asked to offer an "overall evaluation" of the riskiness of products and activities on a scale of zero to eight, their rankings would be similar to those that emerge from Slovic's studies. 
The idea of richer rationality is drawn into further question by the fact that lay people's concerns vary greatly across nations. Consider, for example, the fact that nuclear power, a source of real fear in the United States, occasions little concern in France. 114 Similarly, genetic engineering of food is treated as a serious problem in Europe, but much less so in the United States." 5 If lay people really have a richer rationality, it seems surprising to find cultural differences of this magnitude. 
Nothing in Slovic's data excludes the possibility that people fear certain risks in part because they have a general impression that these risks are statistically large. If this is right, then people will express more concern with certain activities, on the qualitative dimensions, when they have an intuitive sense that those activities have few benefits and impose significant risks. 16 On this view, the rankings on the qualitative dimensions do not have much explanatory power. On the contrary, they are explained, at least in part, by people's intuitive belief that large statistical risks are associated with certain activities. The point should not be overstated. Slovic is undoubtedly right to say that the qualitative factors matter. But his evidence seems too crude to disprove a competing hypothesis - that people's rankings of risks reflect, in significant part, the roles of affect and crude, rough-andready assessments of net benefits, and are not mostly driven by a richer rationality. 171 
If we look closely at Slovic's actual list of hazards, it is not at all clear how to explain the results in terms of qualitative factors. Of ninety hazards, smoking ranks ninth, while marijuana ranks eightyfifth (pp. 143-45). Do the "qualitative factors" on Slovic's list really account for this dramatic difference? What is the richer rationality that produces these judgments? Are the risks of smoking less voluntary and more inequitably distributed? Or consider the fact that pesticides and herbicides rank seventh and eighth on the list, while x-rays rank thirtieth, food preservatives thirty-fifth, and food irradiation thirty-ninth (pp. 143-45). Can this pattern of judgments really be explained in terms of voluntariness, equity, potentially catastrophic quality, and risk to future generations? The answer is far from obvious. Might it not be more reasonable to speculate that people's rankings are based on some combination of the affect heuristic and a quick, intuitive, imperfectly informed assessment of the magnitude of the relevant hazards and accompanying benefits? To be sure, it is possible to suggest that people think that smoking is addictive and hence peculiarly 116 Recall that people's judgments about risks and benefits tend to be inversely related; hence when people think something is dangerous, they believe that it has few benefits. See supra p. 
117 Consider the possibility that these "richer" factors merely operate as ex post justifications for decisions reached on other grounds. See MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at 102-o6. It is well established that people are not especially good at offering the actual grounds for their judgments and will sometimes offer accounts that demonstrably diverge from reality. See id.; see also Richard E. Nisbett & Timothy Decamp Wilson, Telling More than We Can Know: Verbal Reports on Mental Processes, 84 PSYCHOL. REV. 231 (1977). In an especially interesting experiment, people were asked to choose one item of clothing from a foursome. Id. at 243-44. Though the four items were identical, the subjects generally chose the item furthest to the right, apparently for no other reason than that it was on the right side. Id. at 243. When asked to justify their decisions, the subjects failed to state the object's location as a reason and, when asked directly, even denied that location played a role. Id. at 243-44. In this light, there is reason to be cautious about the suggestion that these qualitative factors are the actual bases for people's judgments about risks. In fact, things are still worse for Slovic's causal hypothesis, because as I have noted, the qualitative factors said to support ordinary risk perceptions are not generated by subjects on their own, but are suggested by experimenters. The research discussed in this footnote - showing a disconnection between the actual basis and the articulated basis for decisions - has obvious implications for the question whether judges' articulated reasons actually reflect their motivations. involuntary, or that pesticides and herbicides are more likely to affect future generations. But this seems speculative, a heroic effort to make sense of ordinary evaluations."" In short, Slovic has not demonstrated that ordinary people show a richer rationality.1 19 
It is possible to explain people's perceptions in many ways. Slovic's own discussion of the availability heuristic offers the beginning of an account that competes with the idea of a rival rationality: when a relevant incident readily comes to mind, people are much more likely to be fearful than when one does not. The risks associated with nuclear power, smoking, and pesticides receive a great deal of publicity. In the media and in everyday life, less attention is given to the risks associated with x-rays, food preservatives, and food irradiation. If this point is right, people are not unconcerned with the number of lives at risk. They simply err on the factual question: how large is the risk as a statistical matter? The various qualitative considerations are not, on this view, irrelevant; but they play much less of a role than Slovic suggests in explaining the split between experts and ordinary people. 
I have noted the possibility that some of people's judgments, rooted in affect, are attributable to rough-and-ready assessments of whether the activities in question are on balance beneficial or harmful. 120 Consider in this light Howard Margolis's powerful and detailed criticisms of the psychometric paradigm,1 2 1 criticisms with which Slovic does not engage. Margolis thinks that the psychometric paradigm does not explain divisions between experts and lay persons, for which he suggests a quite different explanation. 122 Margolis's bottom line: experts know the facts and ordinary people do not.123 While Slovic attempts to establish that lay people think more richly, Margolis leans heavily in the technocratic direction, challenging the populist underpinnings of those who celebrate the rival rationality of ordinary people. 
118 For similar heroism, see Gillette & Krier, supranote 17, at 1075-82. 
119 One possibility, stressed by Slovic himself and taken up in detail above, is that the affect heuristic underlies people's judgments (pp. 413-29). 
120 Of course, this point is not meant to deny that an unlikely catastrophic risk is likely to attract more attention than its discounted value warrants. There is a connection here to prospect theory in general, which predicts that people will be especially sensitive to low-probability catastrophes. For a good application of prospect theory to the incentives facing potential litigants, see Chris Guthrie, Framing Frivolous Litigation: A Psychological Theory, 67 U. CHI. L. REV. 163 (2000). 
121 See MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at 71-143. 122 See id. at 94-19. 
123 See id. 
Margolis's basic account 124 is exceedingly simple. He thinks that in some cases ordinary people are alert to the hazards of some activity, but not very alert to its benefits, which are cognitively "off-screen.' 1' 5 In such cases, people will tend to think "better safe than sorry,"1' 26 causing them to have a highly negative reaction to the risk. 2 7 In such cases, they will demand aggressive and immediate regulation. In other cases, the benefits, but not the hazards, of the activity will be very much on people's minds, and people will tend to think "nothing ventured, nothing gained.' 28 In these cases, they will think that regulators are overzealous, even fanatical. In still other cases - in Margolis's view, the cases in which observers behave most sensibly - both cboenmepfiatrsinagn dtherisbkesnewfiitlsl wbeith"otnh-esccroesetns.,"129and people will assess risks by 
It is reasonable to think that, for experts, benefits and costs are usually on-screen and that when ordinary people are much more alarmed than experts, it is sometimes because the risks are apparent but the benefits are not. How else are we to make sense of the fact that the very small risks associated with x-rays do not occasion much concern, while the very small risks associated with pesticides and herbicides frequently appear on the list of most feared risks? A sensible conjecture is that people know that, on balance, a world with x-rays is safer and better than a world without them. For pesticides and herbicides, by contrast, the benefits seem far less tangible, if visible at all. It is safe to predict that if a reliable source told people that eliminating pesticides would lead to serious health problems - for example, because pesticide-free fruits and vegetables carried special dangers 30 the perceived risk of pesticides would decline dramatically. Indeed, I predict that if people were informed that eliminating pesticides would lead to a significant increase in the price of apples and oranges, the perceived risk would decrease as well. 
Margolis offers a nice example to support this prediction. The removal of asbestos from schools in New York City was initially quite popular, indeed demanded by parents, even though experts believed that the risks were statistically small.' 3 ' But when it emerged that the removal would cause schools to be closed for a period of weeks, greatly inconveniencing parents, parental attitudes turned right around and 124 Id. at 75-92. 125 Id. at 73-79. 126 See id. 127 See id. at 74, 91-92. 128 See id. 129 See id. at 77-78. 
130 See McHUGHEN, supra note 41, at 232-37 (discussing the potential risks of organic food production). 
131 MARGOLIS, supra note 14, at 124-28. asbestos removal seemed like a really bad idea. 13 When the costs of the removal came on-screen, parents thought much more like experts and the risks of asbestos seemed like the risks of x-rays: statistically small and, on balance, worth incurring. 
A reasonable conjecture, then, is that when ordinary people diverge from experts, it is sometimes because ordinary people see the risks but not the benefits, whereas experts see both. Some evidence for this conjecture comes from Slovic's finding that when people think that a product or an activity has a high risk, they tend to think that it has a low benefit, and that when they think that a product or an activity has a high benefit, they tend to think that it carries a low risk too (pp. 415-17). This finding strongly suggests that when ordinary people are more fearful than experts, it is often because ordinary people are not looking at the benefits that accompany the product or activity at issue. The same finding suggests that when ordinary people are less fearful than experts - as was the case, for many years, with cigarettes - it is because ordinary people are looking not at the risks, but instead only at the benefits. 
In sum, the difference between experts and ordinary people might be explained not only or mostly by reference to rival rationality, but also and more fundamentally by some combination of the availability and affect heuristics and a failure, on the part of ordinary people, to put all of the effects of risks on-screen. Of course, none of these points means that experts do not err. They too are subject to cognitive errors, 133 and we have seen that experts show affiliation bias. I have emphasized that annual fatalities are not all that matter. My major point is that in the domains in which they specialize, experts are far more likely to be right than are ordinary people. Compare the area of law: experienced litigators are hardly infallible, but they have a comparative advantage, most of the time, in predicting what judges and juries will do. Similarly, brain surgeons certainly err, but they know far more about brain surgery than most of us do, and it would be odd to say that ordinary people have a rival rationality about brain surgery. 
There is a further problem. Many of the qualitative factors that are said to lead people to a "rich" conception of risk need a good deal of unpacking. 134 The qualitative variables should not be seen as 132 Id. at 127-28. 
133 See, e.g., Amos Tversky & David Kahneman, Belief in the Law of Small Numbers, 76 PSYCHOL. BULL. 105 (1970. 
134 For a sophisticated treatment that seems to me far too celebratory and uncritical of lay rationality, see Gillette & Krier, supranote 17, at 1076-82. 2002) marking dichotomies, or even clear distinctions. They raise many questions. 
i. The Example of Dread. - Some risks are said to be "dread," whereas other risks are not. But what does this mean? In the abstract, to say that a risk is dread seems to be to say that people fear it. This suggests that the idea of dread is just a synonym for perception of risk, not an explanation for it. If so, it is no surprise that there is a correlation between risks perceived as serious and risks deemed to be dread. (Is it surprising that people are scared of things that they find frightening?) It is even possible that when people say that a risk is dread, what they mean, in part, is that the risk is large in magnitude. People do not dread being attacked by unicorns or Martians. But they do dread cancer, partly (not only' 35 ) because the risk of getting cancer is relatively high. 
Slovic uses the term "common" as an antonym to "dread" (p. 94), but that dichotomy raises further problems. Cancer is a common risk. But it is also the prototype of a dread risk. In trying to explain how the qualitative factor of dread explains the divergence between experts and ordinary people, we seem to be approaching (so to speak) a dead end. 135 See Revesz, supra note io8, at 972-73. 
136 I defend this view in Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 259, 26869 (1997). 
137 See Revesz, supra note lo8, at 972-74; George Tolley, Donald Kenkel & Robert Fabian, State-of-the-Art Health Values, in VALUING HEALTH FOR POLICY: AN ECONOMIC APPROACH 323, 339-44 (George Tolley, Donald Kenkel & Robert Fabian eds., 1994). 138 See Tolley, Kenkel & Fabian, supra note 137, at 339-44. voluntariness and controllability. 139 At first glance, the risks associated with pesticides and herbicides might seem involuntary and uncontrollable, whereas the risks from smoking and driving might seem voluntary and controllable. People choose to smoke and to drive. At least this is what people seem to say, when asked to rank risks along the relevant dimensions on seven-point scales (pp. 203-06). People do seem especially fearful when danger is random and when it seems as if nothing can be done to prevent it;14o terrorists are well aware of this point. 
On reflection, however, these issues are complicated, and people's assessments of risks, along the scales of voluntariness and controllability, may not make much sense. It is not especially difficult to avoid pesticides. Many people can and do select pesticide-free food. The decision to smoke might seem voluntary, but smoking is addictive, and many people seek to quit but find, or say, that they cannot.1 4 1 The decision to drive might seem voluntary, but in many places it is extremely hard or expensive to get to work without a car. Perhaps the risks associated with driving are controllable, but in many accidents at least one of the drivers involved is not at fault. Are the risks from ambient air pollution involuntarily incurred? It might seem that they are, but people can choose where to live and some areas have much cleaner air than others. Are the risks from flying uncontrollable? Many people seem to think so. But no one is required to fly. Why are the risks of flying so much less controllable than the risks from bicycles or microwave ovens (p. 142)? 
In this light, it is probably best not to see a dichotomy between voluntariness and involuntariness, but to start by asking about two issues: first, whether those who are subject to a risk know about its existence, and second, whether it is costly, or burdensome, to avoid the risk in question. 142 When a risk seems "involuntary," it is usually because people who face the risk do not know about it or because it is especially difficult or costly to avoid it. When a risk seems "voluntary," it is usually because those who run the risk are fully aware of it and because risk avoidance seems easy or cheap. If this is correct, there is no sharp dichotomy between "voluntary" and "involuntary" 139 These are the two factors that the EPA'emphasized in its sensitivity analysis involving arsenic. National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7013-I5 (Jan. 22, 2001) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, 142). 
140 See JOEL BEST, RANDOM VIOLENCE: How WE TALK ABOUT NEW CRIMES AND NEW VICTIMS 8-17, 22 (I999). 
141 See Neal L. Benowitz, The Nature of Nicotine Addiction, in SMOKING: RISK, PERCEPTION, & POLICY, supra note 20, at 159, 159. 
142 For more details on this complex issue, see Sunstein, supranote 136, at 266-70. 2002] risks, or even between "controllable" and "uncontrollable" risks. Indeed, these terms seem far too crude to capture what is really important. In this way, they have much in common with intuitive toxicology, which also portrays things in "all or nothing" terms. (Is it unfair to say that the use of such dichotomies reflects a form of intuitive psychometrics?) To the extent that ordinary people care about voluntariness and controllability, they are gesturing toward a sensible way of thinking about risks. But it has not been shown that they have a rival rationality. 
Slovic is right to say that qualitative factors matter to ordinary perceptions of risk. But I think that he claims more than the evidence establishes and that the same evidence said to support rival rationality might reflect affect and simple errors of fact. An interesting way to test my claims would be to see whether people are able to generate statistically accurate judgments about relevant risks. When specifically asked about the number of expected deaths from various sources, do people make roughly the same judgments that experts do? If so, then it might indeed be the case that when ordinary people diverge from experts, it is because of the qualitative factors to which Slovic points. But if ordinary people err in estimating the number of lives at risk, then their errors might well explain the divergences. It is also possible that people are simply not focusing on the magnitude of the risk and that if this factor were brought to their attention, their judgments would shift accordingly. 
Actually, Slovic does provide some evidence on this point (pp. 1o507), and I believe that it undermines his claim. On the purely factual issues, he finds systematic mistakes by ordinary people (pp. io5-o7). 143 Other evidence supports Slovic's findings here. 144 No one, however, has sorted out the extent to which these errors, or instead qualitative judgments, underlie the relevant disagreements. There remains a large empirical agenda here. 
Where does this leave us? It suggests that many of the disagreements between experts and ordinary people stem from the fact that experts have more information and are prepared to look at the benefits 143 Gillette and Krier refer to intriguing evidence that ordinary people's estimates of annual fatalities do not closely correlate with ordinary people's judgments about riskiness. Gillette & Krier, supra note 17, at 1074. From this evidence, they conclude that the qualitative factors catastrophic quality, involuntariness, unfamiliarity, and the like - do actually motivate nonexperts. Id. But the conclusion need not follow. People's riskiness judgments might be based on overall affect and on the availability heuristic; it is also possible (likely!) that when making riskiness judgments, people are not focusing on annual fatalities, even though they would on reflection agree that annual fatalities matter a great deal. 
144 See Viscusi, supra note 29, at 130-34. as well as the risks associated with controversial products and activities. In the terms of Slovic's more recent work, experts rely on a form of statistical analysis, while ordinary people use more "experiential thinking," which leads to errors. 45 But Slovic is right to insist that values matter. When people's reflective judgments drive their perceptions, those judgments deserve to play a role in policy. To the extent that experts focus only on the number of lives at stake, they are genuinely obtuse. It is reasonable to devote special attention to dangers that are hard to avoid, accompanied by unusual suffering, or faced principally by children. On the positive side, what is needed is more empirical work to determine the extent to which ordinary risk perceptions are based on errors or instead on values. On the normative side, what is needed is more thought about the nature of concepts like "dread," "voluntariness," and "controllability." With respect to policy, what is needed is incorporation of people's values to the extent that they can survive a process of reflection. 
I now turn to three issues on which Slovic offers a number of intriguing findings of special importance to law and policy. These involve demographic differences, the crucial issue of trust, and paternalism. 
Do members of different social groups agree about risks? Slovic offers several interesting findings. The most general is what he calls "[t]he white-male effect" (p. 399). Apparently white men are less concerned about risks than are members of other groups. With respect to nearly every risk, white women, nonwhite women, and nonwhite men are far more troubled than are white men (pp. 397-99). But this is the punchline of the story, and it is helpful to provide the details. 
Slovic asked large numbers of people to rank a large number of activities as posing little or no risk, slight risk, moderate risk, or high risk. Women ranked nearly every risk higher than men did (pp. 396402). These results obtained for ordinary Americans. They hold as well for British toxicologists: female British toxicologists ranked risks as more serious than did their male counterparts (p. 397). Among ordinary Americans, the differences between men and women are most pronounced for stress, suntanning, nuclear waste, nuclear power plants, ozone depletion, and AIDS, and least pronounced for medical x-rays, commercial air travel, and genetically engineered bacteria (p. 
145 See Slovic, supra note 20, at 107-10. 398). Among British toxicologists, the sex differences are especially large with respect to nuclear waste, nuclear power reactors, outdoor air pollution, alcoholic beverages, and suntanning (p. 397), and smallest for radon in homes, motor vehicle accidents, and mercury in fillings (p. 397).146 There are other demographic differences too: as education and income increase, fear of almost all risks decreases (p. 399). Notably, however, sex differences hold even when the results are controlled for education and income. 
Once the data are disaggregated, a still more striking and somewhat different picture emerges. Although men as a group perceive risks as less serious than do women as a group, race affects risk perception as well. Nonwhites see risks as more serious than do whites, with especially large differences for bacteria in food, genetically engineered bacteria, and pesticides in food, and smaller differences for outdoor air quality, ozone depletion, and stress (p. 399). But there is more: white males turn out to be the real outliers, ranking risks as less serious than other demographic groups do. Across a large number of hazards, white men perceive risks as consistently lower than do white women, nonwhite women, and nonwhite men (pp. 398-4oo). In fact, there are no large-scale differences among the latter three groups. Even more interestingly, what drives the "white-male effect" is not the view of all white males, but the view of about 30% of them who believe almost all risks to be very low (pp. 398-99). The other 70% of white males are not greatly different from the other subgroups. 
Slovic observes that the relevant 30% tend to have more education and more household income and also to be more conservative (pp. 399-4oo). They tend to disagree more with the view that technological development is destroying nature, to reject the idea that they have very little control over risks to their health, and to think that future generations can take care of themselves when facing risks imposed as a result of today's technologies. Slovic thinks that affect is part of what is responsible for this distribution of beliefs about risks (pp. 40309). 
All of this is extremely interesting. There is, however, a question in the background: is it helpful or even meaningful, for purposes of analysis, to isolate the 30% of white men who believe almost all risks to be low? This group was selected not because of anything that unites them, but because the views of its members differed systematically from the entire remaining pool of nonwhites, white females, and 146 Male British toxicologists rank only two sources of risk as more severe than do female British toxicologists: the risks from burning fossil fuels and from chemical pollution in the workplace (P. 397). the other 70% of white men. 14 7 Hence the low-risk-perception group of 30% of white men is essentially a constructed pool. From what Slovic says here and from the supporting study,148 it is not even demonstrated that political perceptions closely correlate with risk perception. Because the 30% of white males were compared with the entire pool of nonwhites, white females, and the 70% of white males, it is not impossible that white males as a group are more conservative but that there is no correlation between conservatism and risk assessment within the group of white males. I strongly suspect that Slovic is right in suggesting that there is a correlation, but the analysis here does not prove that it exists. 49 
Even if Slovic is right, there is an additional gap in these studies. We know that white men are less concerned about certain risks than are members of other demographic groups. But we do not know whether white men believe that the statistical risk of harm is lower or whether they simply take those risks less seriously. White men might believe that the risks of pesticides deserve a "2"on a seven-point scale, whereas others believe that those risks deserve a "5," but all groups might have the same basic sense of the statistical risks. Does a lifetime risk of i in iooooo count as a "I" or a "5"? How can we tell? Is it possible that groups do not disagree on the statistical risks, but merely on how to evaluate them on some scale? 
On the data that Slovic presents here, it is possible that white men have a more accurate perception of the numbers.150 It is more likely (indeed, it is my guess) that no group has an accurate sense of the facts but that white men, or the key 30%, are simply less worried than are other people.'15 Of course, the level of worry is a source of concern, even if unfounded. If people are frightened when they should not be or are relaxed when they should be troubled, something is wrong and government might well do something about the situation. But for 147 See James Flynn, Paul Slovic & C.K. Mertz, Gender, Race, and Perception of Environmental Health Risks, 14 RISK ANALYSIS iios, iio6 (1994). 
148 Id. 
149 Not included in The Perception of Risk is a later study in which Slovic finds the "white male effect" to be "more complex than previously indicated." Melissa L. Finucane, Paul Slovic, C.K. Mertz, James Flynn & Theresa A. Satterfield, Gender,Race, and PerceivedRisk: The 'White Male' Effect, 2 HEALTH, RISK & SOCY 159, 159 (2000). This subsequent study confirms that nonwhites generally view risks as higher than do whites and that females generally view risks as higher than do men, but it also finds significant heterogeneity among other groups. See id. at 163-65. While suggesting that low-risk attitudes are driven by "greater confidence in experts and less confidence in public-dominated social processes," id. at 170, the study also eschews the causal language linking ideology and risk perception found in The Perception of Risk, see id. at 17o-71. 
1SO Note that if they do, it is not because of greater education; even holding education constant, Slovic finds sex differences. 
151 It would be interesting in this regard to know whether demographic groups differ much in their judgments of the actual numbers. 2002] many purposes, the facts do matter. It is important to know whether people are concerned because they have a sense of the statistical truth or because they lack such a sense. 
A reasonable hypothesis is that the lesser concern of white men results from the fact that white men, simply by virtue of being white and male, have a sense of relative security and safety, at least in some domains. For this reason, they might believe, and report that they believe, that the risks they face are generally low. Women and nonwhites, by contrast, may have a sense of relative insecurity and so think of most risks as more serious, not necessarily on the numbers, but on the slight risk/high risk scale. Indeed this is my hunch, strongly supported by three of Slovic's other findings. First, if people are most concerned about risks that they consider involuntarily incurred, beyond their control, and unfairly distributed, it should be unsurprising that for most risks white men are simply less concerned. Second, the affect heuristic might well lead to distinctive reactions from white men. When white men hear the words "pesticides" or "nuclear power," they might have no negative reaction, and possibly even a positive reaction, as compared to the reactions of members of other demographic groups. When women hear the term "stress" or "suntanning," their affective reaction might be especially negative (p. 398), perhaps because of the availability heuristic; so too when nonwhites hear the term "bacteria in food" or "genetic engineering" (p. 399). Third, trust is relevant to people's assessment of the severity of risks. White men might well have comparatively greater trust in private and public institutions and hence rank risks as relatively low. I now turn to this point. 
The topic of trust has been a greatly neglected issue in political and especially legal treatments of risk regulation. Slovic thinks that the topic is extremely important (pp. 316-26).1l 2 A basic puzzle here is that in the last twenty years, our society has grown healthier and safer, in part because we have spent billions of dollars on risk reduction; but at the same time, the American public has become more, not less, concerned about risks (p. 316). Slovic emphasizes that a lack of trust has played an important role in controversies over managing hazardous technologies. He also shows that when people are concerned about a hazard, it is often because they do not trust those who manage it. Consider, for example, the fact that people tend to view medical tech152 See WEINGART, supra note 3, at 362 ("Throughout the voluntary siting process, people would tell us that their fears were fueled by their conviction that the government had lied to them, or misled them, in the past. Things they had thought would be harmless had turned out to cause harm."). 
116o nologies involving radiation and chemicals (such as x-rays) as high benefit and low risk, whereas they tend to view industrial technologies involving radiation and chemicals (such as nuclear power and pesticides) as high risk and low benefit (p. 316). Far more important than technical risk assessments is the level of trust in those who try to manage risks and to give assurances. 
Slovic also stresses the fragility of trust, which is far easier to destroy than to create.1 5 3 Slovic offers a study of forty-five hypothetical news events involving nuclear power; some of these events were designed to increase trust in those managing its risks, whereas others were designed to decrease that trust (pp. 320-22). Negative events were judged to have had a much more significant effect than positive events. For example, a nuclear power plant accident in another state had a strong negative effect on trust, whereas careful selection and training of employees or an absence of any safety problems in the past year had little effect in increasing trust (pp. 320-22). Slovic also finds that sources of bad, trust-destroying news are seen as more credible than are sources of good, trust-creating news (pp. 322-23). This finding is in line with a related one mentioned above: when people are unconcerned about a risk, discussion that is designed to provide still more assurance tends to increase anxiety rather than to diminish it. 
With respect to trust, Slovic therefore establishes the existence of an "asymmetry principle": events that weaken trust have a significant effect, whereas events that strengthen trust do very little (p. 320). Does this mean that people are confused or irrational? Slovic doesn't think so: "Conflicts and controversies surrounding risk management are not due to public irrationality or ignorance but, instead, can be seen as expected side effects of these psychological tendencies, interacting with our remarkable form of participatory democratic government, and amplified by certain powerful technological and social changes in our society" (p. 323). Many of those changes involve the news media, which can instantaneously publicize risk-related events from anywhere in the world. (Consider the anthrax frenzy of October 2001.) And the news media, no less than ordinary people, give special emphasis to bad, trust-destroying events. This asymmetry has important effects on public attitudes. Slovic argues that "[t]he young science of risk assessment is too fragile, too indirect, to prevail in such a hostile atmosphere" (p. 324). Slovic does not explain exactly why trust is more easily destroyed than created; perhaps the asymmetry principle is partly a product of risk aversion, which makes people respond more when trust 153 See id. (noting that "the fact that some widespread fears have proved to be unfounded seems to have had no impact on the evaluation of present and future risks"). 2002] is challenged than when it is confirmed. In any case, Slovic shows that the asymmetry is quite important for policymakers. 
What can be done to increase trust? Slovic favors an increase in public participation in decisionmaking, going well beyond public relations to include much more in the way of actual power-sharing (p. 325).154 His fear is that governmental efforts to reassure people are unlikely, without broad participation, to breed anything but further distrust. On this count, Slovic might well be right, but his own data raise serious questions about the value of public participation in increasing trust.155 If bad news is more salient than good news and if people act as intuitive toxicologists whose perceptions of risk can be amplified by social interactions, there is special danger: high levels of public participation in technical domains could simply heighten public fear, with unfortunate consequences for policy. 156 Recall here the epigraph to this Review: "At the Siting Board's open houses, people would invent scenarios and then dare Board members and staff to say they were impossible."'. 7 Like the questioners in this passage, many Americans would find that more exposure to this type of information feeds their fears. 
Slovic is right to emphasize the importance of trust and also to connect that issue to the split between experts and ordinary people. But efforts to increase public participation in the regulatory process could have many unforeseen consequences. Greater participation might make things worse rather than better, fueling both fear and distrust. If people come to the process with the intuitions that Slovic catalogues, then it is not clear that broad public involvement will be helpful for either sound regulation or trust itself. Group polarization could well increase the problem. 158 Imagine, for example, that government attempted to increase public participation in a decision to license a nuclear power plant or to allow a certain level of arsenic in drinking water. It is easy to imagine a situation in which reassurances would fall on deaf ears and in which the very fact of participation, and broader citizen involvement, would increase fear and distrust. 
154 Increasing public participation in decisionmaking is a major theme in NAT'L RESEARCH COUNCIL, UNDERSTANDING RISK: INFORMING DECISIONS IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY (1996). 
155 WEINGART, supra note 3, at 357-62 (raising similar questions). 156 See id. at 362-63. 157 Id. at 362. 158 See supra section I.D.3, pp. 1135-37. 
Much of Slovic's analysis, including his treatment of trust, raises the vexing issue of paternalism. He discusses that issue explicitly in connection with tobacco. 
To come to terms with paternalism for smokers, it is important to ask whether smokers know the risks associated with smoking. In an important study, W. Kip Viscusi argues that they do.159 Viscusi asked both smokers and nonsmokers how many smokers are likely to die from various smoking-related causes. Viscusi's basic findings were that people do indeed know the risks and that in fact they overestimate them. 
With respect to adolescents, at least, Slovic is quite critical of Viscusi's findings. 160 He suggests that young people tend to be overly optimistic, thinking that they themselves are peculiarly immune from risks that others face (p. 366). Hence Slovic believes that people's ability to generate accurate statistical figures for smokers as a whole can be consistent with the claim that smokers typically underestimate the risk that they themselves face. 16 1 Slovic also contends that people's quantitative judgments depend on how questions are asked and hence that slight alterations in questions can generate large differences in results and far more inaccurate numbers (pp. 366-67). Consider a vivid example: In Slovic's own, small-scale study, a simple question like Viscusi's - of lifetime smokers, how many are likely to die of lung cancer? - produced no underestimate (p. 367). But when the same people are asked how many lifetime smokers are likely to die of each of fifteen causes of death (homicide, suicide, car accident, and so forth), the number of predicted lung cancer deaths dropped for nearly everyone, often precipitously (p. 367). For Slovic, the instability of people's answers raises serious questions about the robustness of responses to any particular question. 
Slovic contends as well that people who know the statistical risk do not have a sufficient sense of what it is actually like to experience the adverse effects of smoking. He claims, finally, that people are not likely to understand either the cumulative nature of the risk (p. 367) or its addictive quality (p. 369). Thus, many smokers have no clear sense of the long-term risks of smoking. In addition, high school seniors greatly overestimate the likelihood that they will not be smoking five years after starting to smoke (p. 369). Fewer than half of those who 159 See W. KiP visCusI, SMOKING: MAKING THE RISKY DECISION 61-86 (1992). 160 The findings in The Perception of Risk are extended in SMOKING: RISK, PERCEPTION, & POLICY, supranote 20. 
161 See John Z. Ayanian & Paul D. Cleary, PerceivedRisks of HeartDisease and CancerAmong CigaretteSmokers, 281 JAMA lO19, 1020-21 (1999) (finding that most smokers do not view themselves at increased risk of heart disease and cancer). 2002] predicted that they would quit smoking after five years turned out, in fact, to have quit. Many young smokers perceive themselves to be at little or no risk from smoking because they expect to stop smoking before any damage to their health occurs. In reality, a high percentage of young smokers continue to smoke over a long period of time and are placed at significant risk by this behavior (p. 370). 
Slovic's discussion of these points is brief but highly suggestive. There is a great deal to sort out here on the vexing questions associated with ensuring adequate information and the proper place of paternalism. People have been saturated with evidence about the adverse health effects of smoking. Viscusi's data should not be shocking in this light. But neither Viscusi nor Slovic offers a great deal of evidence about a key issue: the statistical risk that each smoker believes he or she is running - as opposed to the statistical risk that each smoker believes that smokers generally are running. If it is true that people generally suffer from excessive optimism with respect to the risks that they face personally, 162 there is a problem of inadequate information even when people are well aware of the statistical risks. Indeed, some evidence suggests that smokers do not believe that they themselves are at an increased risk of heart disease and cancer. 163 This problem could justify a governmental effort to provide a corrective. (Consider the advertising campaign from several years ago: "Drive defensively; watch out for the other guy.") And this point raises the expert/layperson split from another angle. In some areas, the source of the split may be an emphasis on statistical realities by experts - and an overinflated sense of personal invulnerability by risktakers. 
Slovic is a psychologist, not a policy analyst. Although he gestures in the direction of legal reform, this is not his principal topic. Nonetheless, his work carries considerable importance for those concerned with law and policy, partly because an understanding of human cognition (not excluding emotion) helps to explain people's reactions to risk and their demands for legal responses. Such an understanding will help us to see which approaches to risk regulation will work and which will not. It will also illuminate the continuing battle between technocratic and populist approaches to risk. If we know why people think what they do, and whether their views are based on mistakes or 162 See Christine Jolls, Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules, in BEHAVIORAL LAW AND ECONOMICS 288, 291-92 (Cass R. Sunstein ed., 2000). Jolls offers evidence that people inderestimate both their relative risk and their statistical risk. See id. 163 See Ayanian & Cleary, supra note r6i, at 1020-21. instead on reasonable judgments of value, we will be able to make some progress in understanding the role of science, and experts, in the world of risk regulation. 
I have said nothing thus far about the political valence of technocratic and populist approaches to risk regulation. But there are interesting issues in the background here. For those who favor aggressive efforts to protect safety, health, and the environment, technocratic approaches might seem unhelpful, even destructive, perhaps a form of obstructionism. 164 It is tempting to think that an emphasis on science will be favored by those who are skeptical of risk regulation and that populism will seem appealing to those who believe that risk regulation is desirable and should be increased. To ask a crude question: shouldn't conservatives be technocrats and liberals populists? 
As a description of current debates, this view is not entirely inaccurate. 16 Certainly science can slow things down. 166 But the associations should not be overstated. In many contexts, an effort to bring science to bear on regulatory issues, and even to engage in cost-benefit analysis, has led to more rather than less aggressive regulation; 167 consider stringent controls on ozone-depleting chemicals and the phaseout of lead in gasoline, both of which were spurred by technocrats armed with careful analyses of the underlying science. 68 Consider too the "prompt letter," a new innovation from President Bush's Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. The purpose of the prompt letter is to spur further regulation in contexts in which the evidence calls for it.169 In the disability context, science and data have been invoked by disability rights advocates, attempting to quiet or delegitimate public fears about the dangers caused by disabled people. 170 As Samuel Bagenstos has shown, the political valence of technocracy on the one 164 See Samuel R. Bagenstos, The Americans with Disabilities Act as Risk Regulation, ioi COLUM. L. REV. z479, 1484-87 (2001). 
165 Id. 
166 This is especially true if people with a stake in the outcome fund experts. See RAMPTON & STAUBER, supra note 18, at 195-221. 
167 See, e.g., RICHARD BENEDICT, OZONE DIPLOMACY 63 (igg) (noting that a cost-benefit study produced by the President's Council of Economic Advisors was influential in persuading some skeptical executive officials to support the administration's stance on ozone regulation); James K. Hammitt, Stratospheric-OzoneDepletion, in ECONOMIC ANALYSES AT EPA 131, 13164 (Richard D. Morgenstern ed., 1998); Albert L. Nichols, Lead in Gasoline, in ECONOMIC ANALYSES AT EPA, supra,at 49, 77-83. 
168 Hammitt, supra note 167, at 131-64; Nichols, supra note 167, at 49-83. 
169 White House Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Prompt Letters, at http://www.whitehouse.gov/ omb/inforeg/promptjletter.html (last visited Jan. 6, 2002). 
170 Bagenstos, supra note 164, at 148o-81. hand, and populism on the other, is a product of the context; it cannot be established in advance.' 
But there is a still deeper issue in the background. If it is sensible to favor aggressive efforts to protect people against the risks posed by, say, arsenic in drinking water or nuclear power, it must be because those risks are substantial rather than trivial. And if it is sensible to oppose these efforts, it must be because the risks are too small to be worth addressing. Whether the risks are small or substantial depends, in large part, on what science shows. Of course, the "number of lives at risk" is not all that matters, and science will often leave gaps and uncertainties. But it is worse than senseless to have a kind of preanalytic commitment to regulation, or against regulation, and to use technocratic and populist arguments as mere rhetorical tools or props on behalf of that commitment. When people are skeptical of risk regulation in some domain, it must be because they do not believe that it will do much good. 7 2 It is absurd to think that science can tell us all we need to know or that values are irrelevant. But there is no necessary political valence to science; and when we favor regulation, or oppose it, it should be because of its likely consequences, 17 3 rather than because of a political commitment that precedes, or outruns, an investigation of that topic. 
To see the importance of Slovic's work for law, it is useful to distinguish among three different enterprises: positive, prescriptive, and normative. 7 4 Positive work is concerned with making predictions: When will law take certain forms? What will be the effect of a particular step on human behavior? Prescriptive work is concerned with identifying the means of achieving shared goals: if government seeks to increase people's fear of certain risks and to dampen their fear of others, it needs to know which strategies will actually work. Normative work is concerned with determining what government's ends should be. If people make systematic mistakes about the risks that they face, perhaps governmental paternalism is justified. 
Slovic's emphasis on conflicts between experts and ordinary people sheds light on all of these enterprises. If the availability heuristic and 171 Id. at i5o9-11. 
172 Some people may have a commitment to liberty that argues against regulation even when it would do a great deal of good. In the particular contexts I discuss, I doubt that any such commitment could be defended; but I will not defend that doubt here. 
173 Of course, no evaluation or even account of consequences is value-free. But an understanding of the likely effects of regulation will often produce agreement from people with quite different values. 
174 See Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein & Richard Thaler, A BehavioralApproach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 147I, 1474-75 (i998). intuitive toxicology help to drive people to certain judgments about risks, we will be able to make predictions about the likely effects of salient events, both on people's judgments about when to insure and take precautions and on the demand for legal responses. 7 In the aftermath of a highly publicized incident, considerable movement should be expected; but if illustrations of harm do not come to mind, people might persist in failing to take adequate care of themselves. If emotions play a large role in risk-related behavior, educational campaigns are far more likely to work when they involve memorable images rather than statistical probabilities. 176 If government wants to encourage people to protect themselves, it should use particular examples and try to make them as vivid as possible. And if people make a large number of mistakes about risks - partly because of emotions, partly because of cognition - there are reasons to be skeptical about populist conceptions of regulatory government and also about the reflexive antipaternalism of much work on risk regulation. In short, Slovic's findings may support the conception of administration associated with the New Deal period, which placed a high premium on ensuring regulatory choices by people immersed in the subject at hand.1 77 
In this light, Slovic's findings can be brought in close contact with Justice Stephen Breyer's discussion of risk regulation, 178 probably the most influential treatment within the legal culture. Breyer urges, quite plausibly, that the regulatory state suffers from poor priority-setting. In his view, government devotes a lot of resources to trivial problems and spends too little time and effort on more serious problems that place many people at risk.179 Breyer urges the creation of a new body of risk specialists, with expertise in many fields. 80 The task of these specialists would be to reallocate resources from small problems to large ones.' 81 
Breyer offers an impressive analysis of the problem of poor priority-setting, and he proposes a promising institutional correction. In many ways, Breyer calls for a kind of newer New Deal - a system of administration run in substantial part by technocrats, subject of course to democratic oversight and override. But his book says almost nothing about how people think about risks. 82 With reference to Slovic's 175 See Noll & Krier, supranote 32, at 760-77. An understanding of intuitive toxicology might, for example, have alerted officials to the likely adverse reaction to any effort to suspend the proposed regulation of arsenic in drinking water. See Sunstein, supranote 6i (manuscript at 6-7). 176 See Sunstein, supra note 81 (manuscript at ix). 177 See JAMES M. LANDIS, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS 6-46 (1938). 178 BREYER, supra note 14. 179 Id. at 10-29, 180 Id. at 59-68. 181 See id. at 67. 
182 Breyer does offer a brief treatment of cognitive factors. See id. at 16. findings, Breyer's analysis might well be criticized on the ground that ordinary people would distrust any body of risk specialists, viewing them as unlikely to be sufficiently responsive to their concerns. Perhaps more interestingly, Breyer's approach might be criticized on the ground that sheer numbers cannot tell us whether a problem is "large" or "small." People are reasonably concerned about a range of other variables. This is a large thrust of Slovic's work. 
In the end, however, Slovic's findings seem to me mostly supportive of Breyer's analysis; indeed, Slovic provides strong cognitive ammunition for Breyer's diagnosis and even his remedy. Slovic shows that ordinary people make many mistakes in thinking about the risks associated with various activities. He also shows that, much of the time, people treat safety as an "all or nothing" matter, are vulnerable to the "zero-risk mentality," overreact to small signals of dangers, and sometimes show excessive optimism. In these circumstances, a sensible system of risk regulation will not respond mechanically to what people think; it will impose thick filters on the public's own conception of appropriate priorities. 
But there are three grounds for objecting to a purely technocratic approach to risk regulation. The first emerges from analysis of some of the qualitative factors that Slovic highlights. Some deaths are particularly bad, and these deserve unusual attention. When it is especially easy to avoid certain risks, government should not spend a great deal of time and effort in response. Inequitably distributed risks deserve special attention, as do risks that impose special suffering. It would indeed be obtuse to treat all statistically equivalent risks as if they were the same, regardless of context or quality. But it remains true that a sensible society is greatly concerned with ensuring that people have longer and healthier lives - and that if policies lead government to spend a lot on small problems and little on large ones, something is amiss. Note in this regard that a more sensible allocation of public resources could save tens of thousands of lives, tens of billions of dollars, or both. 183 It makes sense both to acknowledge qualitative distinctions among statistically equivalent deaths and to insist that better priority-setting is extremely important. 
The second criticism of a purely technocratic approach involves people's likely reaction to it. To work well, a regulatory system needs public support and trust, even if we do not believe that a lack of trust would be fully rational. To the extent that government relies on statistical evidence alone, it is unlikely to promote its own goals. This is 183 See Tammy 0. Tengs & John D. Graham, The Opportunity Costs of Haphazard Social Investments in Life-Saving, in RISKS, COSTS, AND LIVES SAVED x67, 172-74, 176 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996) (discussing the rationality of resource allocation for 185 interventions designed to avert premature deaths). partly because people will assess that evidence in light of their own motivations and their imperfect cognitive capacities; recall the availability and affect heuristics and intuitive toxicology. Regulators who are alert to the importance of both confidence and trust will do what they can to provide information in a way that is well tailored to how people think about risk - and that tries to educate people when their usual ways of thinking lead them astray. In some circumstances, an understanding of how people think will lead government toward approaches that technocrats, if insensitive to Slovic's findings, would not have on their viewscreen. We might say that good technocrats need to know not only economics and science, but psychology as well. 
The third ground for objecting to a purely technocratic approach involves the reality and effects of fear.184 The mere fact of fear is a social loss, in some cases a large one, and as we have seen, fear is likely to have a range of ripple effects. Ripple effects are likely even if the fear turns out to be baseless or to be rooted in beliefs that technocrats rightly reject. Of course, the most straightforward response to baseless fear is information and education. But sometimes these will be ineffectual; recall the discussions of availability, affect, and trust. If government cannot dissipate fear through information, it might be well advised to regulate, at least if regulation will eliminate fear in a relatively inexpensive manner. Suppose, for example, that by banning the feeding of sharks or erecting physical barriers in the ocean, government can assure people that they will not be attacked by sharks. If the relevant steps would be both inexpensive and effective in eliminating fear, they would make a great deal of sense, not to reduce the risk (which may be infinitesimal) but to quell the fear. This point has implications for many imaginable issues involving governmental response to panics and catastrophes. 
But the most important lesson of Slovic's book seems to lie elsewhere. Because of predictable features of human cognition, people's intuitions are unreliable,18 - and we are prone to blunder about the facts in predictable ways. These blunders have harmful consequences for regulatory policy. To be effective, regulators must be aware of not only actual but also perceived risk. For purposes of policy, however, what is most important is actual risk rather than perceived risk. I have offered some qualifications to this point. But most of the time, government and law should respond to people's values, not to their errors. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer 
Cass R. Sunstein 
Do animals have rights? Almost everyone believes in animal rights, at least in some minimal sense; the real question is what that phrase actually means. By exploring that question, it is possible to give a clear sense of the lay of the land—to show the range of possible positions, and to explore what issues, of theory or fact, separate reasonable people. On reflection, the spotlight should be placed squarely on the issue of suffering and well-being. This position requires rejection of some of the most radical claims by animal rights advocates, especially those that stress the “autonomy” of animals, or that object to any human control and use of animals. But this position has radical implications of its own. It strongly suggests, for example, that there should be extensive regulation of the use of animals in entertainment, in scientific experiments, and in agriculture. It also suggests that there is a strong argument, in principle, for bans on many current uses of animals. 
There are nearly sixty million domestic dogs in the United States, owned by over thirty-six million households. Over half of these households give Christmas presents to their dogs. Millions of them celebrate their dog’s birthday. If a family’s dog were somehow forced to live a short and painful life, the family would undoubtedly feel some combination of rage and grief. What can be said about dog owners can also be said about cat owners, who are more numerous still. But through their daily behavior, people who love those pets, and greatly care about their welfare, help ensure short and painful lives for millions, even billions of animals that cannot easily be distinguished from dogs and cats. Should people change their behavior? Should the law promote animal welfare? Should animals have legal rights? To answer these questions, we need to step back a bit. 
Many people think that the very idea of animal rights is implausible. Suggesting that animals are neither rational nor self-aware, Immanuel Kant thought of animals as “man’s instruments,” deserving protection only to help human beings in their relation to one another: “He who is cruel to animals becomes hard also in his dealings with men.”1 Jeremy Bentham took a different approach, suggesting that mistreatment of animals was akin to slavery and racial discrimination. “The day may come when the rest of the animal creation may acquire those rights which never could have been withholden from them but * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Emily Buss, Gary Francione, Martha Nussbaum, Richard Posner, Janet Radcliffe Richards, and David Wolfson for valuable comments on a previous draft. Alexandra Baj provided valuable research assistance. 1 Immanuel Kant, Lectures on Ethics, trans. Louis Infield (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1963), at 240. by the hand of tyranny. The French have already discovered that the blackness of the skin is no reason why a human being should be abandoned without redress to the caprice of a tormentor. . . . A full-grown horse or dog is beyond comparison a more rational, as well as a more conversable animal, than an infant of a day, or a week, or even month, old. But suppose the case were otherwise, what would it avail? the question is not, Can they reason? Nor, Can they talk? But, Can they suffer?”2 John Stuart Mill concurred, repeating the analogy to slavery.3 
Most people reject that analogy. But in the last ten years, the animal rights question has move from the periphery and toward the center of political and legal debate. The debate is international. In 2002, Germany became the first European nation to vote to guarantee animal rights in its constitution, adding the words "and animals" to a clause that obliges the state to respect and protect the dignity of human beings.4 The European 
consumer pressures have been leading to improved conditions for animals used as food.6 Notwithstanding its growing appeal, the idea of animal rights has been disputed with extraordinary intensity. Some advocates of animal rights think that their adversaries are selfish, unthinking, cruel, even morally blind. Some of those who oppose animal rights think that the advocates are fanatical and even bizarre, willing to trample on important human interests for the sake of rats and mice and salmon. 
In this essay I have three goals. The first is to reduce the intensity of the debate by demonstrating that almost everyone believes in animal rights, at least in some minimal sense; the real question is what that phrase actually means. My second goal is to give a clear sense of the lay of the land—to show the range of possible positions, and to explore what issues separate reasonable people. In this way, I attempt to provide a kind of primer for current and coming debates. The third goal is to defend a particular position about animal rights, one that, like Bentham’s, puts the spotlight squarely on the issues of suffering and well-being.7 This position requires rejection of some of the most radical claims by animal rights advocates, especially those that stress the “autonomy” of animals, or that object to any human control and use of animals. But my position has radical implications of its own. It strongly suggests, for example, that there should be extensive regulation of the use of animals in entertainment, scientific experiments, and agriculture. It also suggests that there is a strong argument, in principle, for bans on many current 2 See Jeremy Bentham, The Principles of Morals and Legislation, chap. XVII, section IV [1781] (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), at 310-11. 3 See John Stuart Mill, Whewell on Moral Philosophy, in John Stuart Mill & Jeremy Bentham, Utilitarianism and Other Essays 228, 252 (Alan Ryan ed., 1987). 4 John Hooper, German parliament votes to give animals constitutional rights, The Guardian (London) May 18, 2002, the Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 2. 5 See note infra. 6 Chicago Tribune, June 26, 2002, p. 9, John Keilman, Food retailers press for humane farming; Industry, animal activists reaching some suppliers. 7 By putting the spotlight there, I do not mean to resolve a hard question: Whether an animal that is subject to a life of deprivation, and that entirely adapts to that life, is nonetheless being treated in a way that violates its rights. In brief, I believe that like a human being, an animal that adapts to deprivation has a reasonable ground for complaint, if the deprivation means that its life is much worse than it might be. But I cannot discuss that issue here. uses of animals. In my view, those uses might well be seen, one hundred years hence, to be a form of unconscionable barbarity. In this respect, I suggest that Bentham and Mill were not wrong to offer an analogy between current uses of animals and human slavery. 
If we understand “rights” to be legal protection against harm, then many animals already do have rights, and the idea of animal rights is not at all controversial. And if we take “rights” to mean a moral claim to such protection, there is general agreement that animals have rights of certain kinds. Of course some people, including Descartes, have argued that animals are like robots and lack emotions -- and that people should be allowed to treat them however they choose.8 But to most people, including sharp critics of the animal rights movement, this position seems unacceptable. Almost everyone agrees that people should not be able to torture animals or to engage in acts of cruelty against them. And indeed, state law contains a wide range of protections against cruelty and neglect. We can build on existing law to define a simple, minimal position in favor of animal rights: The law should prevent acts of cruelty to animals. 
In the United States, state anticruelty laws go well beyond prohibiting beating, injuring, and the like, and impose affirmative duties on people with animals in their care. New York contains a representative set of provisions. Criminal penalties are imposed on anyone who transports an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner, or in such a way as to subject it to torture or suffering, conditions that can come about through neglect.9 People who transport an animal on railroads or cars are required to allow the animal out for rest, feeding, and water every five hours.10 Nonowners who have impounded or confined an animal are obliged to provide good air, water, shelter, and food.11 Those who abandon an animal in public places, including a pet, face criminal penalties.12 A separate provision forbids people from torturing, beating, maiming, or killing any animal, and also requires people to provide adequate food and drink.13 Indeed it is generally a crime not to provide necessary sustenance, food, water, shelter, and protection from severe weather.14 New York, like most states, forbids overworking an animal, or using the animal for work when she or he is not physically fit.15 Compare in this regard the unusually protective California statute, which imposes criminal liability on negligent as well as intentional overworking, overdriving, or torturing of animals.16 “Torture” is defined not in its ordinary language sense, but to include any act or omission “whereby unnecessary or unjustified physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted.”17 
If taken seriously, provisions of this kind would do a great deal to protect animals from suffering, injury, and premature death. But animal rights, as recognized by state law, are sharply limited, and for two major reasons.18 First, enforcement can occur only through public prosecution. If horses and cows are being beaten at a local farm, or if greyhounds are forced to live in small cages, protection will come only if the prosecutor decides to provide it. Of course prosecutors have limited budgets, and animal protection is rarely a high-priority item. The result is that violations of state law occur every day, and there is no way to prevent those violations. The anticruelty prohibitions sharply contrast, in this respect, with most prohibitions protecting human beings, which can be enforced both publicly and privately. For example, the prohibitions on assault and theft can be enforced through criminal prosecutions, brought by public officials, and also by injured citizens, proceeding directly against those who have violated the law. 
Second, the anticruelty provisions of state law contain extraordinarily large exceptions. They do not ban hunting, and generally they do not regulate hunting in a way that is designed to protect animals against suffering. They do not apply to the use of animals for medical or scientific purposes. To a large degree, they do not apply to the production and use of animals as food.19 The latter exemption is the most important. About ten billion animals are killed for food annually in the United States; indeed, twenty-four million chickens and some 323,000 pigs are slaughtered every day.20 The cruel and abusive practices generally involved in contemporary farming are largely unregulated at the state level.21 Because the overwhelming majority of animals are produced and used for food, the coverage of anticruelty laws is actually very narrow. 
If the suffering of animals matters—and every reasonable person seems to think that it does—we should be greatly troubled by these limitations. The least controversial response would be to narrow the “enforcement gap,” by allowing private suits to be brought in cases of cruelty and neglect. Reforms might be adopted with the limited purpose of stopping conduct that is already against the law, so that the law actually means, in practice, what it says on paper. Here, then, we can find a slightly less minimal understanding of animal rights. On this view, representatives of animals should be able to bring private suits to ensure that anticruelty and related laws are actually enforced. If, 17 Cal Penal Code 599b. 18 I do not discuss here the difficulties introduced by the fact that some statutes allow otherwise unlawful acts if they are “necessary” or “justifiable.” 19 I am putting some complex interpretive questions to one side. The majority of state statutes do not apply to farming, but some of them could, on their face, be so applied. 20 See David Wolfson, Animals, Agribusiness and the Law: A Modern American Fable, forthcoming in Animal Rights: Law and Policy (Cass R. Sunstein and Martha C. Nussbaum eds. 2003). 21 See Peter Singer, Animal Liberation 95-158 (revised ed. 2002). for example, a farm is treating horses cruelly and in violation of legal requirements, a suit could be brought, on behalf of those animals, to bring about compliance with the law. 
In a sense, this would be a dramatic proposal, because it might well be understood to mean that animals should be allowed to sue in their own name—and whoever the nominal plaintiff, there would be no question that the suit was being brought to protect animals, not human beings. The very idea might seem absurd. But it is simpler and more conventional than it appears. Of course any animals would be represented by human beings, just like any other litigant who lacks ordinary (human) competence; for example, the interests of children are protected by prosecutors, and also by trustees and guardians in private litigation brought on children’s behalf. 
It would make sense to build on this idea by allowing suits on behalf of animals too. Why should anyone oppose an effort to promote greater enforcement of existing law, by supplementing the prosecutor’s power with private lawsuits? Perhaps the best answer lies in a fear that some or many of those lawsuits would be unjustified, even frivolous. Perhaps animal representatives would bring a flurry of suits, not because of cruelty or neglect or any violation of law, but because of some kind of ideological commitment to improving animal welfare in a way that might go well beyond what the law actually says. If this is a genuine risk, it might make sense to respond, not by banning those lawsuits, but by forcing those who bring frivolous ones to pay the defendants’ attorneys fees. Of course there would be issues in deciding on the identity of representatives and choosing the people who would pick them. But we are not yet in especially controversial territory. Many of those who ridicule the idea of animal rights typically believe in anticruelty laws, and they should strongly support efforts to ensure that those laws are actually enforced. 
Increased Regulation of Hunting, Science, Farming, and More 
But I think that we should go further. We should focus attention not only on the “enforcement gap,” but on the areas where current law offers little or no protection. In short, the law should impose further regulation on hunting, scientific experiments, entertainment, and (above all) farming to ensure against unnecessary animal suffering. It is easy to imagine a set of initiatives that would do a great deal here, and indeed European nations have moved in just this direction. There are many possibilities. 
Federal law might, for example, requires scientists to justify experiments on animals by showing, in front of some kind of committee or board, that (a) such experiments are actually necessary or promising, and that (b) the animals involved will be subjected to minimal suffering. Some steps have already been taken in this direction, but it would be reasonable to go much further. If dogs or chimpanzees are going to be used to explore some medical treatment, it should be necessary to ensure that they would be decently fed and housed. Similar controls might be imposed on agriculture. If cows, hens, and pigs are going to be raised for use as food, they should be treated decently in terms of food, space requirements, and overall care. European nations have taken significant steps of this sort.22 The European Union, for example, has decided to ban the standard bare wire cage for hens, and to require that they be provided with access to a perch and nesting box for laying eggs.23 If we focus on suffering, as I believe that we should, it is not necessarily impermissible to kill animals and use them for food; but it is entirely impermissible to be indifferent to their interests while they are alive. So too for other animals in farms, even or perhaps especially if they are being used for the benefit of human beings. If sheep are going to be used to create clothing, their conditions must be conducive to their welfare. We might ban hunting altogether, at least if its sole purpose is human recreation. (Should animals be hunted and killed simply because people enjoy hunting and killing them? The issue might be different if hunting and killing could be justified as having important functions, such as control of populations or protection of human beings against animal violence.) 
As a minimal reform step, it would even be possible to imagine a system in which companies disclosed their practices, either voluntarily or as part of a mandate. Companies that protected animals from suffering, and ensured decent conditions, might publicize that fact, and attempt to receive a market boost from the practices. 
I believe that steps in this direction would make a great deal of sense. But here things become far more controversial. Why is this? Partly it is because of sheer ignorance, on the part of most people, about what actually happens to animals in (for example) farming and scientific experimentation. I am confident that much greater regulation would be actively sought if current practices were widely known. Partly the controversy is a product of the political power of the relevant interests, which intensely resist regulation. But some legitimate questions might be raised about some of these regulatory strategies, for one simple reason: The legitimate interests of animals and the legitimate interests of human beings are in conflict in some of these areas. Here as elsewhere, additional regulation would be costly and burdensome. It is possible to fear that regulation of scientific experiments on animals would lead to less scientific experiments on animals—and hence to less in the way of scientific and medical progress. If farms are regulated, the price of meat will increase, and people will be able to eat less meat. Hence it is necessary to weigh the gain to animal welfare against the harms to human beings. If the health of human beings could be seriously compromised by regulation of experiments on animals and farming, there is reason to engage in some balancing before supporting that regulation. 22Under its common agricultural policy, the European Union adopted the European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes on Nov. 17, 1978. European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes, 1978 O.J. (L 323)12. The Convention applies to the “keeping, care and housing of animals, and in particular to animals in modern intensive stock-farming systems.” In Articles 3 to 7, the Convention provides detailed principles of animal welfare. The Convention was amended and strengthened on December 31, 1992. Protocol of Amendment to the European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes, 1992 O.J. (L 395) 22. Under the Convention, the EU has established specific regulations for such activities as the keeping of laying hens. Council Directive 1999/74/EC Laying Down Minimum Standards for the Protection of Laying Hens, O.J. (L 203) 53. Members of the European Union have enacted implementing legislation. The United Kingdom Department for Environmental, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) has been active. See www.defra.gov.uk. 23 See Peter Singer, Animal Liberation x (revised edition 2002). 
Any such balancing must depend, on part, on values—on how much weight we should assign to the relevant interests. At the very least, I suggest that suffering and harm to animals should count, and that any measures that impose suffering and harm should be convincingly justified. If animals are being made to suffer to produce cosmetics and hair dyes, the justification seems weak. To make a sensible assessment, it would be helpful to know a great deal about the facts, not only about values. One of the most important disputes, in the domain of scientific experimentation, is whether and to what extent the relevant experiments really hold out a great deal of promise for medical progress. If we are speaking of perfumes, the claim for imposing suffering on animals is ludicrously weak. But if scientists are able to develop treatments for AIDS and cancer, the claim is much stronger. 
Now some animal rights advocates might urge that even if the gains from a certain practice are very large, experiments are not justified. We do not, after all, allow scientists to experiment on human beings, even human beings with serious disabilities, when and because medical advances would be significant. But there are many complications here. Some utilitarians would not find it easy to explain why we impose absolute barriers in cases of this kind. But I believe that it is excessive to ban experiments that impose a degree of suffering on rats or mice if the consequence of those experiments would to produce significant medical advances for human beings (and ultimately nonhuman animals as well). 
Eliminating Current Practices, Including Meat-Eating 
Now turn to some quite radical suggestions. Suppose that we continue to believe that animal suffering is the problem that should concern us, and that we want to use the law to promote animal welfare. We might conclude that certain practices cannot be defended and should not be allowed to continue, if, in practice, mere regulation will inevitably be insufficient—and if, in practice, mere regulation will ensure that the level of animal suffering will remain very high. To make such an argument convincing, it would be helpful, whether or not necessary, to argue not only that the harms to animals are serious, but also that the benefits, to human beings, of the relevant practices are simply too small to justify the continuation of those practices. Many people who urge radical steps—who think, for example, that people should not eat meat—do so because they believe that without such steps, the level of animal suffering will be unacceptably severe. 
To evaluate an argument of this kind, there is no choice but to go area by area. Consider greyhound racing. Greyhounds live in miserable conditions and many of them are put to death after their racing careers are over. I believe that if possible, the preferred step should be to use the law to ensure that greyhounds are given decent lives—and to hope that the racing industry will comply with law that has that goal. But if it proves impractical for law to ensure that greyhounds live minimally decent lives,24 I believe that that greyhound racing should be abolished. The entertainment gain, for some people, 24 This might be because it is not feasible to provide decent care for greyhounds and to run a profitable racing business. cannot justify significant suffering. Of course the largest issue involves eating meat. I believe that that meat-eating would be acceptable if decent treatment is given to the animals used for food. Killing animals, whether or not troublesome, is far less troublesome than suffering. But if, as a practical matter, animals used for food are almost inevitably going to endure terrible suffering, then there is a good argument that people should not eat meat to the extent that a refusal to eat meat will reduce that suffering. Of course a legal ban on meat-eating would be extremely radical, and like prohibition, it would undoubtedly create black markets and have a set of bad, and huge, side-effects. But the principle seems clear: People should be much less inclined to eat meat if their refusal to do so would prevent significant suffering. 
There is an objection, utilitarian in spirit, to steps of this kind. If people do not eat meat, or if they take other steps to prevent animals from suffering, the inevitable result will be to ensure that fewer animals exist. Perhaps it is objectionable to protect animals through measures that reduce the total number of animals. Perhaps it is better for animals to have lives, even difficult ones, than not to have lives. But I think that this objection is weak. We should increase the likelihood that animals will have good lives—we should not try to ensure that there are as many animals as possible. 
My argument—that we should consider refraining from certain practices if this is the only feasible way to avoid widespread suffering—raises a host of questions. As before, the argument raises issues of fact. Shouldn’t it be possible to reduce the level of suffering in scientific experiments by, for example, requiring animals to be adequately sheltered and fed? Why couldn’t farms generally give their animals decent lives, as many farms now do? It would also be valuable to ask some factual questions. If vegetarianism were widespread, would human health be undermined (as many contend) or improved (as many also contend)? After the factual questions are resolved, disputes will remain about the weight to be given to the various interests. My suggestion is that on a reasonable reading of the facts, many practices will have to yield. 
The Question of Animal Autonomy 
Of course some people might go further. They might focus not only, and perhaps not mostly, on the relief of suffering. On one view, animals have rights in the sense that they should not be subject to human use and control. Notice that this is not a Benthaminspired point about the prevention and relief of suffering. It is instead a suggestion that animals deserve to have a kind of autonomy. And the suggestion goes well beyond the view, which seems to me correct, that animals should be seen as ends rather than solely as means. Many people who use chimpanzees in entertainment or zoos, or who use horses for racing, do not consider the relevant animals to be mere means to human ends. They agree that animals have intrinsic as well as instrumental value. But those who think that animals should not be subject to human control tend to object to all of these uses. They want all or most animals to be able to make their own choices, free from human control. 
This claim raises many questions, and in the end it seems to me extreme and unconvincing, mostly because it neglects the possibility that animals will have bad lives under natural conditions, and much better lives under a degree of human control. The most obvious point is that it is not clear whether and how this position might be applied to companion animals. Dogs and cats, among others, have been bred specifically for human companionship, and many of them would not fare well on their own. Perhaps those who believe in animal autonomy would accept the idea that people can substantially control animals who have been bred to live with them. Perhaps the autonomy argument would apply only to wild animals -- forbidding human beings from hunting, trapping, and confining them. 
But what if certain practices, such as confinement in zoos, science labs, and other facilities, can be undertaken in a way that ensures good lives for the relevant animals? What if some animals, including dolphins and elephants, would do very well under human control? Nature can be very cruel, after all, and many animals will live longer lives with human beings than in the wild. Of course longer is not necessarily better. But good zoos have breeding programs that protect endangered species, give good care to animals, and serve an important function (for nonhuman animals and human beings alike) in educating people about the nature and worth of animals. Indeed we could imagine that many lions, elephants, giraffes, and dolphins could, in fact, have better lives with human assistance, even if confined, than in their own habitats. If this is so, it is not simple to see what sort of response might be made by those who believe in animal autonomy. Perhaps autonomy advocates disagree on the facts, not on the theoretical issue, and think it highly unlikely, in most cases, that wild animals can have decent lives under human control. I do not believe that they are correct on the facts. In any case the claim for animal autonomy must, in the end, depend on an assessment of what will give animals good lives. 
I have not yet explored the ongoing debate over the status of animals as “property.” This is one of the most vigorous debates of all.25 What underlies this debate? 
There is no single answer. Those who insist that animals should not be seen as property might be making a simple and modest claim: Human beings should not be able to treat animals however they wish. Their starting point seems to be this: If you are property, you are, in law and in effect, a slave, wholly subject to the will of your owner. Mere property cannot have rights of any kind. A table, a chair, or a stereo can be treated as the owner likes; it can be broken or sold or replaced at the owner’s whim. For animals, it might be thought, the status of property is devastating to actual protection against cruelty and abuse. 
On this view, a central goal of the modern animal rights movement -- eliminating the idea that animals are property -- can be taken in a modest way, as an effort to remove a legal status that inevitably promotes suffering. But the goal can be taken far more ambitiously, as an effort to say that animals should have rights of self-determination, or a certain kind of autonomy. Hence some people urge that certain animals, at least, are “persons,” not property, and that they should have many of the legal rights that human beings have.26 Of course this does not mean that those animals can vote or run for office. Their status would be akin to that of children—a status commensurate with their capacities. What that status is, particularly, remains to be spelled out. But at a minimum, it would seem to entail protection against torture, battery, and even confinement (except for purposes of human self-defense). 
There is, however, a puzzle here. What does it mean to say that animals are property and can be “owned”? As we have seen, animals, even if owned, cannot be treated however the owner wishes; the law already forbids cruelty and neglect. Ownership is just a label, connoting a certain set of rights and perhaps duties, and without knowing a lot more, we cannot identify those rights and duties. A state could dramatically increase enforcement of existing bans on cruelty and neglect without turning animals into persons, or making them into something other than property. A state could do a great deal to prevent animal suffering, without banning the ownership of animals. We could even grant animals a right to bring suit without insisting that animals are in some general sense “persons,” or that they are not property. A state could certainly confer rights on a pristine area, or a painting, and allow people to bring suit on its behalf, without therefore saying that that area and that painting may not be owned. In the context of children’s rights, the assertion that “children are not property” is universally accepted, but appears not to have added anything to debates over how parents may treat children. 
What, then, are the real stakes in the debate over whether animals are “property”? Perhaps it is thought necessary to destroy the idea of ownership in order to make, simply and all at once, a statement that the interests of animals count, and have weight independent of the interests of human beings. Rhetoric can matter, and in my view, the idea of “property” does fit very poorly with how people should think, on reflection, about other living creatures. On this view, the debate over whether animals are property is really a debate over the more specific issues discussed above. If getting rid of the idea that animals are property is helpful in reducing suffering, then we should get rid of the idea that animals are property. 
There is an large question in the background. People do not see all animals in the same way. They might agree that human beings should protect the interests of dogs, cats, horses, and dolphins; they are unlikely to think the same about ants and mosquitoes and cockroaches; rats and mice and squirrels seem to be an intermediate case. It is often objected, to those who believe in animal rights, that their position would lead to truly ludicrous conclusions—to the (ridiculous?) suggestion that people cannot kill ants or mosquitoes, or rid their houses of rats and cockroaches. 
There are two ways to answer this objection. One way, of special appeal to those who stress autonomy, would inquire into the cognitive capacities of the particular animals involved. We would draw the line by seeing how well the animals in question think.27 26 Id. 27 See Steven Wise, Drawing the Line (2002). 
But this seems to me misdirected; Bentham was right to place the emphasis on whether and to what extent the animal in question is capable of suffering. If rats are able to suffer—and no one really doubts that they are—then their interests are relevant to the question how, and perhaps even whether, they can be expelled from houses.28 At the very least, people should kill rats in a way that minimizes suffering. And if possible, people should try to expel rats in a way that does not harm them at all. 
These claims need not be taken as radical or extreme; many people already take steps in just this direction. If we are getting rid of rats, we do so in a way that reduces, rather than maximizes, their distress. On this view, if ants and mosquitoes have no claim to human concern—if they can be killed at our whim—it is because they suffer little or not at all. Here we have some empirical questions about the capacities of creatures of various sorts. And we should certainly be willing to engage in a degree of balancing. If human beings are at risk of illness and disease from mosquitoes and rats, they have a strong justification, perhaps even one of self-defense, for eliminating or relocating them. 
Every reasonable person believes in animal rights. Even the sharpest critics of animal rights support the anticruelty laws. I have suggested that the simple moral judgment behind these laws is that animal suffering matters, and that this judgment supports a significant amount of reform. Most modestly, private suits should be permitted to prevent illegal cruelty and neglect. There is no good reason to give public officials a monopoly on enforcement; that monopoly is a recipe for continued illegality. Less modestly, anticruelty laws should be extended to areas that are now exempt from them, including scientific experiments and farming. There is no good reason to permit the level of suffering that is now being experienced by millions, even billions of living creatures. 
I have also raised doubts about the radical idea that animals deserve to have “autonomy,” understood as a right to be free from human control and use. In my view, the real questions involves animal welfare and suffering, and human control and use may be compatible with decent lives for animals. But the emphasis on suffering, and on decent lives, itself has significant implications. Of course it is appropriate to consider human interests in the balance, and sometimes our interests will outweigh those of other animals. The problem is that most of the time, the interests of animals are not counted at all—and that once they are counted, many of our practices cannot possibly be justified. I believe that in the long-run, our willingness to subject animals to unjustified suffering will be seem a form of unconscionable barbarity—not the same as, but in many ways morally akin to, slavery and the mass extermination of human beings. 28 If an animal carries disease, the issue is different; in that case expulsion can be seen as a matter of selfdefense. 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992) Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993) Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000) Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000) Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes, The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 2000) Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System (November 2000) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care: Vicarious Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art: An Economic Approach (December 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis: A Positive Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale? Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended 
Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
Texas Law Review) or Failure (March 2002) (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) 
Coase Lecture February 2002) 
Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 2002) 
What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) (July 2002) 
Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 
Copyright 2003 by Northwestern University Schoolof Law Northwestern University Law Review 
INTRODUCTION 
Human cognition does not take place in a social vacuum. When a particular incident becomes cognitively "available," it is because of social influences. Individuals are especially averse to losses; but how do we know whether we are facing a loss or instead a foregone gain? What is the status quo from which losses are measured? Social understandings provide the answer. Individuals often think and work in groups; do group interactions aggravate or reduce some of the harmful effects of heuristics and biases?' If heuristics and biases sometimes lead people to make bad decisions, in a way that seems to justify paternalism, the flow of information is a crucial reason. Can anything be done-by individuals, government, or the law-to improve information flow and perhaps to ensure "debiasing" in the process? Or consider the fact that people care about fairness and are willing to punish, at their own expense, those who behave unfairly. 2 How might social influences reduce or increase people's willingness to sacrifice their material self-interest for the sake of fairness? 
My goal in this Essay is to suggest that we will have a far better understanding of the relationship between behavioral economics and law if we investigate the connection between behavioral findings and social influences. The real-world effects of heuristics and biases are very much a function of social pressures, including, but not limited to, the law. Wellorganized private groups, showing a working knowledge of behavioral economics and a willingness to exploit it for their benefit, play a central role here. But to say this is to get ahead of the story. Begin with an example. 
In fall 2002, a pair of snipers killed ten people in the Washington, D.C. area. The victims were randomly chosen. They included men and women, 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department ofPolitical Science. I am grateful to Caryn Campbell for superb research assistance. 
I For evidence, see Norbert Kerr et al., Bias in Judgment: Comparing Individualsand Groups, 103 PSYCHOL. REV. 687 (1996). 
2 See RICHARD THALER, THE WINNER'S CURSE 21 (1992). 1295 young and old, whites and African Americans. Each of these murders was a tragedy, of course, but the actions of the snipers affected millions of others as well. Many citizens were afraid that they would be next. Fear, sometimes dull and sometimes very sharp, seemed to grip much of the area, and it significantly affected the behavior of D.C.-area residents. "What has seized the capital of the world's only superpower in fear, the real palpable fear that causes people to wear bullet-proof vests to pump gas and football teams to practice indoors, is a sniper with an assault rifle." 3 
Consider the following manifestations of this fear: * Many school districts placed their classes under a "code blue," which means that students must stay inside school buildings and cannot leave campus for lu4nches or outdoor activities; nearly one million children were affected. * October SAT testing at several area schools was canceled.' " Recreation league soccer for six-year olds, high school girls' tennis and field hockey, and baseball, were all canceled or postponed. 6 " In Winchester, Virginia, all school field trips were canceled.7 " The Glory Days Grill Invitational Bull Run in Manassas, Virginia, a track meet that attracts over 2,000 runners, was canceled. 8 " About fifty area Starbucks stores removed their outside seating. 9 " The Prince George's County school system canceled all athletic events indefinitely.' 0 " The D.C. Stoddert Soccer League, with more than 5,000 players, ages four to nineteen, called off games; youth leagues in Maryland and Virginia were told to follow the lead of the school systems, most of which canceled outdoor events.II " Many people stopped going to health clubs with large front windows, and some took to wearing body armor while pumping gas or shielding themselves with a car door to keep safe. 12 1296 
But there is something very odd about the extraordinary effects of the snipers' actions. For people in the relevant area, the snipers caused a miniscule increase in risk. If there were five million people in the D.C. area, and if the snipers were going to kill one person every three days, the daily statistical risk of being shot was less than one in one million, and the weekly statistical risk was less than three in one million. These are trivial risks, far lower than the risks associated with many daily activities about which people do not express even the slightest concern. The daily risk, for example, was smaller than the risk of death from drinking thirty diet sodas with saccharin, from driving one hundred miles, from smoking two cigarettes, from ten airline trips, from living in a home with a smoker for two weeks, from living in Denver rather than Philadelphia for forty days, and from eating thirty-five slices of fresh bread.' 3 It would be possible to quibble with my assessment of the statistical risk, and perhaps people, at the time, rationally thought that the risk was somewhat higher than I have suggested. But even if so, the real risk could not possibly have been sufficient to justify the high levels of anxiety and fear, which bordered, for many, on the edge of hysteria. Perhaps some of the defensive behavior was rational, given the fact that that behavior itself was not terribly costly. But the extent of alarm could not possibly be justified by the extent of the risk. 
Why, then, did so many people in Washington feel fear and alter their behavior in the midst of the snipers' attacks? Behavioral economics suggests two principal accounts. First, people rely on the availabilityheuristic. Under the availability heuristic, people assess probabilities by asking whether examples readily come to mind.' 4 Lacking statistical information, people substitute an easy question (Can I think of illustrations?) for a hard question (What realities do the data actually show?). It is hardly irrational to use the availability heuristic when reliable information is absent. But the availability heuristic can lead to significant mistakes. If an incident is readily available but statistically rare, the heuristic will lead to overestimation of risk; if examples do not come to mind, but the statistical risk is high, the heuristic can give people an unjustified sense of security. Perhaps the fear of sniper attack, in the Washington area, arose from a misperception of probability, generated by the high salience of the few attacks and thus by the availability heuristic.' 5 
This explanation seems to have considerable power. But there is another explanation. When strong emotions are triggered, people tend to focus on the worst case and not to think much about issues of probability at 13 RICHARD WILSON & EDMUND CROUCH, RISK-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 208-09, 225 (2001). The risk of living in Denver comes from slightly elevated radiation levels; the risk from eating fresh bread comes from formaldehyde. 
14 See Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgment Under Uncertainty: HeuristicsandBiases, in JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING: AN INTERDISCIPLINARY READER 38, 46-49 (Hal R. Arkes & Kenneth R. Hammond eds., 1986). 
15 In this light, we can see that terrorists show a good working knowledge of that heuristic. 1297 all. 16 The phenomenon of probability neglect occurs when people are highly responsive to the outcome and when significant variations in its likelihood do not much affect thought and behavior.' 7 Affect-rich outcomes, involving intense emotions, are likely to produce probability neglect.' 8 To say the least, the idea of being killed by a sniper, at a gas station or on a playground, is affect-rich, especially in a period in which newspapers and television stations focus their attention on the actual murders. Many of those who altered their behavior in response to the killings appeared not to use the availability heuristic to conclude that the probability of an attack was significant, but instead to focus on the bad outcome and to neglect probability altogether. 
It is therefore reasonable to explain the effects of the sniper attacks by reference to some combination of the availability heuristic and probability neglect.' 9 But an account of this kind, focusing solely on individual cognition, seems to be missing something important. Countless risks are, in principle, "available," and countless risks might, in principle, have the kind of salience that would lead to probability neglect. In many communities, the risks associated with unsafe sex, which kills tens of thousands of Americans each year,20 lack much salience. But in other communities, those risks are salient indeed. In many communities, the risks associated with tobacco smoking (a killer of hundreds of thousands of Americans annually) 2' are not salient at all; in many other communities, those risks are entirely available. The dangers associated with nuclear power are available to Americans, but much less so to citizens of France, who are largely unconcerned about those risks. 22 Americans do not much fear the risks associated with genetic modification of food, even though in principle, such risks might be "available. '23 Obviously the availability of risks, and the risks to which probability neglect attaches, are variable from place to place. Abandoned hazardous waste sites were not a salient source of risk until about 1980, when the Love Canal controversy converted 16Yuval Rottenstreich & Christopher K. Hsee, Money, Kisses, and ElectricShocks: On the AffectivPesychology of Risk, 12 PSYCHOL. SCI. 185, 188 (2001) (finding that when emotions are triggered, variations in probability matter relatively little). 
17See Cass R. Sunstein, Probabilit, Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law, 112 YALE L.J.61, 61-76 (2002). 
18See Rottenstreich & Hsee, supra note 16, at 187-89. 
19Other factors might be at work, involving the new, unfamiliar, and apparently uncontrollable natureof the risk. See PAUL SLOVtC, THE PERCEPTION OF RISK (Ragnar E. L6fstedt ed., 2000). 20 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, RISK AND REASON 8 (2002). 21 Id. 
22 See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REv. 683, 712 (1999). 
23 See ALAN MCHUGHEN, PANDORA'S PICNIC BASKET 114-21 (2000) (discussing incidents that might be publicized widely and to an extent have been). 1298 such sites into a strong basis of concern.24 Availability thus varies over time. Some statistically large risks do not cause a great deal of fear. Why is this? 
The question suggests what is missing from the behavioral account: an assessment of the social and cultural dimensions of judgment under uncertainty.25 In behavioral work, researchers usually investigate individuals' thinking through laboratory experiments in which subjects answer questions in isolation. To say the least, these experiments are highly illuminating, and they tell us a great deal about how people think and act in the real world. 26 What I mean to emphasize here is that for every finding in behavioral economics, there is an accompanying set of social interactions, which greatly influence people's beliefs and judgments. 
This is most obviously true for availability. In many cases of highvisibility, low-probability risks, including sniper attacks, shark attacks, and the kidnapping of young girls, the sources of availability are not obscure. The mass media focus on those risks; people communicate their fear and concern to one another; the widespread fear and concern increase media attention; and the spiral continues until people move on. This account explains how the "risk of the month" syndrome stems from the interaction between availability and social influences. Much of the time, however, what is available and salient to some is not available and salient to all. For example, many people focus on cases in which the government neglected to regulate some environmental risk, with the consequence being widespread illness and death. 27 To such people, the available incidents require strong precautions in the face of uncertainty. But many other people focus on cases in which the government overreacted to weak science, engaging in large expenditures for little gain in terms of health, safety, or environmental protection. 28 To such people, the available incidents justify a measure of circumspection and restraint in the face of uncertainty. Which of these cases will be available and to whom? 
In any case people have different predispositions. These predispositions play a large role in determining which of the numerous possibilities is salient. Availability helps to determine beliefs, to be sure, but beliefs help to determine availability as well. Both beliefs and availability are endogenous to one another. When social and cultural forces interact with salience to produce concern about one set of problems, but not another, predispositions are crucial. On this count, too, those interested in behavioral economics have said relatively little. 
24 See Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22, at 691-98. 25 On the cultural issues, see MARY DOUGLAS & AARON WILDAVSKY, RISK AND CULTURE (1982). 26 See Colin F. Camerer, Prospect Theory in the Wild: Evidence from the Field, in CHOICES, VALUES, AND FRAMES 288 (Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky eds., 2000). 
27 See THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE IN THE 20TH CENTURY: LATE LESSONS FROM EARLY WARNINGS (Poul Harremoes et al. eds., 2001). 
28 See AARON WILDAVSKY, BUT IS IT TRUE? (1995). 1299 
In order to predict behavior, to see how law can accomplish shared goals, and to analyze the legitimate role of paternalism in law, it is necessary to know something about how social forces interact with individual cognition. Indeed, law can sometimes amplify the relevant effects-as, for example, through a rapid, aggressive response to a salient risk, a response that makes the risk more salient still. If public officials focus on a risk, they can use the underlying cognitive processes to increase social concern. 
While I focus throughout this Essay on the availability heuristic and on probability neglect, it should be easy to see that social influences amplify many other features of individual cognition. Alert politicians and wellorganized private groups can manipulate loss aversion. Anchoring greatly affects people's judgments; in the face of uncertainty, people often seize on any number, or "anchor," that is available. 29 But on which number will they anchor? Social influences, including those imposed by lawyers, play a large role in answering that question. 0 Fairness matters, but the beliefs and actions of others greatly affect people's judgments about fairness.3 In emphasizing these points, I mean to suggest the importance of seeing various cognitive findings in the context of social dynamics, including selfconscious manipulations of the flow of information. 
II. AVAILABILITY AND PROBABILITY NEGLECT 
In this Part, I briefly describe the availability heuristic and probability neglect and their relationship to risk-related law. I do so partly because they are important in their own right, and not much discussed in this Symposium, but mostly by way of preface for the discussion of social influences. 
questions, people often ask themselves easier questions, which serve to simplify their inquiry. 32 The answer to the easier questions operates as a heuristic or a rule of thumb. Of these rules of thumb, the availability heuristic is probably the most important for purposes of understanding law, and in particular, those aspects of law that involve both discrimination and social risks. 33 29 See Gretchen B. Chapman & Eric J. Johnson, Incorporatingthe Irrelevant: Anchors in Judgments of Beliefand Value, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT 120 
3 Id. at 137. 
31 Timothy N. Cason & Vai-Lam Mui, A LaboratoryStudy of Group Polarisationin the Team Dictator Game, 107 ECON. J. 1465, 1468-70 (1997). 
32 See Daniel Kahneman & Shane Frederick, RepresentativenessRevisited- AttributeSubstitution in Intuitive Judgment, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT, supranote 29, at 49; Christine Jolls et al., A BehavioralApproach to Law andEconomics,50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 1518-19 (1998). 
33 On the availability heuristic ingeneral, see Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 14, at 38, 46-49. On the availability heuristic and law, see Roger Noll & James Krier, Some Implications ofCognitive Psychologyfor Risk Regulation, 19 J.LEGAL STUD. 747,767-71 (1991); Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22, at 703-05. 1300 Thus, for example, "a class whose instances are easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable. '34 The point very much bears on private and public responses to risks, suggesting, for example, that people will be especially responsive to the dangers of AIDS, crime, earthquakes, and nuclear power plant accidents if examples are easy to recall.35 The point also explains some of the sources of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, age, and disability. If it is easy to bring to mind cases in which a female employee quit work to care for her family, sex discrimination is more likely; so too if it is easy to think of cases in which African-American employees performed poorly. 36 
In this way, familiarity can affect the availability of examples, but salience is important as well. "The impact of seeing a house burning on the subjective probability of such accidents is probably greater than the impact of reading about a fire in the local paper. '37 Similarly, earlier events will have a smaller impact than later ones. This point helps explain much of human behavior. For example, whether people will buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experiences. 38 If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase insurance. 39 In the aftermath of an earthquake, many more people buy insurance for earthquakes, but the number declines steadily from that point, as vivid memories recede. 40 For purposes of law and regulation, the problem is that the availability heuristic can lead to serious errors of fact, in terms of both excessive controls on small risks that are cognitively available and insufficient controls on large risks that are not. 41 Notice that the use of the availability heuristic in these contexts strongly suggests that the heuristics operate even when the stakes are large. And it is even possible that the use of the availability heuristic, in such contexts, is fully rational for people who lack statistical knowledge. Perhaps use of that heuristic is the best way of minimizing the sum of decision and error costs. But it seems less useful to debate the rationality of the availability heuristic than simply to observe that it has a significant effect on actual behavior. 34 Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 14, at 46. 35 See SLOVIC, supra note 19, at 37-38. 
36 1speculate that the availability heuristic helps explain the striking results in Marianne Bertrand & Sendhil Mullainathan, Are Emily and Brendan More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination 11-23 (Nov. 18, 2002) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author) (finding that otherwise identical job applicants are less likely to spur employer interest if their first name seems likely to be that of an African-American). The representativeness heuristic might also be playing a role. See Kahneman & Frederick, supra note 32, at 60-63 (discussing the representativeness heuristic). 
37 SLOVIC, supra note 19, at 37-48. 38 Id. at 39-40. 39 Id. 40 Id. 41 Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22, at 703-05; SUNSTEIN, supranote 20, at 33-35, 78-98. 1301 
What, in particular, produces availability? An interesting study attempts to test the effects of ease of imagery on perceived judgments of risk.42 The study asked subjects to read about an illness (Hyposcenia-B) that "was becoming increasingly prevalent" on the local campus. In one condition, the symptoms were concrete and easy to imagine: muscle aches, low energy, and frequent severe headaches. In another condition, the symptoms were vague and hard to imagine: an inflamed liver, a malfunctioning nervous system, and a vague sense of disorientation. Subjects under both conditions were asked both to imagine a three-week period in which they had the disease and to write a detailed description of what they imagined. After doing so, subjects were asked to assess, on a ten-point scale, their likelihood of contracting the disease. The basic finding was that likelihood judgments were very different in the two conditions, with easily imagined symptoms making people far more inclined to believe that they were likely to get the disease. 43 
There are several implications for policy and law. The public demand for law should be much higher if people can easily imagine the harm in question-in such cases, the law might well reflect a kind of hysteria. But if the harm is difficult to imagine, we might well see a pattern of neglect.44 We would therefore predict that easily imaginable harms would lead to relatively greater private precautions and relatively greater governmental concern. 45 Well-organized private groups should, and do, take advantage of this fact, attempting to publicize visible examples of harms to which they seek to draw attention.46 This point also offers implications about public informational campaigns. If the government wants people to take protective steps, it should provide information about symptoms in a vivid rather than statistical way, relying on examples that can later be brought to mind. 
An understanding of the availability heuristic bears directly on the debate over paternalistic interventions. If people believe that some risks are much higher than they actually are and that other risks are much lower than they actually are, their behavior will not promote their welfare. People will take excessive precautions to avoid trivial risks and they will fail to protect themselves against genuine hazards. Government has a legitimate role to play here; at a minimum, it should correct false beliefs. In some cases, government legiti42 Steven J. Sherman et al., Imagining Can Heighten or Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating Effect of Ease of Imagery, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT, supra note 29, at 82. 
43 Id. at 88. 
44 Compare the finding that teens' rates of risk behaviors-smoking, driving after drinking, unsafe sex-can be reduced by addressing heuristics and biases, in part by explaining that the availability heuristic leads teens to overestimate the risk behavior of their peers. See Baruch Fischhoff, Heuristics and Biases in Application, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT, supra note 29, at 730, 747. 
45 See Noll & Krier, supra note 33, at 767-71. 
46 See Kuran & Sunstein, supranote 22, at 733-35 (discussing availability campaigns). 1302 mately responds to people's inability to process risk-related information by constraining their choices, at least when the constraint ensures that they will do what they would do if they were adequately informed. Here, as elsewhere, an understanding of bounded rationality undermines the dogmatic, nearly theological, antipaternalism of those who indulge strong assumptions about rationality, at least if social influences do not correct individual errors. 47 
The availability heuristic can produce an inaccurate assessment of probability. But sometimes people will attempt to make little assessment of probability at all, especially when strong emotions are involved.4 8 In such cases, large-scale variations in probabilities matter little, even when those variations unquestionably should matter. The case of the sniper attacks is an example. The point applies to hope as well as fear; vivid images of good outcomes will crowd out consideration of probability too.49 Lotteries are successful partly for this reason. 
Probability neglect has received its most direct empirical confirmation in a striking study of people's willingness to pay to avoid electric shocks. 50 The central purpose of the study was to test the relevance of probability in "affect rich" decisions. One experiment investigated whether varying the probability of harm would matter more, or less, in settings that trigger strong emotions than in settings that seem relatively emotion-free. In the relatively emotion-free setting, participants were told that the experiment entailed some chance of a $20 penalty. In the "strong emotion" setting, participants were asked to imagine that they would participate in an experiment involving some chance of a "short, painful, but not dangerous electric shock." 5' Participants were asked to say how much they would be willing to pay to avoid participating in the relevant experiment. Some participants were told that there was a 1% chance of receiving the bad outcome (either the $20 loss or the electric shock), others were told that the chance was 99%, and still others were told that the chance was 100%. 
The key result was that variations in probability affected those facing the relatively emotion-free injury, the $20 penalty, far more than they affected people facing the more emotionally evocative outcome of an electric shock.52 For the cash penalty, the difference between the median payment for a 1% chance and the median payment for a 99% chance was predictably large and indeed broadly consistent with economic rationality: $1 to avoid 47 For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein & Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism and the Law 6-8 (Feb. 20, 2003) (unpublished manuscript, on file with authors). 
48 Rottenstreich & Hsee, supra note 16, at 176-88. 49See id. 50 Id. 51 Id. at 181. 52 Id. 1303 a 1% chance, and $18 to avoid a 99% chance.5 3 For the electric shock, by contrast, the difference in probability made little difference to median willingness to pay: $7 to avoid a 1% chance, and $10 to avoid a 99% chance.5 4 Apparently, people will pay a significant amount to avoid a small probability of a hazard that is affect laden-and the amount that they will pay will not vary greatly with changes in probability. My own study, involving arsenic, comes to a similar conclusion, suggesting that people are less sensitive to differences in probability when the risks are described in a way that triggers strong emotions. 5 The point explains "why societal concerns about hazards such as nuclear power and exposure to extremely small amounts of toxic chemicals fail to recede in response to information about the very small probabilities of the feared consequences from such hazards. 5 6 
An understanding of probability neglect casts new light on the finding that visualization or imagery matters a great deal to people's reactions to risks.5 7 When an image of a bad outcome is easily accessible: people will become greatly concerned about a risk, holding probability constant.58 Consider the fact that when people are asked how much they will pay for flight insurance for losses resulting from "terrorism," they will pay more than if they are asked how much they will pay for flight insurance to compensate for injury or monetary losses from all causes.5 9 The evident explanation for this peculiar result is that the word "terrorism" evokes vivid images of disaster, thus crowding out probability judgments. Note also that when people discuss a low-probability risk, their concern rises even if the discussion consists mostly of apparently trustworthy assurances that the likelihood of harm really is infinitesimal.60 The reason is that the discussion makes it easier to visualize the risk and hence to fear it. 
Probability neglect does not involve the availability heuristic. That heuristic leads people not to neglect probability, but to answer the question of probability by replacing a hard question (What is the statistical risk?) with an easy question (Do salient examples readily come to mind?). 6' My suggestion here is 53 Id. 54 Id. 55See Sunstein, supro note 17, at 77-81. 
56 Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic, in HEURISTICS AND BIASES: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT, supra note 29, at 397. 
57See Paul Slovic et al., Violence Risk Assessment andRisk Communication: The Effects of Using Actual Cases, ProvidingInstruction,andEmploying Probability Versus FrequencyFormats, 24 LAW & HUM. BEHAV. 271 (2000). 
58 See George Loewenstein et al., Risk as Feelings, 127 PSYCHOL. BULL. 267, 275-76 (2001). 59 See E.J. Johnson et al., Framing,ProbabilityDistortions,and InsuranceDecisions, 7 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 35 (1993). 
60 See Ali Siddiq Alhakami & Paul Slovic, A PsychologicalStudy of the Inverse Relationship Between PerceivedRisk andPerceivedBenefit, 14 RISK ANALYSIS 1085, 1094-95 (1994). 
61 See Amos Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Availability: A Heuristicfor Judging Frequency and Probability,5 COGNITIVE PSYCHOL. 207 (1973). 1304 
SocialInfluences andBehavioralEconomics not that visualization makes an event seem more probable (though this is also true), but that visualization makes the issue of probability less relevant or even irrelevant. The most sensible conclusion is that with respect to risks of injury or harm, vivid images and concrete pictures of disaster can "crowd out" other kinds of thoughts, including the crucial thought that the probability of disaster is really small. "If someone is predisposed to be worried, degrees of unlikeliness seem to provide no comfort, unless one can prove that harm is absolutely impossible, which itself is not possible. '62 When people focus on highly speculative risks, it is often because of intense emotional reactions that make those risks, and not relevant others, stand out from the background. 
All these points involve individual thinking about risks. But as I have stressed, there is an unresolved puzzle for those interested in the real-world effects of the availability heuristic and probability neglect: in many contexts, multiple images are literally available and potentially salient. "[N]ot all analogies within a person's repertoire are equal: for whatever reasons, some are more easily recalled than others. '63 Consider the problem of gun violence. We can find cases in which the presence of guns led to many deaths and also cases in which the presence of guns allowed law-abiding citizens to protect themselves against criminals. 64 Or consider the question of whether women, when facing a risk of sexual violence, increase or decrease their chances of escaping unscathed if they engage in aggressive selfdefense. In some cases, resistance prevented the assault. In other cases, resistance led to murder.65 In the face of conflicting instances, which cases are especially available? Even expert judgments appear to be driven by one or another set of available instances. 66 But why should one or another kind of case be available? 
A. 
Social influences are quite important here. Sometimes availability and salience spread through social bandwagons or cascades, in which apparently representative anecdotes and gripping examples move rapidly from one person to another.67 In fact, a process of this sort played a large role in the 62 JOHN WEINGART, WASTE IS A TERRIBLE THING TO MIND 362 (2001). 63 YUEN FOONG KHONG, ANALOGIES AT WAR 213 (1992). 
64 See Donald Braman & Dan M. Kahan, More Statistics, Less Persuasion: A Cultural Theory of Gun-Risk Perceptions, U. PA. L. REV. (forthcoming 2003). 
65 See Fischhoff, supra note 44, at 730, 733-34. 66 Id. 
67 Chip Heath et al., Emotional Selection in Memes: The Case of Urban Legends, 81 J. PERSONALITY & SOC. PSYCHOL. 1028 (2001) [hereinafter Heath et al., Emotional Selection in Memes]; Chip Heath, Do People Prefer To Pass Along Good or Bad News? Valence and Relevance as Predictors of Transmission Propensity, 68 ORG. BEHAV. & HUM. DECISION PROCESSES 79 (1996). For a popular account of the related 1305 Washington area sniper attacks, in the Love Canal scare, 68 and in many other sets of social processes producing law. 
Consider a stylized illustration. Andrew hears of a social event, which he finds to be revealing or illustrative. The event might involve crime, discrimination, environmental hazards, or threats to national security. Andrew tells Barry, who would be inclined to view the event as not terribly informative, but who comes to believe that the event does indeed reveal a great deal after seeing Andrew's reaction. Once Carol hears about the event from Andrew and Barry, she is likely to find it revealing as well. Deborah will then have to possess a great deal of private information to reject the shared opinion of Andrew, Barry, and Carol. 69 Stylized, though it is, the example shows that once several people start to consider an example as probative, many people may come to be influenced by their opinion, giving rise to cascade effects.10 Nor is the example entirely unrealistic. Why do people purchase insurance against natural disasters? Much of the explanation comes from social interactions that follow vivid examples. 71 
In the domain of social risks, availability cascades are responsible for many social beliefs. The point is amplified by the fact that fear-inducing accounts, with high emotional valence, are especially likely to spread.7 2 There is a general implication here. Because different social influences can be found in different communities, local variations are inevitable, with different examples becoming salient in each. One community might greatly fear abduction of young girls, and another might not, even though the statistical risk is the same in each. One community might fear shark attacks, and another might not, even though the likelihood of such an attack, in both places, is miniscule. Such variations might involve coincidence or small or random factors, rather than large-scale cultural differences. 
Different judgments within different social groups, with different available examples, owe their origin to social processes of this sort. Indeed the different reactions to nuclear power in France and the United States can be explained in large part in this way. Or suppose that some groups concentrate on cases in which guns increased violence, while others focus on cases in which guns decreased violence. 73 When this is so, availability cascades are a large part of the reason. "Many Germans believe that drinking phenomenon of tipping points, see MALCOLM GLADWELL, THE TIPPING POINT (2000); for a somewhat more technical treatment, see DUNCAN WATTS, SIx DEGREES OF SEPARATION (2003). 
68 See Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22, at 691-98. 
69 See David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in THE NEW ECONOMICS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 188, 193-95 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn lerulli eds., 1995). 
70 See Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22, at 715-33; Sushil Bikhchandani et al., Learningfrom the Behavior of Others, 12 J. ECON. PERSP. 151 (1998). 
71 See Jacob Gersen, Strategy and Cognition: Regulating Catastrophic Risk (2001) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). 
72 See Heath et al., Emotional Selection in Memes, supra note 67, at 1037. 
73 See Braman & Kahan, supra note 64. 1306 
water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that putting ice in soft drinks is unhealthy. The English, however, rather enjoy a cold drink of water after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments. '74 Availability cascades help account for many diverse social judgments. 
There is a closely related phenomenon. Processes of social deliberation typically lead like-minded people to accept a more extreme version of the views with which they began.75 This is the process known as group polarization. 76 If several people fear global warming, and speak to one another, their fear is likely to increase as a result of internal discussions. If group members believe that the United States cannot be trusted in its dealings with other nations, that very belief is likely to be heightened after members have started to talk. Group polarization has not been studied in connection with the availability heuristic. But the clear implication is that the effect of certain available examples will become greatly amplified through group discussion. Suppose, for example, that several people are discussing a recent wave of sniper attacks, or cases involving the kidnapping of young girls, or situations in which the government has wrongly ignored a serious foreign threat. 77 If these particular examples are mentioned, they are likely to stick. And if the group has a predisposition to think that one or another risk is serious, social dynamics will lead the group to believe that the example is highly revealing. The same is true if the group is fearful. An initial predisposition toward fear is likely to be aggravated as a result of collective deliberations.78 
In general, then, groups tend to polarize toward a more extreme position in line with their predeliberation tendencies. This finding suggests that groups are not likely to be able to avoid the judgment errors made by individuals. A great deal of evidence suggests complex and mixed results on that question.79 With respect to certain statistical problems, groups have been found to make better decisions than individuals. 80 And in a finding of particular relevance here, there is suggestive evidence that groups of randomly selected people, without any particular predeliberation tendency, are slightly better at avoiding the problems created by use of the availability heuristic. 81 On the other hand, groups of 74 Joseph Henrich, Group Report: What Is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in BOUNDED RATIONALITY: THE ADAPTIVE TOOLBOx 343, 353-54 (2001) (presenting an entertaining outline in connection with food choice decisions). 
75 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, WHY SOCIETIES NEED DISSENT (forthcoming 2004) (manuscript at 7495, on file with author); Cass R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go to Extremes, 110 YALE L.J. 71 (2000). 
76 ld 77 See KHONG, supra note 63. 
CrippledEpistemology ofExtremism, in POLITICAL EXTREMISM AND RATIONALITY 79 See Kerr et al., supranote 1, at 688-96. 
80 ALAN BLINDER & JOHN MORGAN, ARE Two HEADS BETTER THAN ONE? AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF GROUP VS. INDIVIDUAL DECISIONMAKING (Nat'l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 7909, 2000), availableat http://papers.nber.org/papers/w7909.pdf. 
81 Kerr et al., supranote 1, at 692. 1307 like-minded people, predisposed to show concern about some problem, are likely to show amplified use of that heuristic. And some evidence suggests that the use of the representativeness heuristic is aggravated in groups.82 Groups seem to be more confident than individuals, but the evidence conflicts on whether the greater confidence reflects overconfidence bias.83 The most comprehensive study suggests that "there can be no simple answer to the question, 'Which is more biased, individuals or groups?"' 84 It seems clear that group processes do not eliminate the use of heuristics. It remains to be seen whether and when they reduce or increase the resulting errors.85 
B. 
Thus far the discussion has involved interactions among individuals, who are all treated as equals. But it should be clear that in the real world, some voices are more important than others, especially when availability and salience are involved. In particular, the behavior and preoccupations of the media play a large role. Many perceived "epidemics" are in reality no such thing, but instead a product of overwhelming media coverage of gripping, unrepresentative incidents.8 6 Attention to these unusual incidents is likely to ensure availability and salience, promoting an inaccurately high estimate of probability and at the same time some degree of probability neglect. And in the face of close media attention, the demand for legal responses will be significantly affected. In the context of the sniper attacks, intense media coverage was the central source of social fear, helping to ensure that large amounts of private and public resources were devoted to risk reduction. 
A natural question, then, is why the media covers certain risks and not others. A good clue comes from the following suggestion: 
Whatever the criticisms, the reign of terror is boosting ratings for cable news networks. In fact, they are now at their highest levels since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. At the end of last week, Fox News Channel's average daily audience was up 27% from a month before; CNN's was up 29%; MSNBC's, up 24%.87 Hence the media's coverage reflects its economic self-interest, at least in part. Gripping instances, whether or not representative, are likely to attract attention and to increase ratings. Often the result is to distort probability judgments. There can be a kind of vicious circle involving the availability heuristic and media incentives, with each aggravating the other, often to the 82 Id. 
2 1308 4 Id.at715. 
85 For evidence ofgroup polarization on juries, see CASS R. SUNSTEIN ET AL., PUNITIVE DAMAGES: How JURIES DECIDE 43-61 (2002). 
86 See JOEL BEST, RANDOM VIOLENCE 28 (1999). 97 Johanna Neuman, In a Sniper s Grip: Media's Role in Drama Debated (pt. 1),L.A. TIMES, Oct. detriment of public understanding. 
Knowing the importance of media coverage, well-organized private groups-some entirely self-interested and others altruistic and pursuing a social cause-often work extremely hard to promote public attention to particular risks. A common tactic is to publicize an incident that might trigger both availability and salience. Of course terrorists themselves are the most extreme and vicious example, using high-visibility attacks to convince people that "they cannot be safe anywhere." 88 But many illustrations are less objectionable and sometimes even benign. Consider the abandoned hazardous waste problem at Love Canal, used by environmental groups to promote hazardous waste cleanup,8 9 or the Exxon Valdez disaster, used by the Sierra Club and other environmental organizations to promote more stringent safeguards against oil spills. Showing at least a working knowledge of the availability heuristic and other behavioral findings, private groups seize on selected incidents and publicize them to make them generally salient to the public. With respect to tort reform, corporate advocates use extreme and unrepresentative cases of jury misconduct to suggest that significant protections are needed against jury overreaching.9" In all of these examples, the use of particular instances might be necessary to move the public, and legislators, in the right directions. Certainly the social processes that interact with salience and availability can promote legal reform where it is needed. But there are no assurances here. Social influences might well lead people to exaggerate a problem or a probability, or to ignore the question of probability altogether. 
Politicians engage in the same basic project. President Ronald Reagan was a master. Consider his influential discussion of the Chicago Welfare Queen, "a heavy woman driving a big white Cadillac and paying for thick steaks with wads of food stamps." 91 By its very nature, the voice of an influential politician comes with amplifiers. When public officials are able to bring an incident before the public, a seemingly illustrative example is likely to spread far and wide. A legal enactment can itself promote availability; if the law responds to the problems associated with hazardous waste dumps or "hate crimes," people might well come to see those problems as readily available. The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 would inevi88 See Cass R. Sunstein, TerrorismandProbabilityNeglect, J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY (forthcoming 1309 tably loom large no matter what President George W. Bush chose to emphasize. But notice that the President, and his White House generally, referred to the attacks on countless occasions, frequently in order to stress the reality of seemingly distant threats and the need to incur significant costs and burdens to counteract them. We know too little to know if the government's emphasis on those attacks reflected, or bred, a form of probability neglect. But there is no doubt that their salience played a large role in affecting political behavior and that that role cannot be understood without reference to social influences. 
But all this does not provide the full picture. Beliefs and orientations are a product of availability, to be sure, and social influences help to ensure both availability and salience. But what is available is also a product of antecedent beliefs and orientations, both individual and social. In other words, availability is endogenous to, or a product of, individual predispositions. Almost no discussion has been devoted to this point in the behavioral analysis of law. 92 
Consider some examples. Why do some people recall and emphasize incidents in which a failure to take precautions led to serious environmental harm? A likely reason is that they are predisposed to favor environmental protection. And why do some people recall and emphasize incidents in which environmental protection led to excessive costs for little gain? A likely reason is that they are predisposed to oppose environmental controls. Here is an interaction between the availability heuristic and confirmation bias, which is "the tendency to seek information to confirm our original hypotheses and beliefs. '93 President Reagan's tale of the Welfare Queen was especially salient to those who were predisposed to believe that the welfare system was rewarding people who should be required to work, but tried to cheat the system. To many others, the tale would fall on deaf ears and not prove memorable at all (except perhaps as an illustration of unfortunate political rhetoric, or of an attempt to use the availability heuristic). The same basic processes are at work in debates over gun control. When those suspicious of such controls recall, and use, instances in which legal controls actually cost lives, predispositions are crucial. 94 
The point should not be exaggerated. Predispositions are not a black box, and they do not come from the sky. They have sources. Among their sources are availability and salience. Hence there is a complex set of interactions here, with heuristics helping to constitute predispositions, which are in turn responsible for the real-world operation of heuristics. What I mean to emphasize is that all this happens socially, not merely individually. 92 The exception is Braman & Kahan, supranote 64. 93 ELLIOT ARONSON, THE SOCIAL ANIMAL 147 (6th ed. 1992). 
94See Braman & Kahan, supra note 64. 1310 When people are in a group that is predisposed in a particular direction, the salient examples will be quite different from those that are salient in a group with an opposite predisposition. Here group polarization is especially important. 
More generally, different cultural orientations play a large role in determining what turns out to be available. 95 The United States is highly diverse, and for some purposes, it is plausible to think of different regions and groups as having somewhat different cultures. Within the AfricanAmerican community, for example, the available instances are sometimes quite different from those that can be found within the White community.96 Across nations, the differences are even more striking, in part because different world-views play such a dominant role.97 
I have emphasized the role of the availability heuristic and probability neglect, but social influences are connected with the real-world effects of many heuristics and biases and with the full range of findings in behavioral economics. Consider, for example, one of the sources of unpredictability in jury awards involving punitive damages or hard-to-monetize injuries: the absence of a "modulus" that would enable people to make sense of various "points" along the scale of dollars.98 When a company has engaged in serious misconduct, is the appropriate punishment $100,000, or $1,000,000, or $10,000,000? A jury's judgment is likely to depend on the modulus that is suggested by the most influential jurors. But where does that modulus, or any modulus, come from? The answer lies in social understandings. Sometimes a particular juror will have heard of a case in which a certain amount has been awarded, and that amount might turn out to serve as a modulus for the group. 
Social influences are not limited to this phenomenon. In a process akin to group polarization, the dollar awards of juries turn out to be systematically higher than the predeliberation dollar awards of those juries' median juror. 99 Dollar awards undergo a systematic "severity shift," ensuring that in many cases, awards are as high as, or even higher than, that of the highest individual before deliberation began. Thus social interactions have a predictable amplifying tendency on individual awards. An understanding of individual psychology would be insufficient to predict this outcome. It is necessary to examine social interactions as well. There is much to be learned about the relationship between such interactions and anchoring. 95 See id. 96 See RONALD N. JACOBS, RACE, MEDIA, AND THE CRISIS OF CIVIL SOCIETY (2000). 97 See MARY DOUGLAS, RISK ACCEPTABILITY IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCES 53-72 (1985). 98 See SUNSTEIN ET AL., supra note 85, at 29-30. 99 Id. 1311 
Or consider loss aversion. People are averse to losses;100 but how do we know whether something will count as a loss? When will people see changes as losses? Often the answer depends not on simple facts, but on a range of contextual factors, including how the event is framed. The status quo is usually the reference point, so that losses are so defined when people are asked, or forced, to relinquish what they now have. But simply through inventive terminology, it is possible to manipulate the frame so as to make a change appear to be a loss rather than a gain, or vice versa. These manipulations occur socially-through the acts and deeds of other people and institutions. Consider a company that says "cash discount" rather than "credit card surcharge." Or consider a parent who says that for behavior X, rather than behavior Y,a child will be rewarded, as opposed to saying that for behavior Y,rather than behavior X, a child will be punished. Or consider familiar advertisements to the effect that "you cannot afford not to" use a certain product. 
In the context of environmental regulation, it is easy to manipulate the reference point that people use to measures losses or gains. Thus policymakers might claim that they are trying to "restore" water or air quality as it was thirty years ago. If they make this claim, people are likely to be receptive; they do not want air and water to be dirtier than they recently were. By contrast, a proposal to "improve" air or water quality will not be nearly so attractive. People's judgments are much affected by whether we are speaking of restoration or improvement.0 1 But how can we tell which is involved? The answer might be manipulated socially, simply by picking a "clean" year to which policymakers seek to return. There is a more general point. Because people are averse to losses from the status quo, policymakers have a great deal to gain by manipulating people's conception of what the status quo is, so that any changes do not seem to be a "loss" at all. If an apparent increase in tax rates can really be described as a return to tax rates in 1996, taxpayers are less likely to object. Such manipulations, inevitably social in character, will inevitably have large effects on assessments of legal alternatives.10 2 
Or consider the finding of bounded self-interest, which behavioral economists and those interested in behavioral law and economics have stressed. 0 3 Bounded self-interest refers to the fact that people are sometimes willing to sacrifice material self-interest in order to be fair and also to sacrifice material self-interest in order to punish unfairness. But what is the difference between individual behavior and behavior in groups? The issue has been studied in connection with the Dictator Game, used to explore 100 See Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and LegalAnalysis,97 Nw. U. L. REV. 1227 (2003). 101See Robin Gregory et al., The Role of Past States in Determining Reference Points for Policy Decisions, 55 ORG. BEHAV. & HUM. DECISIONS PROCESSES 195 (1993). 
102Id 103 See THALER, supra note 2, at 50-62; Jolls et al., supra note 32, at 1489-93. 1312 selfishness and altruism. 10 4 In this game, a subject is told that she can allocate a sum of money, say $10, between herself and some stranger. The standard economic prediction is that most subjects will keep all or almost all of the money for themselves. But the standard prediction turns out to be wrong. Most people choose to keep somewhere between $6 and $8 and to share the rest. 10 5 The question here, however, is how behavior in the Dictator Game is affected if people are placed in teams-if people decide in groups rather than individuals. Are groups more altruistic than individuals? The answer is that team members choose still more equal divisions.1 16 Once placed in groups, people show a significant shift toward greater generosity. 
This result seems best explained by reference to a social norm, one that disfavors selfishness, even within a group that stands to benefit from it. If people are deliberating with others about how much money to give to charity, chances are good that the group will end up being less selfish than the median individual, simply because people do not want to appear to be greedy. People's concern for their reputation, along with their concern for their own self-conception, plays a large role. Of course the outcomes here, and the effects of group influence, would change if the team in the Dictator Game had some reason to be hostile to those who would benefit from their generosity. We can easily imagine a variation of the Dictator Game in which, for example, people of a relatively poor religious group are deciding how much to allocate to another religious group that is thought to be both hostile and far wealthier. In this variation, the social norm would likely favor greater selfishness. 
My point, in short, is that fairness-related behavior is often a function of prevailing social influences. 0 7 Consider a study of cooperative behavior, which tested the subjects' willingness to cooperate, varying only the name of the game. 0 8 In one version, the game was called a Wall Street game; in another, it was called a Community Game. The level of cooperative behavior was far higher in the latter version that in the former. Whether people will behave fairly, and act to their mutual advantage, is likely to depend on whether they think that they are playing Wall Street or Community; and here social signals are crucial. 
104 Cason & Mui, supranote 31, at 1468-70. 105 See id 106 Id. at 1468-72. 
107This point is supported by the existence of some cross-cultural differences in fairness-related behavior. See the overview in Alvin Roth, BargainingExperiments, in HANDBOOK OF EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMICS 253, 282-88 (John Kagel & Alan Roth eds., 1995). 
108 M. Samuels & Lee Ross, Reputations Versus Labels: The Power of Situational Effects in the Prisoner's Dilemma Game (1993) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author); see also Lee Ross & Andrew Ward, Naive Realism in Everyday Life: Implicationsfor Social Conflicts andMisunderstandings, in VALUES AND KNOWLEDGE 103 (Edward S.Reed et al. eds., 1996). 1313 
V. CONCLUSION 
The cognitive findings emphasized by behavioral economists cannot be understood in a social vacuum. What is available and what is salient are products of social interactions. Cascade effects are often responsible for the spread of instances that eventually become "available" to many or even all. Frequently group polarization is at work, ensuring that like-minded people come to focus, and to take as illustrative, a few of countless potential cases. Many private groups, whether self-interested or public-spirited, are entirely aware of that fact. They make efforts to spread examples that will, they hope, serve to drive people's judgments in a particular direction. Many influential political leaders are masters of this process. Showing intuitive understandings of the underlying mechanisms, they attempt to make certain examples vivid and accessible, as a way of moving judgments in one or another direction. 
I have also argued that predispositions have a large effect in producing availability. Of course most predispositions have social foundations. People are predisposed to recall, and to repeat, instances that fortify their antecedent convictions. Those who are predisposed to favor a certain course of action will naturally recall and stress incidents that support their preferred plan. Just as predispositions are, in part, a function of availability, so too availability is, in part, a function of predispositions. Social influences operate at both levels, affecting what is available and also moving predispositions in one or another direction. If our goal is to understand the relationship between law and human behavior, it will be important to know a great deal more about individual cognition. But it will be equally important to see how individual cognition is affected by social interactions. 
THE THESIS 
My goal in this brief Essay is to cast some new light on a question that has been much discussed in the aftermath of the attacks of September 11. The question is simple: Why do they hate us? I suggest that a large part of the answer lies, not in anything particular to Islam, to religion, or even to the ravings of Osama bin Laden, but in social dynamics and especially in the process of group polarization. When group polarization is at work, like-minded people, engaged in discussion with one another, move toward extreme positions. The effect is especially strong with people who are already quite extreme; such people can move in literally dangerous directions. It is unfortunate but true that leaders of terrorist organizations show a working knowledge of group polarization. They sharply discipline what is said. They attempt to inculcate a shared sense of humiliation, which breeds rage, and group solidarity, which prepares the way for movement toward further extremes and hence for violent acts. They attempt to ensure that recruits speak mostly to people who are already predisposed in the preferred direction. They produce a cult-like atmosphere. 
With an understanding of group polarization, we can see that when "they hate us," it is often because of social processes that have been self-consciously created and manipulated by terrorist leaders. These social processes could easily be otherwise. If they were, terrorism would not exist, or at least it * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
THE SECOND EDITION (1986); Cass R. Sunstein, DeliberativeTrouble? Why GroupsGo To Extremes, 110 YALE L.J.71 (2000). would be greatly weakened and its prospects would be diminished. There is no natural predisposition toward terrorism, even among the most disaffected people in the poorest nations. When terrorism occurs, it is typically a result of emphatically social pressures 2 and indeed easily identifiable mechanisms of interaction. More broadly, ethnic identifica3tion and ethnic conflict are a product of similar pressures; an understanding of "why they hate us" is thus likely to promote an increased understanding of social hatred in general. 
We can draw some conclusions here for the law of conspiracy, for freedom of association, for the idea of "political correctness," for the system of checks and balances, and for possible responses to terrorist threats. Thus I shall identify the distinctive logic behind the special punishment of conspiracy: those who conspire are likely to move one another in more extreme and hence more dangerous directions. I shall also urge that freedom of association helps to fuel group polarization-a healthy phenomenon much of the time, but a potentially dangerous one in some contexts. I shall urge, finally, that an especially effective way to prevent terrorism is to prevent "terrorist entrepreneurs" from creating special enclaves of likeminded or potentially like-minded people. It might seem tempting to object to such efforts on the ground that they interfere with associational liberty, which is of course prized in all democratic nations. But we are speaking here of terrorism and conspiracy to kill American citizens; in such cases, the claims for associational liberty are very weak. Conspiracy is the dark side of freedom of association, and it is a form of conspiracy that I am discussing here. One of my largest goals is thus to provide a window on the nature and consequences of conspiracy in the particular context of terrorism. 
individual hatred, even mental illness, in some terrorist activity. 
Cascades,27 J. LEGAL STUD. 623 (1998). 
What GroupsDo 
Let us begin with some social science research that seems very far afield from the area of terrorism. In 1962, J.A.F. Stoner, an enterprising graduate student, attempted to examine the relationship between individual judgments and group judgments.4 He did so against a background belief that groups tended to move toward the middle of their members' predeliberation views. Stoner proceeded by asking people a range of questions involving risk-taking behavior. People were asked, for example, whether someone should choose a safe or risky play in the last seconds of a football game; whether someone should invest money in a low-return, high-security stock or instead a high-return, lower security stock; whether someone should choose a high prestige graduate program in which a number of people fail to graduate or a lower prestige school from which everyone graduates. 
In Stoner's studies, the subjects first studied the various problems and recorded an initial judgment; they were then asked to reach a unanimous decision as a group. People were finally asked to state their private judgments after the group judgment had been made; they were informed that it was acceptable for the private judgment to differ from the group judgment. What happened? For twelve of the thirteen groups, the group decisions showed a repeated pattern toward greater risk-taking. In addition, there was a clear shift toward greater risk-taking in private opinions as well. Stoner therefore found a "risky shift," in which the effect of group dynamics was to move groups, and the individuals that composed them, in favor of increased risk-taking. 
What accounts for this remarkable result? The answer is emphatically not that groups always move toward greater risktaking. Some groups-asking, for example, about whether and when someone should get married, or travel despite a possibly serious medical condition-tend to move toward greater Including Risk (1961) (unpublished master's thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, School of Industrial Management) (on file with author); see alsoJ.A.F. Stoner, Risky and Cautious Shifts in Group Decisions, 4 J. EXPERIMENTAL SOC. PSYCHOL. 442 (1968). caution. Subsequent studies have shown a consistent pattern, one that readily explains Stoner's own findings: deliberating groups tend to move toward a m•o6re extreme point in line with their pre-deliberation tendencies. If like-minded people are talking with one another, they are likely to end up thinking a more extreme version of what they thought before they started to talk. It follows that, for example, a group of people who tend to approve of an ongoing war effort will, as a result of discussion, become still more enthusiastic about that effort; that people who think that environmentalists are basically right, and that the planet is in serious trouble, will become quite alarmed if they talk mostly with one another; that people who tend to dislike the Rehnquist Court will dislike it quite intensely after talking about it with one another; that people who disapprove of the United States, and are suspicious of its intentions, will increase their disapproval and suspicion if they exchange points of view. Indeed, there is specific7 evidence of the latter phenomenon among citizens of France. It should be readily apparent that enclaves of people, inclined to terrorist violence, might move sharply in that direction as a consequence of internal deliberations. 
Three aggravating factors are of special relevance to the issue of terrorism. First, if members of the group think that they have a shared identity, and a high degree of solidarity, there will be heightened polarization. One reason is that if people feel united by some factor (for example, politics or necessity), internal dissent will be dampened. Second, if members of the deliberating jroup are connected by affective ties, polarization will increase. If they tend to perceive one another as friendly, likable, and similar to them, the size and likelihood of the shift will increase.'0 These points obviously bear on the cult-like 
SelfCategorizationand the Nature ofNorm Formation,Conformity and GroupPolarization, 29 BRrr. J. Soc. PSYCHOL. 97,116 (1990). 
Organizations 24 (2000) (unpublished manuscript, on file with author). 
OF GROUP DECISIONS 93 (Hermann Brandstaitter et al. eds., 1978). In JOHN TURNER Er AL., REDISCOVERING THE SOCIAL GROUP: A SELF-CATEGORIZATION THEORY 154-59 (1987), Turner and his co-authors argue for a new synthesis, one features of terrorist organizations, in which shared identity helps fuel movement toward extremes. Third, extremists are especially prone to polarization. When they start out an extreme point, they are likely to go much further in the direction with which they started. Note in this regard that, burglars in a group act more recklessly than they do as individuals. 
What explains these movements? And what explains the aggravating factors? It is tempting to think that conformity plays a large role. Conformity may be at work, but the data make clear that group polarization is not a matter of conformity; people do not simply shift to the mean of their respective initial positions.13 In fact there are two principal explanations for group polarization, involving two different mechanisms.14 
mechanisms plays a role in producing group polarization and, as we shall see, each of them plays a role in terrorist organizations. 
The first is based on persuasive arguments. The simple idea here is that people respond to the arguments made by others, and the "argument pool," in a group with some initial disposition in one direction, will inevitably be skewed toward that disposition. A group whose members tend to think that that they call "a self-categorization theory of group polarization." Id. at 154. In this account, "persuasion is dependent upon self-categorizations which create a common identity within a group," and polarization occurs "because group members adjust their opinion in line with their image of the group position (conform) and more extreme, already polarized, prototypicalresponses determine this inage." Id. at 156. The key point here is that when a group is tending in a certain direction, the perceived "prototype" is determined by where the group is leaning, and this is where individuals will shift. See id. at 156. As the authors acknowledge, their account shows "overlap with many aspects of social comparison and persuasive arguments models," id. at 158, and because of the overlap, I do not discuss it as a separate account here. For possible differences in predictions and supporting evidence, see id. at 158-70. 

PSYCHOL. REP. 579,586 (1991). 

Isenberg, GroupPolarization:A CriticalReview and Meta-Analysis, 50 J. PERSONALITY AND SOC. PSYCHOL. 1141 (1986). For an overview and an attempt to generate a new synthesis, see TURNER E' AL., supra note 10, at 142-70. See also Russell Hardin, The Crippled Epistemology of Extremism, in POLITICAL EXTREMISM AND RATIONALrIY (Albert Breton et al. eds., forthcoming 2002). the United States is engaged in a general campaign against Islam, or that it seeks to kill and humiliate Muslims as such, will hear many arguments to that effect, and few opposing arguments, simply as a result of the initial distribution of positions within the group. If people are listening, they will have a stronger conviction, in the same direction from which they began, as a result of deliberation. The phenomenon is general. A group whose members tend to oppose affirmative action will hear a large number of arguments in favor of abolishing affirmative action, and a comparatively fewer number of arguments for retaining it. There is considerable empirical support for the view tha15t the argument pool has this kind of effect on individual views. 
The second mechanism has to do with social influence. The central idea here is that people have a certain conception of themselves and a corresponding sense of how they would like to be perceived by others. Most people like to think of themselves as not identical to but as different from others, but only in the right direction and to the right extent. If you think of yourself as the sort of person who opposes gun control more than most people do (because, hypothetically, you think that you are unusually disposed to reject liberal homilies), you might shift your position once you find yourself in a group that is very strongly opposed to gun control. If you stay where you were, you may seem more favorably disposed toward gun control than most group members, and this may be disconcerting, thus producing a shift. If you are ill-disposed toward the West, and believe that President Bush has imperialistic ambitions, and find yourself in a group with those same beliefs, you might well move toward a more extreme point, simply in order to maintain your preferred relationship to the views of others. Or if you believe that you have a comparatively favorable attitude toward affirmative action, discussion with a group whose members are at least as favorable as you are might well push you in the direction of greater enthusiasm for it. Having heard group members, you might move your stated position, simply in order to maintain a certain self-conception and reputation, as one who likes affirmative action a bit more than most people do. There is No. 2] evidence that social influence is an independent factor behind group polarization; consider in particular the fact that mere exposure to the views of others can have this effect, even without any discussion at all. 16 
There is another point, not stressed in social science research on group polarization, but much bearing on the general phenomenon and in particular on the nature and rise of terrorism. Many people, much of the time, lack full confidence in their views; such people offer a moderate version of their views, for fear of being marginalized or ostracized. Many other people have more confidence than they are willing to show, for fear of being proved foolish; such people moderate their views in public. In either case, group dynamics can push people toward a more extreme position. Moderate skepticism about the problem of global warming might turn into full-blown disbelief, if the moderate skeptic finds himself in a group of people who also tend toward skepticism. I believe that this phenomenon plays an important role in terrorist enclaves, which often involve young men who could not possibly maintain their position if not for the support and encouragement of like-minded others. I now turn to some details. 
III. TERRORIST LEADERS AS POLARIZATION ENTREPRENEURS Terrorist leaders act as polarization entrepreneurs. They create enclaves of like-minded people. They stifle dissenting views and do not tolerate internal disagreement. They take steps to ensure a high degree of internal solidarity. They restrict the relevant argument pool and take full advantage of reputational forces, above all by using the incentive of group approval. Terrorist acts themselves are motivated by these forces and incentives. Consider, for example, the following account: 
Terrorists do not even consider that they may be wrong and that others' views may have some merit... They attribute only evil motives to anyone outside their own group. The... common characteristic of the psychologically motivated terrorist is the pronounced need to belong to a group.... EXwPRENTAL Soc. PsYCHOL. 202 (1967). 
acceptance. 
Terrorist groups with strong internal motivations find it necessary to justify the group's existence continuously. A terrorist group must terrorize. As [sic] a minimum, it must commit violent acts to maintain group self-esteem and legitimacy. Thus, terrorists sometimes carry out attacks that are objectively nonproductive or even counterproductive to their announced goal.'7 
In fact, terrorist organizations impose psychological pressures to accelerate the movement in extreme directions. Here too group membership plays a key role: 
group dynamics among terrorists. They tend to demand unanimity and be intolerant of dissent. With the enemy clearly identified and unequivocally evil, pressure to escalate the frequency and intensity of operations is ever present. The need to belong to the group discourages resignations, and the fear of compromise disallows their acceptance. Compromise is rejected, and terrorist groups lean toward maximalist positions. . . . In societies in which people identify themselves in terms of group membership (family, clan, tribe), there may, be a willingness to self-sacrifice seldom seen elsewhere. 
Training routines specifically reinforce the basic message of solidarity amidst humiliation. Hitler similarly attempted to create group membership, and to fuel movements toward extremes, by stressing the suffering and the humiliation of the German people. This is a characteristic strategy of terrorists of all stripes, for humiliation fuels rage. "Many al-Qaida trainees saw videos.., daily as part of their training routine. Showing hundreds of hours of Muslims in dire straits -Palestinians... Bosnians... Chechens... Iraqi children- [was] all part of alQaida's induction strategy." In the particular context of Al Qaeda, there is a pervasive effort to link Muslims all over the globe, above all by emphasizing a shared identity, one that includes some and excludes others. Thus Osama bin Laden "appeals to a pervasive sense of humiliation and powerlessness in Islamic countries. Muslims are victims the world over... Bosnia, Somalia, Palestine, Chechnya, and... Saudi Arabia .... [HI]e makes the world • simple for pe.opl.e ws2h1o are otherwise confused, and gives them a sense of mission." Hence there are unmistakable cult-like features to the indoctrination effort: "[Tihe military training [in Al Qaeda camps] is accompanied by forceful religious indoctrination, with recruits being fed a stream of anti-western and 2b2eing incessantly reminded about their dutyptrooppaegrfaonrdma jihad." 
In addition, the Al Qaeda terrorists are taught to believe that they are not alone... but sacrificing themselves as part of a larger group for what they believe is the greater good. [The men are] recruited as teenagers, when self-esteem and separation from family are huge developmental issues. [The indoctrination] involves not only lessons in weaponry but an almost cult-like brainwashing over many months. Among Muslims, the regimen typically inclu92es extended periods of prayer and a distortion of the Koran. 
Intense connections are built into the structure: "The structure of Al Qaeda, an all-male enterprise... , appears to involve small groups of relatively young men who maintain strong bonds with each other, bonds whose intensity is dmriasmsiaotnisseadndanthdehdeaignhgteernoefdthbeyirtphreojseecctrse.cWy"4 demanded by their 
This discussion, brief as it is, should be sufficient to show the central role of group dynamics in producing terrorists, and indeed in answering the question "why they hate us." Terrorists are made, not born. More particularly, terrorists are made through emphatically social processes. Things could easily be otherwise. With respect to social concern with risks, it is possible to imagine multiple equilibria- different social situations, all of them stable, in which people are concerned with some risks but not others.25 People in France are not much concerned about nuclear power, which frightens many Americans; people in America are not much concerned about genetically engineered food, which frightens Europeans. Timur Kuran has shown that "ethnification" -close identification with one's ethnic group, in a way that involves hatred of others-is not a matter of history but of current social processes, closely akin to those discussed here. With relatively small changes, a nation that suffers from intense ethnic antagonism could be free from that scourge. So too, I am suggesting, for terrorism. If enclaves of like-minded and susceptible people are an indispensable breeding ground for terrorism, then it is easy to imagine a situation in which nations, not radically different from the way they are today, could be mostly free from terrorist threats. 
What are the lessons for policy and for law? The simplest and most important is that if a nation aims to prevent terrorist activities, a good strategy is to prevent the rise of enclaves of like-minded people. Many of those who become involved in terrorist activities could end up doing something else with their lives. Their interest in terrorism comes, in many cases, from an identifiable set of social mechanisms (generally from particular associations). If the relevant associations can be disrupted, terrorism is far less likely to arise. 
The second lesson has to do with the idea of "political correctness." That idea is far more interesting than it seems. It is true that some groups of left-leaning intellectuals push one another to extremes, and tow a kind of party line, in part through a limited argument pool, and in part through imposing reputational sanctions on those who disagree, or even ostracizing them. But political correctness is hardly limited to left-leaning intellectuals. It plays a role in groups of all kinds. In its most dangerous forms, it is a critical part of groups that are prone to violence and terrorism, simply because such groups stifle dissent. 
The third lesson has to do with the system of checks and balances and even constitutional design. Citizens in democratic nations are hardly immune from the forces discussed here. Within legislatures, civic organizations, and even courts, group polarization might well occur. Nor is this necessarily bad. A movement in a more extreme direction might well be a movement in a better direction. But serious problems can arise when extremism is a product of the mechanisms discussed here, and not of learning through the exchange of diverse opinions. The institutions of checks and balances can be understood as a safeguard against group polarization, simply because those institutions ensure that like-minded people, operating within a single part of government, will not be able to move governmental power in their preferred direction. Consider, for example, the idea of bicameralism and the power of the president to veto legislation; through these routes, it is possible to reduce the risk that government policy will be a product of the forces I have discussed. 
The fourth lesson has to do with the treatment of conspiracy, including but not limited to terrorist conspiracies. Why does the law punish conspiracy as a separate offense, independent of the underlying "substantive" crime? It is tempting to think that this kind of "doubling up" is indefensible, a form of overkill. But if the act of conspiring leads people moderately disposed toward criminal behavior to be more than moderately disposed, precisely because they are conspiring together, it makes sense, on grounds of deterrence, to impose independent penalties. Some courts have come close to recognizing this point.27 The key point is that the act of conspiracy has an independent effect, that of moving people in more extreme directions. The point holds for terrorists as well as for everyone else. 
The discussion also offers some lessons about freedom of association in general, showing some of its many complexities. Associational freedom is of course an indispensable part of democracy. No one should deny that point. But when associational freedom is ensured, group polarization will ... decreases the probability that the individuals will depart from their path of criminality."). I am grateful to Dan Kahan for helpful discussion. inevitably ensue, as people sort themselves into groups that seem congenial. From the standpoint of liberty, this is extremely important. It is also valuable from the standpoint of democracy, not least because any society's "argument pool" will be expanded by a wide variety of deliberating groups. If groups move to extremes, then social fragmentation may be desirable insofar as it ensures that society as a whole will hear a wide range of positions and points of view. On the other hand, freedom of association can increase the risk of social fragmentation, and social antagonisms, potentially even violence, can result. 
Almost all of the time, the risk is worth tolerating. But when we are dealing with conspiracies to kill American citizens, freedom of association is literally dangerous. Hatred itself is hardly against the law. By itself it is no reason for war. But when hatred is a product of the social forces outlined here, and when it makes terrorism possible, there is every reason to disrupt associations that drive people to violent acts. The line between associational freedom and conspiracy is not always crisp and certain. But in the cases I am emphasizing, there is no real puzzle. When they hate us, it is not a product of deprivation, individual rage, or religiously grounded predisposition; it is a result of social forces and, much of the time, self-conscious conspiracies to fuel hatred. A nation that seeks to win a war against terrorism must try to disrupt those conspiracies. 
