. JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. The JBHE Foundation, Inc is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education. 
. 
This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
by Cass R. Sunstein Editor's Note: A major constitutional scholar contends that conservatives on the Court failed to see that affirmative action in higher education is an important and constitutionally protected institutional liberty. 
CassR. Sulnstsetienin N Grutterv. Bollingert,he SupremeCourtupheldan affirmativeaction programat the University of 
MichiganLaw School. In Gratzv. Bollinger,the SupremeCourtstruckdown the undergraduate affirmativaectionprogramatthesameuniversity. 
I believethatGrutterwascorrectlydecided andthatGratzwasabigmistakeT.hereason haseverythingto do withtheimportancoef judicialrestrain-t anideathatshouldhave specialpowerin the contextof educational policy,whichoughtto be setby educatorsn, ot judges.Affirmativeactionmay or may not be a goodidea,buttheConstitutiondoesnotforbid it.Federajludgesshouldalloweducationainlstitutions,subjectas theyareto politicalconstraintst,o reject or embraceaffirmativaectionas they see fit. It is ironic indeedthatconservativesw, ho havebeenrightlyskeptical ofjudicialactivismn,owembraceanextremeformofjudicialactivismin theirattackon affirmativaection. "Grutterwas correctly decided. But the Gratz decision was a big mistake." 
Tounderstanmdy position,we needto backup a bit.In highereducationt,he basic constitutionaflrameworkwas establishedin thefamousBakkecase,decidedin 1978.The Court'srulingwas set out by JusticeLewisPowell,who brokea tie betweenfourjusticeswho wantedto require color-blindnesasndfourjusticeswhowouldhavepermitted collegesanduniversitieas greatdealof roomto maneuver in their affirmativeactionprogramsJ.usticePowell acknowledgedthatracialdiversitywas a legitimateandeven compellinginterestfor schoolsof highereducationto purCass R. Sunsteinis KarlN. Llewellyn DistinguishedService Professorof Jurisprudenceatthe Universityof ChicagoSchool of Law.His mostrecent book is WhySocieties Need Dissent (HarvardUniversityPress). sue.He pointedto theneedforcourtsto respectreasonable choicesby educatorsB.uthe insistedthatdiversitycould, andmust,be achievedthroughmethodsthatwereflexi 
ble andthatavoidedracialrigidityI.n his view,a I_/^ quotasystemwasconstitutionalluynacceptable. 
Ontheotherhand,a universitycouldconsider race "as a factor"alongsideother factors. _{H^ ~Hencecollegesanduniversitiecsouldgive a 
to African-Americacnandidate-s so l 1_ Iboost llongas every applicantreceivedindividual consideration. 
For decades,then, the law was reasonably clear.Quotasystemswouldbe struckdown,but collegesanduniversitiecsouldconsiderraceas a plus.The hardquestionsaroseonly whena programdidnotclearlyfallwithinone of JusticePowell's twocategories. 
Inthelastdecadeandmore,howevert,heSupremeCourt has been increasinglyskepticalof affirmativaectionprograms,andit hasstruckdowna numberof thoseprograms. 
Therearemanyironieshere,especiallybecausetheattack on affirmativaectionhasbeenledby thoseordinarilcyharacterizedas conservativesT. he two leadingconservatives ontheCourtJ,usticesAntoninScaliaandClarenceThomas, claimtobe committe dto "originalisma"sa methodof constitutionailnterpretationF.ororiginalistst,he meaningof the Constitutio nis settledby askingwhatthe document meantwhenit was originallyratifiedA.ndto theircredit, "Affirmativeaction was accepted by those who ratified the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment." JusticesScaliaandThomasdo usuallypracticethemethod thattheypreach.But in the contextof affirmativaection, originalismapparentlgyoesdownthedrainA. greatdealof historicawlorksuggeststhataffirmativaectionwasaccept80 AUTUMN 2003 
AFFIRMATIVAECTION IN HIGHEREDUCATION:WHYGRUTTERWAS CORRECTLYDECIDED ed by those who ratifiedthe equal protectionclause.*In the aftermath of the CivilWar,Congressengaged | in numerousrace-consciouesfforts, singlingout AfricanAmericansfor specialhelp. Perhapsthe historical workis mistakenb; utJusticesScalia andThomashavenotevenbothered to investigateit. i 
In anycase manymembersof the currenCtourtclaimto be committed to judicial restraint.Those who . believeinjudicialrestrainatrereluc- Itantto disturbthe practicesof state and local authoritiesunless the Constitutiocnlearlyrequiresthemto i do so. Butin thecontextof affirmative action, the Courthas shown little reluctanceto forbidstates and localities from doing what they wouldlike to do. In the contextof -j | ^ , < \ .i . affirmative action, restraint, along I0[ with originalism,has been aban- doned. (Note that the Constitution doesnotapplyto theactsof private universitiesw,hicharegovernedby civil rightslawsinstead;theConsti- ~ tutionis applicableonly to public institutionasndpublicuniversities.) 1 . 
Thusthe stagewas set for Grutter and Gratz, the Court's first real encounterwithaffirmativaectionin highereducationsince Bakke.Essentiallythe Courtreaffirmedthe line drawnby JusticePowell:flexibleaffirmativeaction programasrepermissibleb,utrigidonesarenot.InGrutter, theCourtupheldthelawschool'sprogramc,oncludingthat it was sufficientlyflexible.The Universityof Michigan LawSchoolusedraceasa "plus"butitsprogramwas"narrowlytailored,i"n thesensethatthelawschoolimposedno quota,reservedno places,andinsteadensuredindividualizedconsideratioonf everyapplicantW.ritingfortheCourt, *See Jed Rubenfeld, "AffirmativeAction," 107 Yale L.H.J. 427, 430-32 (1997); EricSchnapper,"AffirmativeAction andthe LegislativeHistoryof the FourteenthAmendment,"71 Va.L. Rev. 753 (1985). 
K \ 
JusticeSandraDay O'Connorsaidthat"auniversity's admissionsprogrammustremainflexibleenoughto ensurethateachapplicanits evaluatedas anindividualandnotin a waythatmakesanapplicant'rsace orethnicitythedefiningfeatureof hisapplication." The law schoolhadno mechanicaolr predetermined system of diversity"bonuses,"and it considereda widerangeof qualitiesandexperiencesin additionto race.Forthesereasons, 
its programwas acceptableT.rue,the law i{ schoolsoughttoobtaina "criticamlass"of 
AfricanAmericans,but it pursuedthis '-g "*? "'; 
..V?T' * . ;.* .:-ht0*, 
.* '3/ X 
WiL\^K i d^ 
' r.K-'r o^' ,& 
goal withoutcompromisingits commit1 \ 7^mentto giveindividualizecdonsiderationto everyapplicant. 
The principal dissenting opinionin Gruttercame from '4^7 J/ 
L9^, ~ ^JusticeClarence Thomas. His opinionwas exceptionallyeloquent,not least becauseof its , insistenceon the moralimporg'o ' ' " tance of considering people's ' 'v merits, not their skin color. But - JusticeThomas' eloquent words wbouldrbe far moreconvincing \ from a politician than from a judge who is committed to originalism and judicial restraint. Justice Thomas stressesthe views of only ' O , erickDouglass.Ofcourse Douglass was a great man,andhis views are entitledto greatrespectB.utto saytheleast,Douglasswas notanauthorof theFourteentAhmendmenotf theConstitution;andforanoriginalista,sJusticeThomaspurporttso be,FrederickDouglassshouldhavelittleauthority. 
Things are worse still. In his Grutterdissent,Justice Thomascalls for an extraordinareyxercise in judicial activism- simplybecausehis color-blindnespsrinciple o wouldinvalidatethevoluntarypracticesof countlessedu- cc cationailnstitutionisnnumeroustatesandlocalitiesW.orst of all,JusticeThomasdoesnotdefendhis color-blindness-a0) principlebyreferencetohistorye,venthougha greatdealof co AUTUMN 2003 Conservative Panel Attacks the GrufterDecision onservativesa,lmostwithoutexception,view Justice 
O'Connor'srecentrulingupholdingthe affirmative actionpolicies at the Universityof MichiganSchool of Lawas a profoundsubversionof theconstitutionaolrderof theUnitedStates. 
In a symposiumentitled"Hasthe SupremeCourtGone TooFar?"appearingin the Octoberissue of the conservativejournalCommentaryf,ormerSupremeCourtnominee RobertH. Borkwrites:"Judiciailnventionof new andpreviously unheard-ofrightsacceleratedover the past halfcenturyand has now reachedwarp speed. The list of activistdecisionsconstitutionalizintghe left-liberaclultural agendais lengthy." 
Referringto the Grutterruling,RobertL. Bartley,now columnistfor The WallStreetJournal,wrotethatJustice O'Connor'sstanceis "ludicrous.B"artleygoes on to concludethattheCourt'smajorityadmitsthat"weareissuing a decision in which we understandthe equal protection clauseof theFourteenthAmendmenptrohibitsthepolicies we herebysanctionB.utbecauseof ourviewof thecurrent socialsituationt,hispartof theConstitutio nis herebysuspended.If I had investedmy life in the law,I wouldfind this,if nothorrifyinga,tleastdisgusting." historicalscholarshipsuggests thatthe framersandratifiers of the FourteenthAmendment did not mean to condemn effortsto assistAfricanAmericansas such. JusticeThomas and his fellow dissenters are certainlyentitled to say that affirmativeaction is bad policy. But they should not read theirown views into the Constitution.The Court'smajority was correct,in Grutter,to allow the law school to continue with its program. "What'swrong with explicitness? Whydoes the Constitution requireadmissions offices to hide the ball?" 
In Gratz,the Courtsaidthatthe undergraduatperogramat the Universityof Michigan was invalidbecause it was too inflexible. Underthatprogram,applicantswere given specified "points"toward admission. A student with 100-150 points would definitely be admitted; those with 75-99 remainedin contention.Points could be awardedbased on standardizedtest scores, high school grades, alumni relationship,personalessay, strengthof high school, and more. 82 An applicantwho came from an underrepresentedminority group would be awarded 20 points toward admission. 
Nonminoritystudentswould receive 20 points for athletic ability, socioeconomic disadvantage, or attendance at a socioeconomically disadvantagedhigh school. Applicants would also receive 10 points for being residents of Michigan,5 for leadershipand service, 5 for artistictalent, and so on. "Whatthe Court is requiring is a costly system of individual discretion in which race does count as a factor, but in which the university is not permitted to be candid, even to itself, about how much of a factor it is." 
The Court'smajorityobjectedthatthis point system failed to provide individualizedconsiderationto each applicant. 
Whether or not the system was a quota, the Court complained,it "automaticallydistributes20 points to every single applicantfrom"a minoritygroup.In the Court'sview, this automaticdistributionof points has the effect of making the factor of race a decisive one "for virtually every minimally qualifiedunderrepresentedminorityapplicant." The Universityof Michigan contendedthatbecause of the sheer volume of applications,individualizedconsideration of each applicantwould be impractical.To this the Court respondeddismissively: "Thefact thatthe implementation of a programcapableof providingindividualizedconsiderationmight presentadministrativechallengesdoes not renderconstitutionalan otherwiseproblematicsystem." 
I believethattheoutcomein Gratzis mostunfortunateT. he initial problem is that in principlethe programupheld in Grutteris no more objectionablethanthe one in Gratz.The majordistinctionis thattheundergraduatseystemused numbers, ratherthan a system of individualdiscretion.But this shouldnot make a constitutionaldifference.In tryingto get minoritystudents,thelaw schoolwas probablyas aggressive as the undergraduatperogramwas. The law school avoided numbers,to be sure;butits admissionsofficersusedthepractical equivalentof numbersin exercisingtheirdiscretionto ensurethatenoughminoritystudentswere able to attendits law school.The SupremeCourtfoundit crucialthatthe law school didnot makeexplicitthe weightthatit gave to minority applicants,whereas the undergraduateprogramdid so. 
But what's wrong with explicitness? Why does the Constitutionrequireadmissionsoffices to hide the ball? 
AUTUMN 2003 
AFFIRMATIVAECTION IN HIGHEREDUCATION:WHYGRUTTERWASCORRECTLYDECIDED Perhapsthe Courtthoughtthatthe law schoolgaveless weighttoracethantheundergraduastcehooldid- thatthe law schoolgavethe equivalenotf 5 pointsratherthan20. 
Butthereis no evidencethatthisis true,andin anycasethe Courtseemstobeobjectingtoanysystemof pointsassuch. 
WhattheCourtis thereforerequiringis a morecostlysystemof individuadliscretionin whichracedoescountas a factorb,utinwhichtheuniversityis notpermittedtobecandid,eventoitself,abouthowmuchof a factorit is. Nothing in theConstitutiojnustifiesthispeculiarrule. 
ButtheproblemgoesmuchdeeperA.cademicinstitutions havestrongclaimsto self-rule- to befreefromclosejudicial oversighta,t leastwherethe Constitutionis not clear. 
Indeedt,heprotectionof academicinstitutioniss connected withthefreespeechprincipleitself(andfederalcourtshave on occasionstressedtheconnection)O.ntheissueof racial preferenceisn highereducationh, undredosfAmericanuniversitieshaveengagedin affirmativaectionas partof their traditionarlightto determinewhattheywill teach,whom theywill admitforinstructiona,ndwhatkindof classroom suitspedagogicaland socialneeds.Racialpreferencesin highereducationarenot a new experimentT.he nation's colleges and universitieshave been doing this for three decades.In thisrespect,the Universityof Michigancases are very differentfromthe othercases wherethe courts havebannedracialpreference-s say,consideringracein allocationof publiccontracts. "Solongas admissionsofficesallow individualized considerationand avoidrigidity,theycan takestepsto promotea diverseeducationalsetting." 
Universitielsegitimatelyseek diversityof manydifferent kinds.Theyhavemanydifferenwtaysof attemptintgo producediversityS.omego thepathof theUniversityof Michigan Law School;otherstry the undergraduapterogram's approacho;therroutesareavailableI.n ourfederalsystem, one that is committedto decentralizationd,ifferentapproacheasreentirelypermissibleN. owof coursetheConstitutionforbidssomeimaginableapproachebsy educational institutionIst.wouldnotbeconstitutionalalycceptablteoput a ceilingon thenumberof Catholicso, r to refuseto admit HispanicosrAfricanAmericanso,rto saythata schoolmay nothavemorethan10percenAtsians.Butallof theseprinciplescomefromtheunmistakabmleeaningof theequalproAffirmativAectionin HigherEducation: 
HeSawtheResultThreeYearsAgo _Pi^ '"TheriseampleevidencethatJusticeSandra DayO'Connoars,wellasseveraolthermembersofthepresenCt ourth,asalreadayccepted thatthesearchforraciadliversitaymongstudents is a compellinginterestthat survives stricstcrutiny." - RonaldDworkinS,ommePrrofessoorf LawandPhilosophy at NewYorkUniversityw, ritingin "AffirmatiAvection:Is It 
Fair?J"BHEN,umbe2r8,Summe2r000,p.79. tectionclauseoftheFourteentAhmendmenTt.heprinciploef color-blindneisssnotpartof thatunmistakabmleeaningO.n thecontrar yit,is a distortioonf it,usinga provisionthatwas meantto eliminatethe social subordinatioonf African 
Letme concludewithtwo cautionarynotes.First,Gratz was incorrectb,utit is not a disasterB.ecauseof Grutter, collegesanduniversitiecsando a greatdealto ensurethat theyarenotall white.So longas admissionsofficesallow individualizedconsiderationand avoidrigidity,they can takestepstopromotea diverseeducationasletting.Second, myobjectiontso Gratzarenotmeanttoexpressapprovaolf anyorall stepsthatgo by thenameof "affirmativaection." Americansreasonablydisagreeaboutthattopic- about thesenseandlegitimacyof race-consciouesffortsto assist membersof traditionalldyisadvantagegdroups.In many settings,includingmanyeducationaslettings,color-blindness is the mostappealingprincipleI.n principleI, think thatJusticeThomas'argumenthsaveconsiderablfeorce. 
WhatI am urginghereis thatthese difficultquestions shouldnot be decidedby federaljudges.The nationhas longbeenin themidstof anintensedisputeaboutaffirmative actionprogramsS.ensiblepeoplehavedifferentperspectives.Sensibleeducationailnstitutionshave different practicesT. heCourtshouldbefaultedforitsrulingin Gratz - forits aggressivenesisn usingtheConstitutiotno forbid a reasonablaepproachby oneof thenation'sgreatuniversities.TheCourtshouldbe praisedforitsrestrainitn Grutter - foritswillingnessto allowthenation'scollegesanduniversitiesto takesteps,if they choose,to ensurethatthe nation'sclassroomsarenotallwhite. 
IJBHEI 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 198 
(2D SERIES) Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: 
A Preliminary Investigation Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman 
Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: 
A Preliminary Investigation Cass R. Sunstein,* David Schkade,** and Lisa Michelle Ellman*** 
For many decades, the United States has been conducting an extraordinary natural experiment: Randomly assigned three-judge panels on courts of appeals produce extensive evidence of the effect of judicial ideology on judges’ votes. If the political party of the appointing president is treated as a rough proxy for ideology, then it becomes possible to test three hypotheses: (a) a judge’s votes, in ideologically contested areas, can be predicted by the party of the appointing president; (b) a judge’s ideological tendency, in such areas, will be amplified if the panel has two other judges appointed by an appointing president of the same political party; and (c) a judge’s ideological tendency, in such areas, will be dampened if the panel has no other judge appointed by an appointing president of the same political party. All three hypotheses are confirmed in many areas, including affirmative action, campaign finance, sex discrimination, sexual harassment, piercing the corporate veil, disability discrimination, race discrimination, and review of environmental regulations. An important implication is that panel composition has a strong effect on likely outcomes, thus creating extremely serious problems for the rule of law. Taken as a whole, the evidence suggests that judges frequently issue collegial concurrences, that is, concurrences produced by the unanimous views of the other judges on the panel, and that judges are subject to group polarization, by which groups of like-minded people go to extremes. Notably, all three hypotheses are rejected in the areas of federalism, criminal appeals, and takings of private property, because Republican and Democratic appointees vote essentially alike. In the areas of abortion and capital punishment, the first hypothesis is confirmed, but the second and third are rejected, because judges vote their convictions, and are not affected by the composition of the panel. Disaggregating the data by circuit allows courts of appeals to be ranked along an ideological spectrum; it also shows striking differences between Republican appointees and Democratic appointees on different circuits. Normative implications are briefly explored. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. ** Herbert D. Kelleher Regents Professor of Business, University of Texas, Austin. *** Third-year law student, University of Chicago. We are grateful to comments from Matthew Adler, Frank H. Easterbrook, Robert Hahn, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eric A. Posner, Richard A. Posner, and Richard Thaler. We are also grateful to participants in workshops at the University of Chicago Law School and the University of Chicago Business School. Caryn Campbell provided superb research assistance. 
Over many decades, the United States has been conducting an extraordinary natural experiment with respect to the performance of federal judges. The experiment involves the relationship between political ideology2 and judicial decisions. Many people believe that political ideology should not and generally does not affect legal judgments,3 and this belief contains some truth. Frequently the law is clear and judges should and will simply implement it, whatever their political commitments. But what happens when the law is unclear? What role does ideology play then? 
It is extremely difficult to investigate these questions directly. But it is possible to identify a proxy for political ideology: The political affiliation of the appointing president. Presidents are frequently interested in ensuring that judicial appointees are of a certain stripe. A Democratic president is unlikely to want to appoint judges who will seek to overrule Roe v. Wade4 and strike down affirmative action programs. A Republican president is unlikely to want to appoint judges who will understand the Constitution to require states to recognize same-sex marriages. It is reasonable to hypothesize that as a statistical regularity, judges appointed by Republican presidents (hereinafter described, for ease of exposition, as Republican appointees) will be more conservative than judges appointed by Democratic presidents (Democratic appointees, as we shall henceforth call them). But is this hypothesis true? When is it true, and to what degree is it true? 
More subtly, we might speculate that federal judges are subject to panel effects – that on a three-judge panel, a judge’s likely vote is affected by whether she is sitting with no, one, or two judges appointed by presidents of the same political party. On this view, a Republican appointee, sitting with two Democratic appointees, is more likely to vote as Democratic appointees typically do, whereas a Democratic appointee, sitting with two Republican appointees, is more likely to vote as Republican appointees typically do. But is this in fact the usual pattern? The invariable one? Since judges in a given circuit are assigned to panels (and therefore to cases) randomly, the existence of a large data set allows these issues to be investigated empirically. 
In this Essay, we examine a subset of possible case types, focusing on a number of controversial issues that seemed especially likely to reveal divisions between Republican and Democratic appointees. In brief, we explore cases involving abortion, affirmative action, campaign finance, capital punishment, commerce clause challenges to congressional enactments, the contracts clause, criminal appeals, disability discrimination, industry challenges to environmental regulation, piercing the corporate veil, race discrimination, sex discrimination, and claimed takings of private property without just compensation. We offer a more detailed description of our subjects and methods below. 
More specifically, the central purpose of this Essay is to examine three central 2 In using this term, we do not intend to venture anything especially controversial about the actual or appropriate grounds of judicial decisions. As will be clear, we measure “ideology” by the political affiliation of the appointing president. 3 See Jeffrey Rosen, Obstruction of Judges, New York Times Magazine, August 11, 2002, at 38. 4 410 U.S. 113 (1973). appointees vote very differently from Democratic appointees. Such issues include many of those just mentioned, such as affirmation action, campaign finance, federalism, the rights of criminal defendants, sex discrimination, piercing the corporate veil, racial discrimination, property rights, capital punishment, disability discrimination, sexual harassment, and abortion. likely to be dampened if she is sitting with two judges from a different political party. For example, a Democratic appointee should be less likely to vote in a stereotypically liberal fashion5 if accompanied by two Republican appointees, and a Republican appointee should be less likely to vote in a stereotypically conservative fashion if accompanied by two Democratic appointees. likely to be amplified if she is sitting with two judges from the same political party. A Democratic appointee should show an increased tendency to vote in a stereotypically liberal fashion if accompanied by two Democratic appointees, and a Republican appointee should be more likely to vote in a stereotypically conservative fashion if accompanied by two Republican appointees. 
We find that in numerous areas of the law, all three hypotheses are strongly confirmed. Each finds support in federal cases involving campaign finance, affirmative action, sex discrimination, sexual harassment, piercing the corporate veil, racial discrimination, disability discrimination, contract clause violations, and review of environmental regulations. In such cases, the aggregate data strongly confirm all three hypotheses. Indeed, we find many extreme cases of ideological dampening, which we might call leveling effects, in which party differences are wiped out. With leveling effects, Democratic appointees, when sitting with two Republican appointees, are as likely to vote in the stereotypically conservative fashion as are Republican appointees, when sitting with two Democratic appointees. We also find strong amplification effects, such that if the data set in the relevant cases is taken as a whole, Democratic appointees, sitting with two Democratic appointees, are about twice as likely to vote in the stereotypically liberal fashion as are Republican appointees, sitting with two Republican appointees – a far larger disparity than the disparity between Democratic and Republican votes when either is sitting with one Democratic appointee and one Republican appointee. In most of the areas investigated here, the political party of the appointing president is a fairly good predictor of how an individual judge will vote. But in those same areas, the political party of the president who appointed the other two judges on the panel is at least as good a predictor of how individual judges will vote. All in all, 5 We use this phrase throughout for the purpose of simplicity. Of course, no sensible stereotype predicts that Republican appointees will always vote against sex discrimination plaintiffs or in favor of challenges to affirmative action programs. Democratic appointees show somewhat greater susceptibility to panel effects than do Republican appointees. 
But there are noteworthy counterexamples. In three important areas, ideology does not predict judicial votes, and hence all three hypotheses are refuted. This is the pattern in criminal appeals, takings claims, and commerce clause challenges to congressional enactments. And in two areas, the first hypothesis is supported, but the second and third hypotheses are refuted. These two areas are abortion and capital punishment. In these areas, judges apparently vote their convictions, and are not affected by panel composition. 
We offer a number of other findings. We show that variation in panel composition leads to dramatically different outcomes, in a way that creates serious problem for the rule of law. In the cases we analyze, a panel composed of three Democratic appointees issues a liberal ruling 61% of the time, whereas a panel composed of three Republican appointees issues a liberal ruling only 34% of the time. A panel composed of two Republican appointees and one Democrat issues a liberal ruling 39% of the time; a panel composed of two Democratic appointees and one Republican does so 50% of the time. These differences do not show that the likely result is foreordained by the composition of the panel. But the plaintiff’s chances, in the cases we examine, are much affected by the luck of the draw. One of the noteworthy points about these numbers is that a Democratic majority, or a Republican majority, has the votes to do what it wishes. Apparently a large disciplining effect comes from the presence of a single panelist from another party. Hence all-Republican panels show far more conservative patterns than majority Republican panels, and all-Democratic panels show far more liberal patterns than majority Democratic panels. 
Disaggregating our data, we provide evidence of how ideology varies by circuit, showing that the Ninth and Second Circuits are the most liberal, while the Fifth and Seventh are the most conservative. We also find striking similarities across circuits. In all circuits, Democratic appointees are more likely than Republican appointees to vote in a stereotypically liberal direction, and both party and panel effects are present. But in every circuit, in terms of likely vote, a judge’s party makes no more difference than whether a judge is accompanied by two Democratic appointees or two Republican appointees. 
Our main goal in this essay is simply to present and to analyze the data – to show the extent to which the three hypotheses find vindication.6 But we also aim to give some explanation for our findings and to relate them to some continuing debates about the role of ideology on federal panels. Our data do not reveal whether ideological dampening is a product of persuasion or a form of collegiality. If Republican appointees show a liberal pattern of votes when accompanied by two Democratic appointees, it might be because they are convinced by their colleagues. Alternatively, they might suppress their private 6 Some of the findings here are previewed, without statistical analysis, in Cass R. Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent (2003). doubts and accept the majority’s view. In any case, it is reasonable to say that the data show the pervasiveness of the collegial concurrence: a concurrence by a judge who signs the panel’s opinion either because he is persuaded by the shared opinion of the two other judges on the panel or because it is not worthwhile, all things considered, to dissent. The collegial concurrence can be taken as an example, in the unlikely setting of judicial panels, of responsiveness to conformity pressures.7 These pressures make it more likely that people will end up silencing themselves, or even publicly agreeing with a majority position, simply because they would otherwise be isolated in their disagreement. 
We also find evidence within the federal judiciary of group polarization, by which like-minded people end up in a more extreme position in accordance with their predeliberation views.8 If all-Republican panels are overwhelmingly likely to strike down campaign finance regulation, and if all-Democratic panels are overwhelmingly likely to uphold affirmative action programs, group polarization is likely to be a reason. Finally, we offer indirect evidence of a whistleblower effect: A single judge from another party, while likely to be affected by the fact that he is isolated, might also influence other judges on the panel, at least where the panel would otherwise fail to follow existing law.9 
We believe that our findings are of considerable interest in themselves. They also reveal much about human behavior in many contexts. A great deal of social science evidence shows conformity effects: When people are confronted with the views of unanimous others, they tend to yield.10 Sometimes they yield because they believe that unanimous others cannot be wrong; sometimes they yield because it is not worthwhile to dissent in public.11 A great deal of social science evidence also shows that like-minded people tend to go to extremes.12 In the real world, this hypothesis is extremely hard to test in light of the range of confounding variables. But our data provide strong evidence that judges who are like-minded also go to extremes, in the sense that the probability that a judge will vote in one or another direction is increased by the presence of judges appointed by the president of the same political party. In short, we claim to show both strong conformity effects and group polarization within federal courts of appeals. If these effects can be shown there, then they are likely to be found in many diverse contexts. 
In fact, the presence of such effects raises doubts about what is probably the most influential method for explaining judicial voting: the “attitudinal model.”13 According to the attitudinal model, judges have certain “attitudes” toward areas of the law, and these 7 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995). 8 See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating About Dollars, 100 Colum. L. Rev. 1139 (2001); Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition (1985); Cass R. Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent (2003). 9 See Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine, 107 Yale L.J. 2155 (1998). 10 See id. 11 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 12 Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition 203-226 (1985). 13 See Jeffrey Segal and James Spaeth, The Supreme Court and the Attitudinal Model Revisited (2002). attitudes are good predictors of judicial votes in difficult cases.14 Insofar as party effects are present, our findings are broadly supportive of this idea. But the attitudinal model does not come to terms with panel effects, which can both dampen and amplify the tendencies to which judicial “attitudes” give rise. Since panel effects are generally as large as party effects, and sometimes even larger, the attitudinal model misses a crucial factor behind judicial votes. 
A disclaimer: We have collected a great deal of data, but our subtitle – a preliminary investigation – should be taken very seriously. The federal reporters offer an astonishingly large data set about judicial votes, including over two hundred years of votes ranging over countless substantive areas. Our own investigation is limited to several areas that, by general agreement, are ideologically contested, so much so as to produce possible disagreements in the cases that find their way to the courts of appeals.15 Of course it would be extremely interesting to know much more.16 Might ideological voting and panel effects be found in apparently nonideological cases, involving, for example, bankruptcy, torts, and civil procedure? What about the important areas of antitrust and labor law? How do the three hypotheses fare in the early part of the twentieth century, when federal courts were confronting the regulatory state? In cases involving minimum wage and maximum hour laws, did Republican appointees differ from Democratic appointees, and were panel effects also significant? Do the hypotheses hold in the segregation cases of the 1960s and 1970s? In the fullness of time, it should be possible to use the techniques discussed here to test a wide range of hypothesis about judicial voting patterns. One of our central goals is to provide a method for future analysis, a method that can be used in countless contexts. 14 See id. We oversimplify a complex account. 15 Note that the disciplining effect of existing law will be most constraining in disputes that never find their way to litigation; in such cases, everyone agrees what the law is, and it is not worthwhile to test that question. In disputes that are not litigated, it is safe to say that Republican appointees and Democratic appointees would agree almost all of the time. The doctrine should be expected to impose less discipline in cases that go to trial but that are not appealed; the decision to appeal suggests a degree of indeterminacy. Hence we are considering cases that are not only contested ideologically, but that also involve a sufficient lack of clarity in the law as to make it worthwhile to challenge a lower court ruling. Of course the highest degree of indeterminacy can be found in cases that are litigated to the Supreme Court. In the areas in which we find no effects from ideology – criminal appeals, takings, and federalism – such effects may nonetheless be found at the Supreme Court level. 16 There is a sparse literature on panel effects. See Donald Songer, Consensual and Nonconsensual Decisions in Unanimous Opinions of the United States Courts of Appeals, 26 Amer. J. of Pol. Sci. 225-239 (1982); Burton Atkins and Justin Green, Consensus on the United States Courts of Appeals: Illusion or Reality? 20 Amer. J. of Pol. Sci.735-748 (1976); Burton Atkins, Judicial Behavior and Tendencies in a Three Member Small Group: A Case Study of Dissent Behavior on the U.S. Court of Appeals, 54 Social Science Quarterly 41 (1973); Sheldon Goldman, Conflict and Consensus in the United States Courts of Appeals, 1968 Wisconsin Law Review 461-482. We have found especially valuable Cross and Tiller, supra, and Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit, 83 Va. L. Rev. 1717 (1997). On partisan voting, see id.; see also Donald Songer et al., Continuity and Change on the United States Courts of Appeals (2000); Davin Klein, Making Law in the United States Courts of Appeals (2002). A helpful overview of party effects is Daniel R. Pinello, Linking Party to Judicial Ideology in American Courts: A Meta-analysis, 20 Justice System J. 219 (1999). 
This essay is organized as follows. Part II offers the basic data, testing the three hypotheses in a number of areas. Part III disaggregates the data by exploring circuit results. Part IV speculates about the reasons for the various findings, with special attention to collegial concurrences, group polarization, and whistleblower effects. Part V investigates some normative issues. 
We examined a total of 4,488 published panel decisions, and the 13,464 associated individual judge’s votes, in the areas of abortion,17 capital punishment,18 Americans with Disabilities Act,19 criminal appeals,20 takings,21 contracts clause,22 affirmative action,23 Title VII race discrimination cases brought by African-American 17 We assembled this sample of abortion cases by searching Lexis for “core-terms (abortion) and date aft 1982 and constitutional” and “abortion and constitution!”. These cases generally presented challenges to statutes and policies that would infringe on a woman’s right to choose, or challenges to the constitutionality of anti-protesting injunctions. Because plaintiffs differed between the cases, outcomes were coded as prolife or pro-choice; if a judge voted at all to support the pro-life position then it was counted as a pro-life vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/82 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 101 cases. 18 We assembled this sample of capital punishment cases by searching Lexis for “capital punishment.” If a judge voted to grant the defendant any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-defendant vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 181 cases. 19 We assembled this sample of disability cases by searching Lexis for “Americans with Disabilities Act.” If a judge voted to grant the plaintiff any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/98 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 682 cases. 20 We assembled this sample of criminal cases from the D.C. Circuit, the Third Circuit, and the Fourth Circuit by searching http://www.ll.georgetown.edu/federal/judicial/cadc.cfm, http://vls.law.vill.edu/Locator/3/, and http://www.law.emory.edu/4circuit/2nd-idx.html, for cases with “United States” in title. Government appeals and civil disputes were disregarded. If a judge voted to grant the defendant any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-defendant vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 1176 cases. 21 We assembled this sample of takings cases by shepardizing on Lexis Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104 (1978); Keystone Bituminous Coal Assn. v. DeBenedictis, 480 U.S. 470 (1987); Nollan v. California Coastal Commission, 483 U.S. 825 (1987); and Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992). If a judge voted to grant the party alleging a violation of the takings clause any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 06/26/78 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 215 cases. 22 We assembled this sample of contracts clause cases by shepardizing on Lexis Allied Structural Steel Co. v. Spannaus, 438 U.S. 234 (1978), and U.S. Trust Co. of New York v. New Jersey, 431 U.S. 1 (1977). If a judge voted to grant the party alleging a violation of the contracts clause any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 04/27/77 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 76 cases. 23 We assembled this sample of affirmative action cases by searching Lexis for “affirmative action and constitution or constitutional.” The sample also includes cases found through a Westlaw Key Cite of United Steelworkers v. Weber, 443 U.S. 193 (1979) and Regents of the Univ. of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978). If a judge voted any part of an affirmative action plan unconstitutional, then the vote was considered a vote for the party challenging the plan. The sample includes cases from 06/28/78 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 155 cases. plaintiffs,24 sex discrimination,25 campaign finance,26 sexual harassment,27 cases in which plaintiffs sought to pierce the corporate veil,28 industry challenges to environmental regulations,29 and federalism challenges to congressional enactments under the commerce clause.30 Our methods for finding and assessing these cases, described in the footnotes, leave room for errors and for a degree of discretion. However, we are confident that the basic pattern of our results is sound. To keep the inquiry manageable, our investigation is limited to recent time periods (sometimes from 1995 to the present, though sometimes longer, certainly when necessary to produce a sufficient number of cases in a particular category31). We believe that limited though the evidence is, our results are sufficient to show the range of likely patterns, and also to establish the claim that the three principal hypotheses are often vindicated. 
Our sample is limited to published opinions. This limitation obviously simplifies research, but it also follows from our basic goal, which is to test the role of ideology in difficult cases rather than easy ones. As a general rule, unpublished opinions are widely agreed to be simple and straightforward, and to involve no difficult or complex issues of law. To be sure, publication practices are not uniform across circuits, and hence the decision to focus on published cases complicates cross-circuit comparisons. But that decision enables us to test our hypotheses in the cases that most interest us (and the 24 We assembled this sample of Title VII cases by searching Lexis for “Title VII and African-American or black.” We included cases that presented a challenge by an African-American plaintiff. If a judge voted to grant the plaintiff any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/85 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 320 cases. 25 We assembled this sample of sex discrimination cases by searching Lexis for “sex! discrimination or sex! harassment.” If the plaintiff was afforded any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 1007 cases. 26 We assembled this sample of campaign finance cases by shepardizing on Lexis Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976). If the party challenging the campaign finance provision was afforded any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/30/76 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 55 cases. 27 We assembled this sample of sexual harassment cases by searching Lexis for “sex! harassment.” If the plaintiff was afforded any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 470 cases. 28 We assembled this sample of piercing the corporate veil cases by searching Lexis for “pierc! and corporate veil.” If a judge afforded the plaintiff trying to pierce the veil any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 01/01/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 106 cases. 29 We assembled this sample of EPA cases by searching http://www.ll.georgetown.edu/federal/judicial/cadc.cfm for cases with “EPA” or the EPA Administrator’s name in the case title. We crosschecked this set of cases with results from a Lexis search of “EPA” and “Environmental Protection Agency.” If a judge voted to afford the industry challenger any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-industry vote. The sample includes cases from 09/19/94 – 12/31/02. For cases before 1994, we relied on Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit, 83 Va. L. Rev. 1717 (1997). We identified a total of 142 cases. 30 We assembled this sample of commerce clause cases by shepardizing on Lexis U.S. v. Lopez, 514 U.S. 549 (1995). If the plaintiff was afforded any relief, then the vote was coded as a pro-plaintiff vote. The sample includes cases from 4/26/95 – 12/31/02. We identified a total of 272 cases. 31 Thus we extended the view screen to earlier cases when the post-1995 sample was small. In deciding how far to look, we typically relied on starting dates marked by important Supreme Court decisions that would predictably be cited in relevant cases. public), while also producing at least considerable information about the role of party and panel effects across circuits.32 32 Because unpublished opinions involve easy cases, we would not expect to see significant party or panel effects there, and a full sample of court of appeals opinions, including unpublished ones, would of course show reduced effects of both party and ideology. We emphasize that our goal is to see explore those effects in hard cases, not easy ones, and hence their absence from easy cases is essentially uninteresting. 
Table 1 shows the percentage of stereotypically liberal votes33 in a variety of areas, for individual votes, and for the majority decisions of three-judge panels. Note first that in a number of areas, there is strong evidence of ideological voting, in the sense that Democratic appointees are more likely to vote in the stereotypically liberal direction than are Republican appointees. We measure ideological voting by subtracting the percentage of liberal Republican votes from the percentage of liberal Democratic votes; the larger the number, the larger the party effect. The overall difference is 13% – not huge, but substantial. The extent of this effect, and even its existence, is variable across areas. We shall discuss these variations shortly. 
We can also see that the votes of judges are influenced by the party affiliation of the other two judges on the same panel. We measure this influence by subtracting the overall percentage of liberal votes by a judge when sitting with two Democratic appointees from the percentage when they sit with two Republican appointees. Surprisingly, this overall difference, 14%, is as large as the basic difference between parties. 33For simplicity of analysis and clarity of presentation we coded votes for all case types in the same ideological direction. Identical results would come using conservative votes, but with the sign reversed. 
Republican Democrat 
Finally, it is clear that these two influences result in actual decisions that are very much affected by the composition of the panel. The clearest point is a sharp spread between the average outcome in an all-Republican panel and that in all-Democratic panel. Indeed, the likelihood of a liberal outcome is twice as high with the latter as with the former. For litigants in highly controversial areas, a great deal depends on the luck of the draw – the outcome of a random assignment of judges. 
Figure 1 captures the aggregate party and panel effects across those areas in which there is ideological voting.34 The most striking lessons of this figure are our principal themes here.35 For both Democratic appointees and Republican appointees, the likelihood of a liberal vote jumps when the two other panel members are Democratic 34 We exempt cases in which there is little or no ideological voting (criminal cases, takings cases, and federalism cases). If those cases were included, then we would see the same overall patterns, but in diminished form. If we exempted cases of ideological voting without panel effects (abortion, capital punishment), the aggregate panel effects would of course be more pronounced. 35 The data were analyzed using a logistic regression model with the vote (liberal/conservative) of an individual judge on a given case as the dependent variable. The independent variables were the judge’s Party (Democrat/Republican appointee), the number of Democrat appointees among the other two judges on the Panel, and dummy variables for Case Category and Circuit. Results for this overall model appear in the Appendix. For analyses of individual case categories, the model is the same but with case category dummies dropped; for analyses of circuits the circuit dummies are dropped. In the aggregate analysis of Figure 1 the coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both highly significant. There is also a slight tendency for Democratic appointees to show larger panel effects that Republican appointees (the interaction term is marginally significant, p < .07). appointees, and it drops when the two other panel members are Republican appointees. For purposes of discussion, we might take, as the baseline, cases in which a judge is sitting with one Democrat and one Republican, and compare how voting patterns shift when a judge is sitting instead with two Democratic appointees or two Republican appointees. We can readily see that a Democrat, in the baseline condition, casts a liberal vote 60% of the time, whereas a Republican does so 46% of the time. Sitting with two Democratic appointees, Democratic appointees cast liberal votes 66% of the time, whereas Republican appointees do so 54% of the time. Sitting with two Republican appointees, Democratic appointees cast liberal votes 53% of the time, whereas Republican appointees do so only 34% of the time. Thus Republican appointees, sitting with two Democratic appointees, show the same basic pattern of votes as do Democratic appointees, sitting with two Republican appointees. 
But the aggregate figures conceal some significant differences across case categories. We begin with cases in which all three hypotheses are supported, and then turn to cases in which they are not. 
Affirmative action. Let us start with affirmative action, which shows the basic pattern of results as in the aggregate data (Figure 2).36 From 1980 through 2002, Republican appointees cast 267 total votes, with 127, or 48%, in favor of upholding an affirmative action policy. By contrast, Democratic appointees cast 198 votes, with 147, or 74%, in favor of upholding an affirmative action policy. Here we find striking evidence of ideological voting. But we also find significant evidence of panel effects. An isolated Democrat, sitting with two Republican appointees, votes for affirmative action only 61% of the time – halfway between the aggregate numbers for Democratic appointees and Republican appointees. More remarkably, isolated Democratic appointees are actually slightly less likely to vote for affirmative action programs than are isolated Republican appointees, who vote in favor 65% of the time. Thus we see strong evidence of ideological dampening. 
The third hypothesis is also confirmed. On all-Republican panels, individual Republican appointees vote for affirmative action programs 37% of the time, as compared with 49% when Republican appointees hold a two-to-one majority. On allDemocratic panels, individual Democratic appointees vote in favor of the plan 82% of the time, compared to 80% with a two-judge Democratic majority. An institution defending an affirmative action program has about a one-in-three chance of success before an allRepublican panel – but more than a four-in-five chance before an all-Democratic panel! In a pattern that captures many of the doctrinal areas, the rate of pro-affirmative action votes on all-Democratic panels is almost triple the corresponding rate of Republican votes on all-Republican panels. 36 The coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 
RR RR 
Sex discrimination. In sex discrimination cases from 1995 to the present, Republican appointees voted in favor of plaintiffs 35% to the time, whereas Democratic appointees voted for plaintiffs 51% of the time. Hence we find strong ideological voting, though not as strong as in the affirmative action context.37 When in the minority, Republican appointees vote in favor of sex discrimination plaintiffs 42% of the time, identical to the 42% rate of Democratic appointees when they are in the minority. The most striking number here is the percentage of pro-plaintiff votes when Democratic appointees are sitting together. Here 75% of Democratic votes favor plaintiffs, far higher than the rates of 50% or less when Democratic appointees sit with one or more Republican appointees. On all-Republican panels, Republican appointees vote at a strongly anti-plaintiff rate, with only 31% favoring plaintiffs, although this rate increases steadily with each Democrat on a panel. 37 The coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 
Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment cases are a subset of sex discrimination cases; for that reason, they have not been included as a separate entry in our aggregate figures. But because the area is of considerable independent interest, we have conducted a separate analysis of sexual harassment cases.38 Republican appointees vote in favor of plaintiffs at a rate of 37%, whereas Democratic appointees vote for plaintiffs at a rate of 52%. Sitting with two Democratic appointees, Republican appointees are more likely to vote for plaintiffs than Democratic appointees sitting with two Republican appointees, by a margin of 44% to 41%. On all-Democratic panels, Democratic appointees vote for plaintiffs at a 76% rate, more than double the 32% rate of Republican appointees on allRepublican panels. It might be expected that gender would be relevant to rulings in sexual harassment cases, and for this reason we did a separate analysis of whether gender predicts likely votes. The answer is that gender does not matter. Female judges are not more likely than male judges to vote in favor of plaintiffs in these cases, and judges who sit with one or more female judge are not more likely to vote for plaintiffs than those who sit only with male judges. The party of the appointing president, not gender, is the important variable here. 
Disability. Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, judges of both parties are influenced by the colleagues with whom they sit on a panel.39 In data collected for the period from 1998 to 2002,40 Republican appointees vote 26% of the time in favor of plaintiffs; sitting with one Republican and one Democrat, the rate is 25%, about the same as the aggregate figure. But when sitting with two Republican appointees, the rate drops to 18%, and when sitting with two Democratic appointees, it jumps to 42%. Democratic percentages move in the same directions, though with a slightly different pattern. The overall pro-plaintiff vote is 43%, but it is 32% when a Democratic appointee sits with two Republican appointees (significantly lower than the 42% rate for Republican appointees sitting with two Democratic appointees), and it rises to 48% with one other Democrat and to 50% on all-Democratic panels. 
Piercing the corporate veil. Cases in which plaintiffs attempt to pierce the corporate veil follow a very similar pattern to that for sexual discrimination, with all three hypotheses confirmed.41 Republican appointees accept such claims at a significantly lower rate than Democratic appointees: 27% as opposed to 41%. But here as elsewhere, a Republican, sitting with two Democratic appointees (37% in favor of veil-piercing), is more liberal than a Democrat, sitting with two Republican appointees (29%). The most extreme figures in the data involve unified panels. Here too the pro-plaintiff voting percentage of Democratic appointees, on all Democratic-panels, is almost triple the corresponding number for Republican appointees, on all-Republican panels: 67% as opposed to 23%. 38 The coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 39 The coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 40 The sample is very large here, so we thought it unnecessary to collect earlier data to test our three hypotheses. 41 The coefficients for Party (p < .01) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 
Campaign finance. In cases since 1976, Republican appointees cast only 28% of their votes in favor of upholding campaign finance laws, substantially lower than the 46% rate for Democratic appointees. Hence the first hypothesis – ideological voting – is tentatively supported.42 With respect to the second hypothesis, involving ideological dampening, the results are suggestive as well. When sitting with two Democratic appointees, Republican appointees voted to uphold campaign finance laws 35% of the time. And when sitting with two Republican appointees, Democratic appointees voted for such programs 40% of the time. 
Now turn to the third hypothesis, involving ideological amplification. On allRepublican panels, Republican appointees voted to uphold 23% of the time, while on allDemocratic panels, Democratic appointees voted to uphold 73% of the time. The corresponding numbers, on two-judge majority panels, are 30% and 38% respectively. Thus there is evidence of a substantial difference between the behavior of all-Democratic panels and Democratic majority panels; but the same is not true for Republican appointees. 
Environmental regulation. A large data set, much of it compiled and explored by Dean Revesz,43 comes from industry challenges to EPA regulations. We have added a great deal to Revesz’s data set here,44 though like Revesz, we limit our findings to the D.C. Circuit, which hears the vast majority of environmental cases.45 From 1970 through 2002, Democratic appointees voted against agency challenges 64% of the time, whereas Republican appointees did so 46% of the time.46 There are also significant findings of group influence.47 Republican appointees show ideological amplification. On allRepublican panels, Republican appointees vote against industry challenges just 27% of the time; but for members of two-Republican majorities this figure rises rapidly to 50%, and finally to 63% for a single minority Republican. 
Interestingly, Democratic appointees do not show ideological amplification in this domain. A single Democratic appointee, accompanied by two Republican appointees, votes against industry challenges 63% of the time; but when joined by two Democratic appointees, the rate rises only to 72%. Their invalidation rates are largely impervious to panel effects. But as Dean Revesz has shown, ideological amplification can be found among Democratic appointees when an environmental group is challenging agency 42 Here we are hampered by the small number of campaign finance cases available. The coefficient for Party almost achieves significance (p = .13) and the Panel coefficient is positive but not significantly different from zero (p = .35). We include campaign finance cases in this group of case categories because it has a matching pattern that would be highly significant, given a larger number of cases. 43 See Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the D.C. Circuit, 83 Va. L. Rev. 1717 (1997). 44 See id. 45 The coefficients for Party (p < .001) and Panel (p < .001) are both significant. 46 Using a smaller data set than that used here, Revesz finds that when industry challenges an environmental regulation, there is an extraordinary difference between the behavior of a Republican majority and that of a Democratic majority. Republican majorities reverse agencies over 50% of the time; Democratic majorities do so less than 15% of the time. Richard L. Revesz, Ideology, Collegiality, and the D.C. Circuit, 85 Va. L. Rev. 805, 808 (1999). 47 See id. at 808 (1999). action. A panel of three Democratic appointees is more likely to accept the challenge than a panel of two Democratic appointees and one Republican.48 The likelihood that a Democrat will vote in favor of an environmentalist challenge is highest when three Democratic appointees are on the panel – and lowest when the panel has two Republican appointees.49 
Contracts clause violations. We examined contracts clause cases with the thought that Republican appointees would be more sympathetic than Democratic appointees to contracts clause claims. Our speculation to this effect was rooted in the fact that conservative academics have argued for stronger judicial protection of contractual rights.50 But our speculation turned out to be wrong. There is mild evidence of ideological voting with respect to the contracts clause, but it runs in the opposite direction from what we predicted, apparently because those who make contracts clause objections are more sympathetic to Democratic than to Republican appointees.51 
In cases from 1995 to the present, Republican appointees vote on behalf of plaintiffs 24% of the time, whereas Democratic appointees do so 30% of the time. More striking in this context are the panel effects, which are large for both parties. On allDemocratic panels, Democratic appointees vote in favor of plaintiffs 50% of the time; on all-Republican panels, Republican appointees vote in favor of plaintiffs only 16% of the time. But the dampening effects are large and in the predicted direction. Sitting with two Democratic appointees, Republican appointees vote in favor of plaintiffs in 42% of the cases, whereas a Democrat sitting with two Republican appointees does so just 24% of the time. 
Title VII. In cases brought under Title VII by African-American plaintiffs, we find small but nearly statistically significant evidence of ideological voting: Democratic appointees vote for plaintiffs 41% of the time, whereas Republican appointees do so 35% of the time.52 Democratic appointees also show ideological dampening, with a 33% proplaintiff vote when sitting with two Republican appointees, and ideological amplification, with a 54% pro-plaintiff vote when sitting with two Democratic appointees. The pattern for Republican appointees is a bit of a puzzle. When sitting with two Republican appointees, Republican appointees actually vote for plaintiffs at a higher rate – 43% – than when sitting with one or more Democratic appointees. When sitting with two Democratic appointees, Republican appointees vote for plaintiffs at a 35% rate, slightly higher than the 30% rate shown when sitting with one Democrat and one Republican. Overall, this is a similar pattern to others with both party and colleague effects, except for 48 Id. at 1753. 49 Id. 50 See Richard Epstein, Toward a Revitalization of the Contract Clause, 51 U. Chi. L. Rev. 703, 704-05 (1984). 51 The coefficient for Party is not significantly different from zero (p > .30) but the Panel coefficient is significant (p < .01). We include contracts clause cases here because of the panel effect. 52 Neither the coefficient for Party (p = .18) nor that for Panel (p > .30) is significantly different from zero. We include Title VII cases here because expect for the anomalous pattern for all-Republican panels, the remainder of the pattern looks similar to the rest of this groups of case categories. Indeed, if we drop the RRR group, both Party and Panel effects are significant. the apparently anomalous voting of all-Republican panels, for which we have no good explanation. 
In three areas, all of our hypotheses were rebutted (Figure 3). The simple reason is that there is no significant difference between the votes of Republican appointees and those of Democratic appointees. Contrary to expectations, the political affiliation of the appointing President does not matter in the contexts of criminal appeals, federalism, and takings. 
RR 
DD 
RR 
RD Panel Colleagues 
DD 
RR 
RD Panel Colleagues 
DD 
Criminal Appeals. It might be anticipated that Democratic appointees would be especially sympathetic to criminal defendants and that Republican appointees would be relatively unsympathetic. At least this is a popular platitude about judicial behavior. Hence the three hypotheses might be anticipated to receive strong support. But all of them are rejected, at least in three courts of appeals from 1995 to the present.53 We selected the courts of appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and for the Third and Fourth Circuits, on the theory that we would be highly likely to find ideological voting in criminal cases in these circuits. However, we found no such effects. The overall rate of votes for defendants is between 30% and 39%, with no significant differences between Republican appointees and Democratic appointees, and without significant panel effects. We conclude that Republican appointees and Democratic appointees do not much differ in this domain; we attempt to explain this finding below. 
Federalism and the commerce clause. Since 1995, the overwhelming majority of federal judicial votes have been in favor of the constitutionality of programs challenged under the commerce clause. Indeed, Democratic appointees vote to validate the challenged program over 99% of the time. The numbers are not materially different for 53 Neither the coefficient for Party nor that for Panel is significantly different from zero. Republican appointees, for whom the overall validation rate is 95%. No panel effects are observed.54 A possible reason for the agreement is that for many decades, the Supreme Court gave a clear signal that courts should be reluctant to invalidate congressional enactments under the commerce clause.55 To be sure, the Court has given recent signals about its willingness to invoke that clause against Congress.56 However, neither Republican nor Democratic appointees seem to believe that those signals should be taken very seriously. Perhaps things will change in this regard as the lower courts internalize the Court’s messages. 
Takings. When plaintiffs challenge a governmental decision as violative of property rights, Democratic appointees and Republican appointees again show no significant differences.57 Only 23% of Republican votes are in favor of such challenges. It might be expected that Democratic appointees would show a substantially lower level of invalidation rates, but the percentage of Democratic votes to invalidate is nearly identical: 20%. No panel effects can be found. 
D. Ideological Voting Without Amplification or Dampening: The Unique Cases of 
Abortion and Capital Punishment 
It would be possible to imagine areas dominated by ideological voting. In such areas, judges would be expected to vote in a way that reflects the political affiliation of the appointing president – but panel effects would be minimal. This is the pattern of outcomes in only two areas that we investigated: abortion and capital punishment (Figure 4). RR 
RD Panel Colleagues 
DD 
RR 
RD Panel Colleagues 
DD 54 Neither the coefficient for Party nor that for Panel is significantly different from zero. 55 See Geoffrey Stone et al., Constitutional Law (5th ed. 2001). 56 See United States v. Lopez; Morrison. 57 Neither the coefficient for Party nor that for Panel is significantly different from zero. appeals are most unlikely to rehear cases en banc.66 In any case, it is time-consuming to write a dissent. If the ultimate decision is not going to be affected, why do the extra work? There is a further point. Dissenting opinions might also cause a degree of tension among judges, a particular problem in light of the fact that judges must work together for many years. According to informal lore, a kind of implicit bargain is struck within many courts of appeals, in the form of, “I won’t dissent from your opinions if you won’t dissent from mine, at least not unless the disagreement is very great.” All of these points help account for the great power of “the ideology of one’s colleagues” in producing judicial votes. 
We can better understand these points if we notice the clear connection between the collegial concurrence and the behavior of individuals, in experimental settings, when faced with a unanimous group opinion. A great deal of social science research has shown that if people are confronted with the unanimous views of others, they tend to yield.67 This finding has been made in the context of both political and legal issues,68 and it extends to simple issues of fact.69 Sometimes people yield even with respect to the unambiguous evidence of their own senses. The yielding, a form of collegial concurrence, occurs partly because of the information suggested by the unanimity of others; how could shared views be wrong? And it occurs partly because of reputational pressures; people do not want to stand out on a limb. The evidence here suggests that judges are vulnerable to similar influences. Note that an understanding of these points clarifies the failure of the second two hypotheses in the contexts of abortion and capital punishment. In those contexts, judgments are firmly held, and the firmness of those judgments is sufficient to outweigh the informational and reputational pressure imposed by the contrary judgments of panel members. 
In fact, an understanding of the relevant processes helps to explain and refine the leveling effects that we have emphasized. Suppose that a Democratic appointee is sitting with two Republican appointees, and everyone on the panel knows that the Democratic appointee might reject an extreme ruling. The anticipation or threat of a dissent, or a separate opinion, might lead the two Republicans to moderate their decision so as to ensure unanimity. The collegial concurrence need not show that the isolated Democrat, or the isolated Republican, is simply going along with her peers. It might well be that the very presence of a potential dissenter has led to a mutually agreeable opinion; both sides might have done some yielding. Our data, focused on outcomes, does not enable us to test this hypothesis rigorously. But the sharp difference between divided and unified panels, in terms of expected votes, is at least suggestive about the possibly important effect of the isolated Democrat or Republican. It is to that difference that we now turn. 
behave so distinctively? Why are they different from majority Republican panels and 66 Explanation and data to be added. 67 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995). 68 See R.S. Crutchfield, Conformity and Character, 10 Am. Psych. 191 (1955). 69 See Asch, supra note. majority Democratic panels? A clue comes from one of the most striking findings in modern social science, which finds that groups of like-minded people tend to go to extremes. 70 More particularly, such groups end up taking a more extreme position in the same direction as their predeliberation tendencies. Outside of the judicial context, consider a few examples: n A group of moderately profeminist women will become more strongly profeminist after discussion.71 n After discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid.72 n After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.73 n After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question.74 n Juries inclined to award punitive damages typically produce awards that are significantly higher than the awards of their median member.75 
An understanding of group polarization strongly suggests that in an important sense, our findings about party and panel effects are understated. We have focused on votes – on who wins and who loses. We have not focused on opinions, which can be written narrowly or broadly. Investigation of the substance of the opinions would obviously be burdensome and involve considerable exercise of discretion. But it is entirely plausible to speculate that a unified panel is less likely to be moderate than a divided one – and hence that the extremism of all-Republican and all-Democratic panels is understated by an investigation that looks only at likely votes. There is much room here for further analysis. 
There have been three main explanations for group polarization, all of which have been extensively investigated.76 
a. Persuasive arguments. The first explanation, emphasizing the role of persuasive arguments, is based on a common sense intuition: that any individual’s position on an issue is partly a function of which arguments presented within the group seem convincing. The choice therefore moves in the direction of the most persuasive position defended by the group, taken as a collectivity. Because a group whose members are already inclined to vote in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that same direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. The key is the existence of 70 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition 203-226 (1985). 71 See D.G. Myers, Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization, 28 Human Relations 699 (1975). 72 Brown, supra note, at 224. 73 D.G. Myers and G.D. Bishop, The Enhancement of Dominant Attitudes in Group Discussion, 20 J. Personality and Soc. Psych. 286 (1976). 74 See id. 75 See Schkade et al., supra note. 76 See Brown, supra note. a limited argument pool, one that is skewed (speaking purely descriptively) in a particular direction.77 
b. Social comparison. The second explanation, involving social comparison, begins with the claim that people want to be perceived favorably by other group members, and they want also to perceive themselves favorably. Once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. The result is to press the group’s position toward one or another extreme, and also to induce shifts in individual members.78 People may wish, for example, not to seem too enthusiastic or too restrained in their enthusiasm for affirmative action, feminism, or an increase in national defense; hence their views may shift when they see what other group members think. The result will be group polarization. 
c. The role of corroboration. The third explanation begins by noting that people with extreme views tend to have more confidence that they are right, and that as people gain confidence, they become more extreme in their beliefs.79 The basic idea here is simple: Those who lack confidence, and who are unsure what they should think, tend to moderate their views. It is for this reason that cautious people, not knowing what to do, are likely to choose the midpoint between relevant extremes.80 But if other people seem to share your view, you are likely to become more confident that you are correct – and hence to move in a more extreme direction. In a wide variety of experimental contexts, people’s opinions have been shown to become more extreme simply because their view has been corroborated, and because they have been more confident after learning of the shared views of others.81 
It seems reasonable to speculate that one of our key results – ideological amplification on all-Republican and all-Democratic panels – reflects group polarization. When a court consists of a panel of judges with the same basic orientation, the median view, before deliberation begins, will be significantly different from what it would be with a panel of diverse judges. The argument pool will be very different as well. For example, a panel of three Republican appointees, tentatively inclined to invalidate the action of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), will offer a range of arguments in support of invalidation and relatively few in the other direction – even if the law, properly interpreted, favors validation. If the panel contains a judge who is inclined to uphold the EPA, the arguments that favor validation are far more likely to emerge and to be pressed. Indeed, the very fact that the judge is a Democrat increases the likelihood that this will occur, since that judge might not think of himself as being part of the same “group” as the other panel members. And because corroboration of opinion leads to greater confidence and hence extremity, it is not surprising that deliberation by a panel of three like-minded judges would lead to unusual and extreme results. 77 See id. 78 Id; Sunstein, Why Societies Need Dissent, supra note. 79 See Robert Baron et al., Social Corroboration and Opinion Extremity, 32 J. Experimental Soc. Psych. 537 (1996). 80 See Mark Kelman et al., Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making, 25 J. Legal Stud. 287, 287-88 (1996). 81 Baron et al., supra note. 
In this context, the difference in voting patterns on unified and divided panels is fortified by the possibility that the minority judge, finding himself outnumbered, might produce a dissenting opinion in public. To be sure, Supreme Court review is rare and in the general run of cases, the prospect of such review probably does not have much of a deterrent effect on courts of appeals. But judges who write majority opinions are usually not enthusiastic about having to see and to respond to dissenting opinions. And if the law actually favors the dissenting view, two judges, even if they would like to reverse the Environmental Protection Agency, might be influenced to adopt the easier course of validation. 
At this point a skeptic might note that lawyers make adversarial presentations before judges. Such a skeptic might insist that the size of the “argument pool” is determined by those presentations, not only and not even mostly by what members of the panel are inclined to say and to do. And undoubtedly the inclinations of judges are shaped, some of the time, by the contributions of advocates. But adversarial presentations are made before all panel compositions, and so they cannot explain panel effects. In any case what matters, for purposes of the outcomes, is the inclinations of judges, upon whatever they are based; and it is here that the existence of a unified rather than divided panel can make all the difference. Notice in this regard that for the polarization hypothesis to hold, it is not necessary to know whether judges spend a great deal of time offering reasons to one another. Mere exposure to a conclusion is enough.82 A system of simple votes, unaccompanied by reasons, should incline judges to polarize. Of course reasons, if they are good ones, are likely to make those votes especially persuasive. 
that fairly applied, it requires one or another outcome. It is easily imaginable that likeminded judges, unaccompanied by a potential dissenter, will fail to apply the law fairly. This is not because they are essentially lawless. It is because when the law is unclear, fallible human beings might well be inclined to understand the law in a way that fits with their predilections. 
These points provide a possible explanation for some of the differences between panels with two-to-one majorities and panels in which all judges were appointed by a president of the same political party. Consider affirmative action cases. In some of these cases, three Democratic appointees might well be inclined to vote in favor of validation even if existing doctrine argues the other way. If no Republican appointee is on the panel, there is a risk that the panel will unanimously support validation in the face of existing law. The effect of the Republican is to call the panel’s attention to the tension between its inclination and the decided cases. Of course her effort may fail. Her copanelists might persist in their views, perhaps with the claim that those cases can be distinguished. But if existing law does create serious problems for the panel, the presence of a judge with a different inclination will have a large effect. We speculate that in the areas in which there is a large difference between two-to-one majorities and three judges from the same president, this effect – a whistleblower effect – is playing a role. 82 See Robert Baron et al., supra note, at 74. 
Our data do not allow this speculation to be tested directly. But a separate study shows the importance of a potential dissenter, or whistleblower, in ensuring that courts follow the law.83 More particularly, a Democratic appointee, on a court of appeals panel, turns out to be extremely important in ensuring that such a panel does what the law asks it to do. The basic point is that diversity of view helps to correct errors – not that judges of one or another party are likely to be correct. 
To understand this study, some background is in order. Under the Supreme Court’s decision in Chevron v. NRDC,84 courts are supposed to uphold agency interpretations of law so long as the interpretations are “reasonable.” But when do courts actually uphold such interpretations? Existing law allows judges considerable room to maneuver, so that courts that are inclined to invalidate agency interpretations usually can find a plausible basis for doing so. The real question is when they will claim to have found that plausible basis. The relevant study, extending well beyond environmental protection to regulation in general, confirms the idea that party affiliation has an exceedingly large influence on outcomes within the D.C. Circuit. If observers were to code cases very crudely, by taking account of whether industry or a public interest group is bringing the challenge, they would find that a majority of Republican appointees reaches a conservative judgment 54% of the time, whereas a majority of Democratic appointees reaches such a judgment merely 32% of the time.85 
For present purposes, the most important finding is the dramatic difference between politically diverse panels, with judges appointed by Presidents of more than one party, and politically unified panels, with judges appointed by Presidents of only one party. On divided panels in which a Republican majority of the court might be expected, on broadly speaking political grounds, to be hostile to the agency, the court nonetheless upheld the agency’s interpretation 62% of the time. But on unified panels in which an allRepublican panel might be expected to be hostile to the agency, the court upheld the agency’s interpretation only 33% of the time. Note that this was the only unusual finding in the data. When Democratic majority courts were expected to uphold the agency’s decision on political grounds, they did so over 70% of the time, whether unified (71% of the time) or divided (86% of the time). Consider the results in tabular form86: 
RRR panel 33% 67% 
RRD panel 62% 38% 
RDD panel 86% 14% 83 Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine, 107 Yale L.J. 2155 (1998). 84 See 467 U.S. 837 (1984). 85 Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2169. 86 Constructed on the basis of data in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2172-2173. 
DDD panel 71% 29% 
It is reasonable to speculate that the seemingly bizarre result – a 67% invalidation rate when Republican appointees are unified! – reflects group influences and, in particular, group polarization. A group of all-Republican appointees might well take the relatively unusual step of rejecting an agency’s interpretation. By contrast, a divided panel, with a built-in check on any tendency toward the unusual or extreme outcome, is more likely to take the conventional route of simply upholding the agency’s action. An important reason is that the single Democratic appointee acts as a “whistleblower,” discouraging the other judges from making a decision that is inconsistent with the Supreme Court’s command that courts of appeals should uphold agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes.87 
We have emphasized that this is a preliminary investigation. It should be possible, before terribly long, to do what we have done here for multiple domains of the law, extending over time. The data are readily available and most of the work involves mere counting. As we have suggested, it would be exceedingly interesting to know whether the three hypotheses hold in the pre-New Deal tensions between courts and the regulatory state and in the struggle over school segregation. So, too, it would be valuable to know whether similar patterns can be found in the legal disputes over slavery, in judicial review of decisions by the National Labor Relations Board and the Federal Communications Commission, in cases brought under the Federal Tort Claims Act, and in cases involving foreign affairs and war. 
We could easily imagine that ideological disagreements, between judges appointed by presidents of different parties, would be greater or weaker in certain historical periods. It might be hypothesized, for example, that such disagreements were weakened in the 1940s, when the nation seemed to form a consensus about the appropriate role of the federal judiciary. It might also be hypothesized that such disagreements would be especially strong since 1980, with powerful partisan divisions about the appropriate role of the federal judiciary. But are these hypotheses correct? Ultimately it would be desirable to compile an extensive data set about votes on federal courts of appeals, showing the diverse patterns into which those votes fall. 
It remains to investigate the normative issues. Is it troubling to find a large effect from party or from panel composition? Should we be concerned if like-minded judges go to extremes? Is there reason to attempt to ensure diversity on the federal courts? To promote a degree of diversity on panels? There is a widespread view that judges appointed by presidents of different political parties are not fundamentally different and that, once on the bench, judges frequently surprise those who nominated them.88 The view is not entirely baseless, but it is misleading. Some appointees do disappoint the Presidents who nominated them, but these examples are not typical. Judges appointed by 87 See id. at 2174-76. 88 See, e.g., Jeffrey Rosen, New York Times Magazine; others. Republican presidents are quite different from judges appointed by Democratic presidents. To take evidence from just one area, “[p]artisanship clearly affects how appellate courts review agency discretion.”89 We have noted that the effects that we find are large but not massive. Because of the disciplining effect of precedent, and because judges do not radically disagree with one another, there is significant commonality across political party. But in the most difficult areas, the ones where the law is unclear or in flux, both party and panel effects are large enough to be a source of serious concern. 
It is difficult to evaluate the underlying issues without taking a stand on the merits – without knowing what we want judges to do. Suppose that three Republican appointees are especially likely to strike down affirmative action programs, and that three Democratic appointees are especially likely to uphold those programs. At first glance, one or the other inclination is troubling only if we know whether we approve of one or another set of results. And if a view about what judges should do is the only possible basis for evaluation, we might conclude that those who prefer judges of a particular party should seek judges of that party, and that group influences are essentially beside the point. 
But the conclusion is too strong. In some cases, the law, properly interpreted, really does argue strongly for one or another view. The existence of diversity on a panel is likely to bring that fact to light and perhaps to move the panel’s decision in the direction of what the law requires. The existence of politically diverse judges, and of a potential dissent, increases the probability that the law will be followed. The Chevron study, referred to above, strongly supports this point.90 The presence of a potential dissenter – in the form of a judge appointed by a president from another political party – creates a possible whistleblower who can reduce the likelihood of an incorrect or lawless decision.91 Through an appreciation of the nature of group influences, we can see the wisdom in an old idea: A decision is more likely to be right, and less likely to be political in a pejorative sense, if it is supported by judges with different predilections. 
There is a further point. Suppose that in many areas, it is not clear, in advance, whether the appointees of Democratic or Republican presidents are correct. Suppose that we are genuinely uncertain. If so, then there is reason to favor a situation in which the legal system has both, simply on the ground that through that route, more reasonable opinions are likely to be heard. And if we are genuinely uncertain, then there is reason to favor a mix of views merely by virtue of its moderating effect. In the face of uncertainty, sensible people choose between the poles.92 
Consider an analogy. Independent regulatory commissions, such as the Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, and the Federal Communications Commission, often make modern law 89 See Revesz, supra note, at 2175. 90 See Cross and Tiller, supra note. 91 This is the explanation in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2173. 92 For evidence, see Mark Kelman et al., Context-Independence in Legal Decisionmaking, in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). and policy. Much of the time, such agencies act through adjudication. They function in the same fashion as federal courts. And under federal statutes, Congress has attempted to ensure that these agencies are not monopolized by either Democratic appointees or Republican appointees. The law requires that no more than a bare majority of agency members may be from a single party.93 An understanding of group influences helps to explain this requirement. An independent agency that is all-Democratic, or allRepublican, might move toward an extreme position, indeed toward a position that is more extreme than that of the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any agency official standing alone. A requirement of bipartisan membership can operate as a check against movements of this kind. Congress was apparently aware of this general point. Closely attuned to the policymaking functions of the relevant institutions, it was careful to provide a safeguard against extreme movements. 
Why do we fail to create similar safeguards for courts? Part of the answer must lie in a belief that unlike heads of independent regulatory commissions, judges are not policymakers. Their duty is to follow the law, not to make policy. An attempt to ensure bipartisan composition would seem inconsistent with the commitment to this belief. But the evidence we have discussed shows that judges are policymakers of an important kind, and that their political commitments very much influence their votes. In principle, there is good reason to attempt to ensure a mix of perspectives within courts of appeals. 
Of course the idea of diversity, or of a mix of perspectives, is hardly self-defining. It would not be appropriate to say that the federal judiciary should include people who refuse to obey the Constitution, or who refuse to exercise the power of judicial review, or who think that the Constitution allows suppression of political dissent and racial segregation. Here as elsewhere, the domain of appropriate diversity is limited. What is necessary is reasonable diversity, or diversity of reasonable views, and not diversity as such. People can certainly disagree about what reasonable diversity entails in this context. We are suggesting here that there is such a thing as reasonable diversity, and that it is important to ensure that judges, no less than anyone else, are exposed to it, and not merely through the arguments of advocates. 
These points cast fresh light on a much disputed issue: the legitimate role of the Senate in giving “advice and consent” to presidential appointments to the federal judiciary. Above all, an understanding of social influences suggests that the Senate has a responsibility to exercise its constitutional authority in order to ensure a reasonable diversity of views. The Constitution’s history fully contemplates an independent role for the Senate in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.94 That independent role certainly authorizes the Senate to consider the general approach, and the likely pattern of votes, of potential judges. There can be no doubt that the President considers the general approach of his nominees; the Senate is entitled to do so as well. Under good conditions, these simultaneous powers would bring about a healthy form of checks and balances, 93 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 78d (1994). 94 See David A. Strauss and Cass R. Sunstein, The Senate, the Constitution, and the Confirmation Process, 101 Yale L.J. 1491 (1992). permitting each branch to counter the other. Indeed, that system is part and parcel of social deliberation about the direction of the federal judiciary. 
Why might this view be rejected? It could be urged that there is only one legitimate approach to constitutional or statutory interpretation – that, for example, some version of originalism or textualism is the only such approach, and that anyone who rejects that view is unreasonable. For true believers, it is pointless to argue for diverse views.95 Diversity is not necessary, or even valuable, if we already know what should be done, and if competing views would simply cloud the issue. (In a scientific dispute, it is not helpful to include those who believe that the earth is flat.) Or it might be urged that a deferential role for the Senate, combined with natural political competition and cycles, will produce a sensible mix over time. We do not deny this possibility. Our only suggestions are that a high degree of diversity on the federal judiciary is desirable, that the Senate is entitled to pursue diversity, and that without such diversity, judicial panels are will inevitably go in unjustified directions. 
No reasonable person seriously doubts that ideology, understood as normative commitments of various sorts, helps to explain judicial votes. Presidents are entirely aware of this point, and their appointment decisions are undertaken with full appreciation of it. We have found striking evidence of a relationship between the political party of the appointing president and judicial voting patterns. We have also found that much of the time, judicial votes are affected by panel composition. In many domains, the voting patterns of isolated Democratic appointees are close to what would be expected from the median Republican appointee, just as the voting patterns of an isolated Republican appointee are akin to what would be expected from the median Democratic appointee. In many domains, a Democratic appointee is significantly more likely to vote in the stereotypical liberal fashion if surrounded by two Democratic appointees than if surrounded by one Republican and one Democrat. So too for Republican appointees, whose voting patterns are very much influenced by having two, rather than one, copanelists appointed by a president of the same political party. 
Taken as a whole, the data suggest the pervasiveness of three phenomena. The first is the collegial concurrence: votes to join two colleagues and to refuse to dissent publicly, notwithstanding an initial disposition to vote the other way and very possibly, a continuing belief that the decision is incorrect. The second is group polarization: the tendency, within a group of like-minded people, to move to relative extremes. The third is a whistleblower effect, by which a single judge, of a different party from the majority, can have a moderating effect on a judicial panel. 95 Note, however, that even if it would be appropriate for all judges to share a certain approach, it is also desirable to have diversity with respect to the application of that approach. Textualists do not all agree with one another; there is internal diversity in the world of originalism. Diversity is appropriate here to ensure an airing of reasonable views. 
It might be surprising to find that in some controversial areas, the political affiliation of the appointing president is not correlated with judicial votes, and hence that in those areas, none of these effects can be observed. This is the basic finding for criminal appeals, takings, and federalism. But it should not be terribly surprising to see that in the areas of abortion and capital punishment, judges vote their convictions. Here the political affiliation of the appointing president is crucial, but panel composition is otherwise irrelevant. What is perhaps most striking is that in our data set, abortion and capital punishment are the only areas in which ideology matters but panel composition does not. 
These findings do not have uncontroversial implications for the composition of panels or of the judiciary as a whole. But if divided panels increase the likelihood of effective whistleblowing, and if unified panels tend to go to extremes, there is fresh reason to attempt to ensure a high degree of intellectual diversity within the federal courts and even within judicial panels. Of course this claim would not hold if the appointees of one or another party had a monopoly on legal wisdom. In most areas, however, we think that there is no such monopoly, and that better results are likely to come from a mix of views and inclinations. However the normative issues are resolved, the empirical findings are clear. In many domains, Republican appointees vote very differently from Democratic appointees, and the effects of ideology are both dampened and amplified by the composition of the panel. 
DV = Liberal vote (0,1) 
Party (1 = Democratic appointee) Other Two (# Democrat appointees) Party * Other Two ADA Abortion Campaign Finance Capital Punishment Contracts Pierce Corp Veil Environmental protection Sex Discrimination Title VII 1st Circuit 2nd Circuit 3rd Circuit 4th Circuit 5th Circuit 6th Circuit 7th Circuit 8th Circuit 10th Circuit 11th Circuit 12th Circuit Constant Base case (constant) = 9th circuit, affirmative action cases, Republican Number of obs = 8475 LR chi2(23) = 747.63 Prob > chi2 = 0.0000 Pseudo R2 = 0.0657 Log likelihood = -5318.8336 Readers with comments should address them to: 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
Patent System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) (May 2001) 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) 
Coase Lecture February 2002) 
Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 2003) 2002) 
What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) (July 2002) 
Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 2002) 
Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 161 Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for 
Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) 
Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 2002) (November 2002) 
Economic Analysis (November 2002) the Regulation of Public Health (December 2002) (December 2002) 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short-Term Assets (January 2003) Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An Economic Perspective (February 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 2003) William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule 
INTRODUCTION 
In law, problems of interpretation can be explored at different levels of generality. At the most specific level, people might urge that the Equal Protection Clause forbids affirmative action, or that the Food and Drug Act applies to tobacco products. At a higher level of generality, people might argue that the Equal Protection Clause should be interpreted in accordance with the original understanding of its ratifiers, or that the meaning of the Food and Drug Act should be settled with careful attention to its legislative history. At a still higher level of generality, people might identify the considerations that bear on the selection of one or another approach to interpretation, with or without reaching a conclusion about the appropriate approach. 
In Interpretationand Institutions,we proceed at the highest level of generality, without offering final judgments about our preferred approach or about particular cases.' Our principal submission is that any judgment about the preferred approach must pay a great deal of attention to institutional capacities and dynamic effects. We intend this submission as a constructive one - one that helps clarify the grounds for reasonable disagreement and that suggests the possibility of empirical research that might actually be helpful. In our view, the study of legal interpretation remains in its infancy, and we are confident that in part as a result of such research, the legal culture will know a great deal more in twenty years than it knows today.' In emphasizing the importance of attending to institutional capacities and dynamic effects, we presented a survey, illustrative rather than exhaustive, of a wide range of work that seems to us to have neglected those capacities and example, we do not "deplore" what Posner calls "[tjhe 'outrage' test for unconstitutionality." See Richard A. Posner, Reply: The Institutional Dimension of Statutory and Constitutional Interpretation.10l MICH. L. REV. 952, 963 (2003) [hereinafter Posner, Reply]. And because our focus is not on particular results, Posner's claims of inconsistency between Sunstein's prior work and what is said here are at best overstated. 
"Can you refer me to studies of different interpretive practices in different states, and of whether state legislatures are acting differently in responses to those different practices?" The student was amazed to hear that there are no such studies, putting aside a small number of case studies and anecdotal reports. those effects. We also attempted to identify some empirical questions that might cast light on the underlying issues. 
We are grateful to Judge Posner for his spirited and lengthy reply. But his disagreements with us are minor - more rhetorical than real. In a department (not a law school) of a well-known university, senior faculty members are said to respond to new ideas in one of two ways. (a) "We did that." (b) "We never did that." Posner's reply has some of this flavor. 
Posner has misunderstood our views in at least three respects. First, Posner takes us to "praise... judicial formalism."3 As we stated, our twofold project is to argue that the choice between formalism and antiformalism must be made on institutional and empirical grounds, rather than conceptual or linguistic grounds, and also to describe the conditions under which formalism or antiformalism would be the better choice for particular institutions or societies.' One of us (Vermeule) indeed believes that current American law should become more formalist, but it is not our concern here to make the arguments on formalism's behalf.5 The large stretches of Posner's discussion that challenge interpretive formalism, then, are irrelevant to our claims. 
Second, Posner accuses us of understating the extent to which past work has viewed interpretation through an institutional lens. We cannot imagine that Posner has any real disagreement with our central claim, which is that most such work is insufficiently resolute about the institutional approach. To be sure, a great deal of interpretive scholarship talks about legislatures, agencies and courts; how could it be otherwise? Of course our claim is not that we are the first to connect institutions to interpretation. In our view, however, most interpretive theorizing goes wrong either by adopting a stylized and nonempirical account of institutional capacities, or by adopting an asymmetrical account that views one type of institution, usually legislatures, through a realist lens, while viewing others, usually courts, in utopian terms. Posner does not engage these claims, challenging instead a view that we do not hold and that we agree to be ludicrous. 
Third, Posner says that we deny the inevitability of casual empiricism in interpretive theory and in law generally, while failing to propose feasible empirical work ourselves. Perhaps we were insufficiently clear, but we agree that casual empiricism is inevitable. Indeed 
962-63, raise many complexities. The most obvious of these is that in most of the cases he discusses, the relevant provisions are ambiguous, and no literal meaning requires the results he describes. For example, the Equal Protection Clause literally requires equal protection, but without more specification. that requirement does not require, permit, or forbid affirmative action. 

HeinOnline -- 101 Mich. L. Rev. 973 2002-2003 we would go further: in the absence of empirical knowledge, people need to rely on presumptions, rules of thumb, and other techniques that help produce decisions in the face of uncertainty.6 But the inevitability of casual empiricism, in areas where little is yet known, doesn't mean we can't simultaneously try to find out more; casual and formal empiricism are not mutually exclusive, as Posner seems to assume. In any case, we have tried to suggest a number of empirical projects, just one of them involving an understanding of the performance of state courts. 
In the remainder of this Reply, we investigate two of Posner's objections in greater detail, simply because an investigation of those objections might clarify our basic claims. The first objection involves different types of institutional blindness. The second involves the feasibility and usefulness of empirical work, especially in light of the apparent difficulty of evaluating empirical findings without antecedent agreement on what constitutes a correct or incorrect interpretation. 
II. 
Our article identified three types of institutional blindness. We might describe the three types along the following lines. 
(1) Out-and-outPhilosophizing. 
These are theorists who attempt to derive an account of interpretation from resolutely noninstitutional premises, particularly high-level political concepts like "democracy" and "authority," or abstractions about the character of language. Posner is right to say that philosopher-lawyers like Dworkin are the paradigm example here. Posner says that these philosopher-lawyers aren't trying to answer all the relevant questions at once; they're focusing on first-best questions, leaving institutional considerations for other scholars. But to this point he also supplies the right rebuttal: doing a partial analysis is valuable, but it isn't possible to use that analysis to derive conclusions about specific interpretive doctrines and outcomes, absent any account of the institutional considerations that always intervene between abstract premises and concrete conclusions. 
So far, so good. The trouble is that Posner suggests, incorrectly, that this is our charge against all interpretive theory. We agree that many previous accounts have considered institutional ideas in some fashion or other. But in addition to ignoring institutional considerations entirely, there are other ways in which interpretive theories go wrong. Most accounts of interpretation have stumbled into additional pitfalls. 
(2) Stylized Institutionalism. 
Here the interpretive theorist talks about comparative institutional competence, but in a stylized or stereotyped way, on the basis of abstract visions of "legislatures" and "courts." This is our understanding of Hart and Sacks: the talk is of institutions, but the institutions are pictured in fuzzy, and excessively laudatory, ways that correspond only hazily to the realities of American government. (As explained below, we fear that Posner may be making the same mistake when he describes American appellate courts as councils of "wise elders,"7 except that Posner is not as charitable to legislatures as were Hart and Sacks.) (3) Asymmetrical Institutionalism. 
Here the characteristic mistake is to take a cynical or pessimistic view of some institutions and a unjustifiably rosy view of others. In constitutional law, John Hart Ely's "process" theory,8 in which farsighted and politically responsible courts police invidious stereotyping and other process failures on the part of dysfunctional legislatures, is an exemplar. Ely's theory is attractive to many; but what if courts are unwilling to do what Ely urges, and what if courts would fail to do the task well if they tried? Much of public choice theory is similar, albeit with a different diagnosis of process failure - one that sees inefficient rent seeking by legislators and interest groups, rather than racial discrimination, as the principal danger that the process-policing judiciary is to prevent.' (Eskridge, by the way, seems to us to make the same mistake, albeit with slightly different emphases.) Posner taxes us for not mentioning process theory or public choice, but he seems not to realize that asymmetrical accounts of this sort can't be taken very seriously anymore, at least not as offering complete support for any view of interpretation. Treatments by Komesar, Elhauge, and others have demonstrated, in different but compatible ways, the inability of asymmetrical institutionalism to underwrite plausible conclusions about constitutional and statutory interpretation. 0 
We may summarize our overview of interpretive theory by saying that we argue for an institutionalismthat is evenhandedly empiricalan institutional account that is realistic about the capacities of all relevant actors. Our challenge to interpretive theories past and present, then, is not the absurdly sweeping claim that Judge Posner attributes 
REVIEW (1980). 
FRICKEY, LAW AND PUBLIC CHOICE: A CRITICAL INTRODUCTION (1991); MAXWELL STEARNS, PUBLIC CHOICE AND PUBLIC LAW (1997). 
Vermeule, Interpretationand Institutions, 101 MICH. L. REV. 885, 937 (2003) [hereinafter Sunstein & Vermeule, Interpretationand Institutions]. 
HeinOnline -- 101 Mich. L. Rev. 975 2002-2003 to us, to the effect that institutional issues are generally or universally ignored. 
As for Posner's own work on interpretation: to date, he himself has fallen firmly into the third category, that of asymmetrical institutionalism, because he holds a persistently jaundiced picture of legislative and administrative capacities and a persistently celebratory view of (other) appellate judges. Consider Posner's amusing vision of American appellate courts as councils of "wise elders."" (Does this apply to state appellate courts, say the Rhode Island intermediate courts, as well as to the Seventh Circuit?) Posner says that this vision rests on "institutional factors."' 2 So it does, in part, but the qualifier is crucial: the only factors Posner's partial analysis considers are characteristics of judges that happen to support a benign view of judicial capacities. Here is Posner's discussion: 
Judges of the higher American courts are generally picked from the upper tail of the population distribution in terms of age, education, intelligence, disinterest, and sobriety. They are not tops in all these departments but they are well above average, at least in the federal courts because of the elaborate preappointment screening of candidates for federal judgeships. Judges are schooled in a profession that sets a high value on listening to both sides of an issue before making up one's mind, on sifting truth from falsehood, and on exercising a detached judgment. Their decisions are anchored in the facts of concrete disputes between real people. Members of the legal profession have played a central role in the political history of the United States, and the profession's institutions and usages are reflectors of the fundamental political values that have emerged from that history. Appellate judges in nonroutine cases are expected to express as best they can the reasons for their decisions in signed, public documents (the published decisions of these courts) and this practice creates accountability and fosters a certain reflectiveness and self-discipline." 
Revealingly absent from this account, however, is the requisite comparisonof these factors to the characteristics of legislators (or for that matter agency officials). Legislators are also picked from the upper tail of the population distribution on all the measures Posner mentions, and if they are not so detached as judges they have much better information about real-world consequences than judges do. A whiff of guild interest hangs about Posner's discussion when he says that "[m]embers of the legal profession have played a central role in the political history of the United States, and the profession's institu11. Posner, Reply, supra note 1. at 959. 
REVIVAL OF PRAGMATISM: NEW ESSAYS ON SOCIAL THOUGHT, LAW, AND CULTURE 235. 243-44 (Morris Dickstein ed.. 1998) [hereinafter Posner, PragmaticAdjudication]) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
HeinOnline -- 101 Mich. L. Rev. 976 2002-2003 tions and usages are reflectors of the fundamental political values that have emerged from that history."' 4 We would be surprised if Posner really believes that lawyers, as a class, have unique insight into the nation's fundamental political and moral values. And in any event legislators are often lawyers as well. Posner urges that we simply "disagree" with his assessment of institutional capacities. Not so. The point of disagreement is that we think his assessment fails, not because it is substantively erroneous .(we are agnostic about that), but instead because it neglects to provide a full comparative assessment of the relevant institutional factors. 
Posner briefly suggests that our proposal for empirical investigations, attempting to identify mistakes and injustices, "is a nonstarter unless there is some objective method of determining which decisions are mistaken or unjust."' 5 We are more optimistic. In some cases, people who disagree on the "objective method," or at least the right method, might be able to agree that one or another result counts as mistaken or unjust. Imagine, for example, a jurisdiction in which literalist interpretations produced outcomes that no reasonable person could endorse, and in which the relevant legislature could not anticipate those outcomes in advance or correct them after they occurred. In such a jurisdiction, the case for absurdity-avoiding nonliteral interpretations, at least in compelling circumstances, would be very strong. 6 Nor is the example fanciful. Is it irrelevant, in this regard, that in the United States (and many other nations as well), there seems to be a consensus in favor of interpreting statutes nonliterally in the case of obvious drafting errors? 7 
Posner doesn't like all of our proposals for empirical work. He suggests research projects that he would prefer. But we continue to believe that it would be revealing and informative to know whether courts are especially literalist in areas in which Congress is engaged in more aggressive oversight of judicial decisions. If this is so, literalism would be well-matched to congressional attentiveness. We also think it eminently feasible, and potentially valuable, to compare the interpretive practices of the various states, to have a better sense of what quotation marks omitted). 

questions. See id. at 970-71. All of the questions are interesting and important, but the sixth is the only that directly bears on our claims. See id. at 971. 
Institutions,supranote 10. 
HeinOnline -- 101 Mich. L. Rev. 977 2002-2003 judges are actually doing. We agree that rigorous empirical studies present a daunting challenge; the empirical study of law remains in its infancy. 8 (We confess that we are not terribly excited about Posner's suggestion that academics should study the relationship between state legislative activity and judicial salaries. To each his own!) 
But our major goal is not to set out a formal empirical agenda of any kind. We urge that large-scale conceptual claims cannot settle current disputes about interpretation; that any claims about interpretation are incomplete if they ignore institutional considerations; and that an understanding of those considerations helps explain what, exactly, reasonable people are currently disagreeing about. We do not take Posner to have challenged any of these claims. Indeed, he has given further reasons to accept all of them. We might be having a debate. But we do not believe that we are having a disagreement. 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic Review. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions BEHAVIORAELCONOMICSP,UBLICPOLICYA,ND PATERNALISMt 
LibertarianPaternalism 
By RICHARDH. THALERANDCASSR. SUNSTEIN* 
sider the term "paternalistic"to be derogatory. Most would think that the phrase libertarian paternalismis an oxymoron.The modestgoal of this essay is to encourageeconomists to rethink their views on paternalism.We believe thatthe anti-paternalistic fervor expressed by many economists is based on a combinationof a false assumption and at least two misconceptions. The false assumptionis thatpeople always (usually?) make choices that are in theirbest interest. This claim is either tautological, and therefore uninteresting,or testable. We claim that it is testable and false-indeed, obviously false. 
The first misconceptionis that there are viable alternativesto paternalism.In many situations, some organizationor agent must make a choice thatwill affect the choices of some other people. The point applies to both private and public actors. Considerthe problem facing the directorof a company cafeteria who discovers that the order in which food is arrangedinfluences the choices people make. To simplify, consider three alternative strategies: (1) she could make choices thatshe thinkswould make the customers best off; (2) she could make choices at random;or (3) she could maliciously choose those items that she thinks would make the customers as obese as possible. Option 1 *Discussants: RobertE. Hall, StanfordUniversity;Gary Becker, Universityof Chicago;RobertBarro,HarvardUniversity. 175 appears to be paternalistic, which it is, but would anyone advocate options 2 or 3? 
The second misconceptionis thatpaternalism always involves coercion. As the cafeteria example illustrates,the choice of which order to presentfood items does not coerce anyoneto do anything, yet one might prefer some orders to others on paternalisticgrounds. Would many object to puttingthe fruitbefore the desserts at an elementary school cafeteria if the outcome were to increasethe consumptionratioof apples to Twinkies?Is this questionfundamentallydifferentif the customersareadults?If no coercion is involved, we think that some types of paternalism should be acceptable to even the most ardentlibertarianW.e call such actions libertarian paternalism. 
In our understandinga, policy counts as "paternalistic" if it is selected with the goal of influencing the choices of affected parties in a way that will make those partiesbetteroff. We intend"betteroff' to be measuredas objectively as possible, andwe clearlydo not always equate revealed preference with welfare. That is, we emphasize the possibility that in some cases individuals make inferior choices, choices that they would change if they had complete information, unlimited cognitive abilities, and no lack of willpower. Once it is understoodthat some organizational decisions are inevitable, that a form of paternalismcannot be avoided, and thatthe alternativesto paternalism(such as choosing options to make people sick, obese, or generally worse off) are unattractive,we can abandonthe less interestingquestionof whether to be paternalisticor not and turn to the more constructivequestion of how to choose among paternalisticoptions.1 
Colin related issues. That paper shares with the papers in this AEA PAPERSAND PROCEEDINGS 
I. Are ChoicesRational? 
should be free from interference is usually based on the assumptionthat people do a good job of makingchoices, or at least thatthey do a far betterjob thanthirdpartiescould do. As far as we can tell, there is little empirical support for this claim. Research by psychologists and economists over the past three decades has raised questions about the rationality of the judgmentsand decisions thatindividualsmake. People do not exhibit rationalexpectations,fail to make forecasts that are consistent with Bayes' rule, use heuristics that lead them to make systematic blunders, exhibit preference reversals(thatis, they preferA to B and B to A) and make different choices depending on the wording of the problem see the two recent collections of papers by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky [2000] andby ThomasGilovich et al. [2002]) Furthermore, in the context of intertemporalchoice, people exhibit dynamic inconsistency, valuing present consumption much more than future consumption.In other words, people have selfcontrol problems session [James Choi et al., 2003b; Ted O'DonoghueandMatthewRabin,2003] for details and references) 
Many economists are skeptical of some of these findings, thinking that people may do a betterjob of choosing in the "realworld"than they do in the laboratory.However, studies of actual choices for high stakes reveal many of the same problems. For example, the Surgeon General reports that 61 percent of Americans are either overweight or obese. Given the adverse effects obesity has on health, it is hardto claim that Americansare eating optimal diets. 
of savings behavior.Shlomo Thaler (2002 the portfolios they have selected in their defined-contributionsavings plans. Employees volunteeredto sharetheirportfoliochoices with the investigators (by bringing a copy of their session the commongoal of devisingpolicies thathelp some agentswho aremakingsome mistake,while minimizingthe costs imposed on others. most recent statementto the lab). They were then shown the probabilitydistributionsof expected retirementincome for three investment portfolios just labeled A, B, and C. Unbeknownst to the subjects, the three portfolios were their own and portfolios mimicking the averageand medianchoices of theirfellow employees. The distributionsof expected returns were computedusing the softwareof Financial Engines, the financial information company founded by William Sharpe. On average, the subjectsratedthe averageportfolioequallywith theirown portfolio,andtheyjudged the median portfolioto be significantlymore attractivethan their own. Indeed, only 20 percent of the subjects preferredtheir own portfolio to the median portfolio. Apparently,people do not gain much by choosing investment portfolios for themselves. 
II. Is PaternalismInevitable? 
illustrates, planners are forced to make some design choices. A simple and importantexample is the selection of a "default option" to determine what happens if an agent fails to choose for himself. In a fully rational world such design choices would have little effect (at least in high-stakes situations) because agents would simply choose the best option for them regardless of the default. However, numerous experimentsillustratethatthereis a very strong "statusquo" bias Richard Zeckhauser, 1988; Kahneman et al., 1991) out by private institutions or by government, tends to stick. 
from studies of automaticenrollmentin 401(k) employee savings plans. Most 401(k) plans use an opt-in design. When employees firstbecome eligible to participatein the 401(k) plan, they receive some plan informationand an enrollment form that must be completed in order to join. Under the alternativeof automaticenrollment, employees receive the same information but aretold thatunless they opt out, they will be enrolled in the plan (with some default options for savings rates and asset allocation). In companies that offer a "match" (the employer matches the employee's contributionsaccording to some formula, often a 50-percentmatch up to some cap), most employees eventuallydo join the plan, but enrollments occur much sooner under automaticenrollment.For example, Brigitte found that initial enrollmentsjumped from 49 percentto 86 percent,and similarresults for other companies. 
Should the adoptionof automaticenrollment be consideredpaternalistic?And, if so, shouldit therefore be seen as a kind of officious meddling with employee preferences?We answer these questions yes and no respectively. If the employer thinks (correctly, we believe) that most employees would preferto join the 401(k) plan if they took the time to think about it and did not lose the enrollmentform,thenby choosing automaticenrollmentthey are acting paternalistically. They are attempting to steer employees' choices in directions that will promote employees' welfare. But since no one is forced to do anything, we think this steering should be considered unobjectionableto libertarians.The employer must choose some set of rules, and either plan affects employees' choices. No law of nature says that, in the absence of an affirmativeelection by employees, zero percent of earnings will go into a retirement plan. Because both plans alter choices, neitherone can be said, more than the other, to count as a form of objectionable meddling. 
Quick-mindedreaders might be tempted to think that there is a way out of this dilemma. Employers could avoid choosing a default if they requiredemployees to make a choice, eitherin or out. But some thoughtreveals thatthis is not at all a way out of the dilemma;rather,it is simply anotheroption among many that the employer can elect. In fact, Choi et al. (2003a) findthatthis ruleincreasesenrollments(relative to the opt-in rule) though by not as much as automaticenrollment.Furthermoret,he very requirementthat employees make a choice has a paternalisticelement. Many employees do not want to have to make a choice (and would choose not to have to do so). Should employers really force them to choose? 
Why, exactly, does the setting of defaults have such large effects? With respect to savings, the designateddefaultplan apparentlycarries a certain legitimacy for many employees, perhapsbecause it seems to have resultedfrom some conscious thoughtaboutwhat makesmost sense for most people. But there is a separate explanation, involving inertia. For any employee, a change from any status quo entails time andeffort, andmanypeople seem to prefer to avoid both of these, especially if they are proneto procrastinationW.hen defaultrules are "sticky" and affect choices as a result, inertia might be the majorreason. 
Forpresentpurposes,the choice amongthese variousexplanationsdoes not muchmatter.The point is only that paternalism,in the form of effects on individualchoices, is often unavoidable. When paternalismseems absent,it is usually becausethe startingpointappearsso natural and obvious that its preference-shapingeffects are invisible to most observers. But those effects are nonetheless there. Of course it is usually good not to block choices, and we do not mean to defend non-libertarian paternalism here. But in an important respect, the antipaternalisticposition is incoherent. 
III. Beyondthe Inevitable(but Still Libertarian) 
The inevitabilityof paternalismis most clear when the plannerhas to choose defaultrules. It is reasonableto ask whetherthe plannershould go beyond the inevitable. Take the cafeteria example discussed above. Putting the fruit before the dessertsis a fairly mild intervention.A more intrusive step would be to place the desserts in anotherlocation altogether,so that diners have to get up and get a dessert after they have finished the rest of their meal. This step raises the transactionscosts of eating dessert, and accordingto a standardeconomic analysis the proposal is unattractive:it seems to make dessert-eatersworse off and no one better off. But once self-controlcosts are incorporated,we can see that some diners would prefer this arrangement,namely, those who would eat a dessert if it were put in front of them but would resist temptationif given a little help. To the extent that the dessert location is not hard to find, and no choice is forbidden,this approach meets libertarianmuster. 
In the domain of employee savings, Thaler andBenartzi(2003) have proposeda methodof increasing contributions to 401(k) plans that also meets the libertariantest. Under this plan, AEAPAPERSAND PROCEEDINGS called Save More Tomorrow, employees are invited to sign up for a programin which their contributionsto the savings plan are increased annuallywhenever they get a raise. Once employees join the plan, they stay in until they opt out or reach the maximum savings rate in the plan. In the first company to use this plan, the employees who joined increased their savings rates from 3.5 percentto 11.6 percentin a little over two years (three raises). Very few of the employees who join the plan drop out. This is successful libertarianpaternalismin action. 
IV. How to Choose:The Toolbox 
of the LibertarianPaternalist 
mean to include anyone who must design plans for others, from human-resourcedirectors to bureaucratsto kings) choose among possible systems, given that some choice is necessary? We suggest two approachesto this problem. 
If feasible, a comparison of possible rules should be done using a form of cost-benefit analysis.The goal of a cost-benefit studywould be to measurethe full ramificationsof any design choice. To illustrate,take the example of automaticenrollment.Under automaticenrollment some employees will join the plan who otherwise would not. Presumably, some are made better off (especially if there is an employer match), but some may be made worse off (e.g., those who are highly liquidityconstrained).If the issue were just enrollment, we would guess thatthe gains would exceed the losses. We base this guess partly on revealed choices. Most employees do join the plan eventually, and very few who are automaticallyenrolled opt out when they figure out what has happenedto them. We also judge thatthe costs of having too little saved up for retirementare typically greaterthanthe costs of having saved too much. 
In many cases, however, the plannerwill be unable to make a direct inquiry into welfare, eitherbecause too little informationis available or because the costs of doing the analysis are not warranted.The committed anti-paternalist might say, in such cases, that people should simply be permittedto choose as they see fit. We hope thatwe have said enoughto show why this response is unhelpful.Whatpeople choose often depends on the startingpoint, and hence the startingpoint cannot be selected by asking whatpeople choose. In these circumstances,the libertarianpaternalistwould seek indirectproxies for welfare:methodsthattest whetherone or anotherapproachis welfare-promotingwithout relying on unreliable guesswork about that question. We suggest three possible methods. 
First, the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat the majoritywould choose if explicit choices were required and revealed. Useful though it is, this market-mimickingapproach raises its own problems. Perhaps the majority's choices would be insufficiently informed. Perhaps those choices, in fact, would not promotethe majority'swelfare.At least as a presumption,however, it makes sense to follow those choices, if the planner knows what they would be. A deeper problem is that the majority's choices might themselves be a functionof the startingpoint or the default rule. If so, the problem of circularity dooms the marketmimicking approach. But in some cases, at least, the majorityis likely to go one way or the otherregardlessof the startingpoint;andto that extent, the market-mimickingstrategy seems quite workable. 
Second, the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat would force people to make their choices explicit. This approach might be chosen if the market-mimickingstrategy fails, eitherbecause of the circularityproblem or because the planner does not know which approachwould in fact be chosen by the majority.We have seen the possibilityof forced choices in the context of retirementplans; it would be easy to findotherexamples.Here too, however, thereis a risk thatthe choices thatare actually elicited will be inadequatelyinformed or will not promote welfare. In the case of retirementplans, for example, forced choices have been found to produce higher participation rates than requiring opt-ins, but lower rates than requiringopt-outs. If it is likely that automatic enrollment is welfare-promoting, perhaps automatic enrollment should be preferred over forced choices. The only suggestion is that, where the social planneris unsure how to handle the welfare question, he might devise a strategythatrequirespeople to choose. 
Third,the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat minimizesthe numberof optouts. For example, very few employees opt out of the 401(k) plan when they are automatically enrolled,thoughmany opt in underthe standard enrollmentprocedure.This is an ex post inquiry into people's preferences,in contrastto the ex ante approachfavoredby the market-mimicking strategy.With those numbers,thereis reasonto thinkthatautomaticenrollmentis better,if only because morepeople are sufficientlysatisfiedto leave it in place. 
V. Conclusion 
Our goal here has been to defend libertarian paternalism, an approach that preserves freedom of choice but that authorizesboth private and public institutionsto steer people in directions thatwill promotetheirwelfare. Some kind of paternalismis likely whenever such institutions set out arrangementsthat will prevail unless people affirmativelychoose otherwise. In these circumstances,the goal shouldbe to avoid random, arbitrary,or harmful effects and to produce a situation that is likely to promote people's welfare, suitably defined. 
companies cannot be liable for failing to inform people about the risks of smoking because people already have sufficient information, indeed usually overestimating the risks. If he is right about this latter point, then one would expect his reforms to increase the amount of smoking as people learn that smoking is less risky than they had believed. 
But Viscusi fails to grapple with the public health community's fundamental concern with smoking: that it is addictive. Many people start smoking when they are still children, and others who start as adults do not have adequate information about the dangers of smoking. They might know that smoking causes a high risk of lung cancer and other diseases, but they do not understand the power of nicotine addiction, and they believe that they will quit before they do significant damage to their bodies. They also have trouble resisting peer pressure and the glamorous image of smoking fed by highly effective tobacco advertising. These individuals try to quit later in life, but are unable to, and high numbers succumb to smoking-related illnesses. 
Viscusi's view about addiction is not clear. On the one hand, he says that cigarettes are addictive. On the other hand, he stresses that smoking is a matter of choice. He cites the -0.4 to -0.7 elasticity of demand for cigarettes as evidence that they are not addictive (pp 17172), but the elasticity just tells us that some people will stop or reduce smoking when the price rises, not that everyone will, and the evidence suggests that for a core group even large price increases will not affect their behavior. The two views can be reconciled with the rational addiction model, which Viscusi cites.26 This model assumes that when a person begins to smoke he takes account of the cost of being able to stop. By contrast to the public health model, which assumes that a person starts smoking without thinking about addiction, and then finds himself trapped by the addiction when further information about the risks persuades him that it is time to stop, the rational addiction model assumes that a person chooses the whole package of cigarette-related benefits and afflictions -the pleasure of the smoke, the glamorous image, the approval of friends, the possibility of addiction, and the remote but devastating health consequences. 
The rational addiction view has been criticized in ways that go beyond the scope of this Review.27 It is sufficient, however, to point out that even if one accepts its behavioral assumptions, it does not have strong normative implications. Usually, when a person makes a choice 
The Universityof Chicago Law Review at time 1 that he regrets at time 2, we do not allow him to escape the consequences of his decision. Otherwise, it would be difficult for people to commit themselves, and the power to commit oneself is extremely valuable in a range of social and economic relationships. But there is a philosophical objection to holding the welfare of the person at time 2 hostage to the preferences of the person at time 1: There is no obvious reason for thinking that welfare at time 1 is more important than welfare at time 2, while it is clear that individuals discount benefits flowing to their future selves. These concerns are relatively minor for most transactions, but they loom large when the early choice has significant negative consequences in the distant future, as is the case for smoking and the consumption of other dangerous and addictive drugs. 
Viscusi is more persuasive when he criticizes the regulatory package established by the MSA, and in particular the high de facto excise taxes that it establishes.2 High excise taxes are troublesome regardless of whether one takes Viscusi's choice view, or the public health community's addiction view. If smoking is a matter of choice, then excise taxes should be used to deter harms to others; however, these harms appear to be relatively small, justifying only low excise taxes. If smoking is a matter of addiction, then excise taxes will deter some people from smoking but leave unaffected a large group of people who will pay more for smoking, and carry a larger part of the tax burden than nonsmokers.29 (In theory, these distributive burdens could be eliminated by adjusting the income tax but the politics of such adjustments are complex.) A moderate excise tax might be justified, but at a time when the drug war is under intense criticism, a prohibitively high tax or an outright ban hardly seems appropriate. 
Other policy instruments also have moderate value. Educational efforts, advertising limitations, and regulation of public spaces show promise but have clear limits0 One problem with these strategies, which is frequently overlooked, is that their quasi-intended effect of stigmatizing smoking may do more harm than good. Stigma is an inefficient way of helping addicts; stigma harms the addicts just like excise taxes, but unlike excise taxes does not raise revenues. In addition, selfconscious efforts by authorities to create and reinforce stigma can 28 This is a point made by many other authors. See, for example, Frank J. Chaloupka, et al, Taxing Tobacco:The Impact of Tobacco Taxes on CigaretteSmoking and OtherTobacco Use, in Rabin and Sugarman, eds, Regulating Tobacco at 63-464 (cited in note 1) (describing the disproportionate impact of tobacco excise taxes on low-income smokers). But there are complications, as noted in this Review. 
29 See id. 
30 For discussions of these proposals, see the essays in Rabin and Sugarman, eds, Regulating Tobacco (cited in note 1). 
backfire and make the forbidden activity all the more alluring to young people and others who regard themselves as nonconformists not easily cowed by officially endorsed public sentiment. 
Viscusi sees the MSA as but one element in a class of cases that reflect a disturbing new trend that he calls "regulation by litigation" (p 217). The vast fees earned by tort lawyers in the Medicaid litigation have stimulated similar lawsuits against gun manufacturers, the paint and fast food industries, and HMOs. Viscusi argues that litigation generates bad regulation that favors lawyers and interest groups, and that legislation and agency regulation (he does not distinguish the two) are the more appropriate vehicles for reining in industry, if such reining-in is needed (p 217). He faults the MSA for its role in encouraging this new litigation (p 4). 
This claim that there is a special class of troubling "regulation by litigation" cases" will strike lawyers as odd. Tort law is a form of regulation, and always has been. Manufacturers know that when they design products they will be held liable under tort law if they choose an unreasonably dangerous design. Judicial decisions ex post will often have the effect of creating regulation-like commands -for instance, do not design a car that explodes if rear-ended at low speeds-but the policy here is to give manufacturers an ex ante incentive to invest in safety. There is nothing new about regulation by litigation, and one suspects that Viscusi does not understand this basic point.' 
Viscusi argues that regulation is superior to litigation because of the traditional values of transparency and accountability. Affected parties have the opportunity to lobby legislators and regulators prior to the creation of rules. If the public does not like the rules, they can vote the politicians out of office. Viscusi thinks that the tort system, by contrast, has been corrupted by well-financed tort lawyers, pusillanimous judges, and populist juries. 
This view turns traditional public-choice thinking on its head. If there is any interest group with dominant influence, one would think it the tobacco industry -rich, highly concentrated, very sophisticated- and not so much the tort lawyers, who are much more numerous and varying in their goals and, for all their new wealth, not nearly as rich. The public health community- another one of Viscusi's betes 31 See W. Kip Viscusi, ed, Regulation through Litigation v (Brookings 2002) (contending that large-scale lawsuits over tobacco, guns, and other products represent a new genre of litigation that confront broad policy problems better left to legislatures). 
32 See also Randall Lutter and Elizabeth Mader, LitigatingLead-Based PaintHazards,in Viscusi, ed, Regulation through Litigation at 125-26 (cited in note 31) (calling the tort system's normal retroactive determination of liability "Kafkaesque"). noires-is a loose conglomeration of different interests, including doctors, hospitals, insurance companies, universities, and health advocates. The fact is that all these groups influence legislative and regulatory outcomes, transparency and accountability notwithstanding. The tobacco industry subverted the effort to incorporate a predecessor to the MSA in federal legislation when the proposed bills went beyond the restrictions to which the industry had initially agreed. The tort lawyers persuaded state legislatures to enact statutes that would facilitate their Medicaid litigation. And the public health community has influenced countless smoking-related laws and regulations. Indeed, all the things that Viscusi deplores in the MSA, like the excise taxes and the advertising restrictions, can be found in countless laws and regulations that existed long before the MSA was negotiated. "Regulation by regulation" has produced outcomes every bit as bad from Viscusi's perspective as those produced by "regulation by litigation.33 
By contrast, the tort system has long been thought to be relatively immune to public choice pressures. Although this view has come under increasing scrutiny, the evidence provides little support for Viscusi's negative view about tobacco litigation. If Viscusi is right about the weakness of the smokers' cases, the tort system has performed admirably until recently, resulting in few awards against the tobacco industry. Although the tort lawyers won some important early victories in the Medicaid litigation, they also lost some important cases, and never obtained a final judgment against a tobacco company. Viscusi's own theory-that the cartel arrangement benefited the tobacco industry and hurt smokers-suggests that the MSA can't be blamed on the tort system. On Viscusi's theory, the tobacco industry would have agreed to the MSA, or some similar version of it, even if the industry had thought it would do well in court. 
One of Viscusi's strongest grounds for complaint is the extraordinary legal fees won by the tort lawyers, but the blame for these fees lies on the shoulders of the states and the tobacco industry. When the tort lawyers offered to represent states in the Medicaid litigation, many states turned them down and relied on the staffs of their attorneys general. Other states preferred to use outside counsel and agreed to pay a percentage of any damages recovered, or what in other contexts would be called a normal contingency fee arrangement. The MSA contained a vague "reasonable" fees provision, to be determined by arbitration, and the arbitrators used the contracts between the states and the lawyers as a guide. Because the states won hundreds of billions of dollars, the contingency percentages yielded very high dol33 For a detailed discussion of the politics of tobacco litigation and legislation, see Martha A. Derthick, Up in Smoke (Congressional Quarterly 2002). lar values. The political outcry was muted because under the MSA the tobacco industry had to pay the fees, though of course the payment could only come from money that would otherwise be available for the states. However, the outcry was still significant enough to create resistance in some legislatures and stimulate concessions by some tobacco lawyers. So if the fees were unreasonable, the responsibility can be traced to the voluntary arrangements between attorneys general, legislatures, tobacco executives, and the tort lawyers. Judges, the guardians of the tort system, could not be expected to interfere with these arrangements. Nor could juries. 
The significant role of state legislatures and attorneys general in the Medicaid litigation suggests that this litigation should not be the prime exhibit for the case against "regulation by litigation," which is probably best used to refer to class actions involving private individuals, not governments, as the plaintiffs. Because the states were the plaintiffs in the Medicaid litigation, it is hard to draw a clean distinction between a virtuous political process and a corrupt legal process. Viscusi complains that the de facto excise taxes in the MSA are perverse because they are regressive, and as a result of them states benefit when tobacco sales rise. States' reluctance to finance antismoking advertisements with their tobacco money, as they had promised, is taken as evidence that they regard tobacco sales as a money pump. But if legislatures are politically responsible, why did they consent to the excise taxes in the first place? And if they were presented with them as a fait accompli,why didn't the legislatures fix the regressive impact by adjusting income taxes, and why would they put revenues over their concern for public health? No one argues that the excise tax on gasoline should be repealed because it gives the government an incentive to encourage people to drive. 
What is most noteworthy about the tobacco litigation is not its exposure of a new form of ex post regulation; the tort system is far older than the regulatory system that Viscusi champions. What is noteworthy is the significant role in the litigation of a group of wealthy and successful tort lawyer-entrepreneurs. Viscusi thinks that these people are bad guys (pp 5,53-54, 134,219-20), and perhaps they are, but like the tobacco industry executives their sin was their exploitation of a permissive legal environment in order to make money. So that this legal environment may be changed, understanding the emergence and incentives of the tort lawyers is an important task, for which the crude opposition between litigation and regulation is not helpful. There are smoke-filled rooms in state capitols, just as there are in the pricey hotels where the MSA was hammered out. 
HeinOnline -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1163 2003 
HeinOnline -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1164 2003 
COMMENTS The Illegitimacy of Protective Jurisdiction over Foreign Affairs .......................................... 
Andrew C. Baak 1487 The Philosophical Dimensions of the 
Doctrine of Unconscionability ........................... Philip Bridwell 1513 State Income Taxation of Out-of-State 
Trademark Holding Companies ....................... Tun-Jen Chiang 1533 Viewpoint Restrictions and 
School-Sponsored Student Speech: 
Avenues for Heightened Protection .............. Samuel P Jordan 1555 An Antitrust Challenge to the 
NCAA Transfer Rules ..................................... Sarah M. Konsky 1581 The Power to Declare 
Peace Unilaterally .............................................. 
Cooperative Federalism and 
Constructive Waiver of State Sovereign Immunity ................................. 
Mark W M osier 1609 
Sarah C. Rispin 1639 
REVIEW The Many Meanings of Separation 
Separationof Church and State Philip Hamburger ............................................ 
DouglasLaycock 1667 Volume 70 © 2003 by The University of Chicago Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron 
The idea of libertarianpaternalismmight seem to be an oxymoron, but it is both possible and desirablefor private and public institutions to influence behavior while also respectingfreedom of choice. Often people's preferences are unclearand ill-formed,and their choices will inevitably be influenced by default rules,framing effects and startingpoints.In these circumstances,a form of paternalismcannotbe avoided. Equipped with an understandingof behavioralfindings of bounded rationalityand bounded self-control,libertarianpaternalistsshould attempt to steer people's choices in welfare-promotingdirections without eliminatingfreedom of choice. It is alsopossible to show how a libertarianpaternalistmight select among the possible options and to assess how much choice to offer.Examples are given from many areas,including savings behavior,labor law, and consumerprotection. 
INTRODUCrION Consider two studies of savings behavior: o Hoping to increase savings by workers, several employers have adopted a simple strategy. Instead of asking workers to elect to t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. 
tt Robert P. Gwinn Professor of Economics and Behavioral Science, The University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. 
We are grateful to Gary Becker, Bryan Caplan, Richard Epstein, Carolyn Frantz, Daniel Gilbert, Robert Hahn, J.B. Heaton, Christine Jolls, Howard Kunrenther, Owen Lamont, Brigitte Madrian, Jane Mansbridge, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Matthew Rabin, and David Strauss for valuable comments on a previous draft. We are also grateful to Caryn Campbell for excellent research assistance and to participants in discussions at the John F Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and a workin-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School. Finally, thanks to discussants on a panel in which an early version of this Article was presented at the 2003 meetings of the American Economic Association. 
1159 participate in a 401(k) plan, workers will be assumed to want to participate in such a plan, and hence they will be enrolled automatically unless they specifically choose otherwise. This simple change in the default rule has produced dramatic increases in enrollment.' * Rather than changing the default rule, some employers have provided their employees with a novel option: Allocate a portion offuture wage increasesto savings. Employees who choose this plan are free to opt out at any time. A large number of employees have agreed to try the plan, and only a few have opted out. The result has been significant increases in savings rates 
Libertarians embrace freedom of choice, and so they deplore paternalism.' Paternalists are thought to be skeptical of unfettered freedom of choice and to deplore libertarianism.4 According to the conventional wisdom, libertarians cannot possibly embrace paternalism, and paternalists abhor libertarianism. The idea of libertarian paternalism seems to be a contradiction in terms. 
Generalizing from the two studies just described, we intend to unsettle the conventional wisdom here. We propose a form of paternalism, libertarian in spirit, that should be acceptable to those who are firmly committed to freedom of choice on grounds of either autonomy or welfare.' Indeed, we urge that libertarian paternalism provides a basis for both understanding and rethinking a number of areas of contemporary law, including those aspects that deal with worker welfare, consumer protection, and the family.6 In the process of defending these claims, we intend to make some objections to widely held beliefs about both freedom of choice and paternalism.7 Our emphasis is on the fact that in many domains, people lack clear, stable, or wellordered preferences. What they choose is strongly influenced by details of the context in which they make their choice, for example default rules, framing effects (that is, the wording of possible options), and starting points. These contextual influences render the very meaning of the term "preferences" unclear. 
Consider the question whether to undergo a risky medical procedure. When people are told, "Of those who undergo this procedure, 90 percent are still alive after five years," they are far more likely to agree to the procedure than when they are told, "Of those who undergo this procedure, 10 percent are dead after five years." What, then, are the patient's "preferences" with respect to this procedure? Repeated experiences with such problems might be expected to eliminate this framing effect, but doctors too are vulnerable to it.' Or return to the question of savings for retirement. It is now clear that if an employer requires employees to make an affirmative election in favor of savings, with the default rule devoting 100 percent of wages to current income, the level of savings will be far lower than if the employer adopts an automatic enrollment program from which employees are freely permitted to opt out.' Can workers then be said to have well-defined preferences about how much to save? This simple example can be extended to many situations involving the behavior of workers and consumers. 
As the savings problem illustrates, the design features of both legal and organizational rules have surprisingly powerful influences on people's choices. We urge that such rules should be chosen with the explicit goal of improving the welfare of the people affected by them. The libertarian aspect of our strategies lies in the straightforward insistence that, in general, people should be free to opt out of specified arrangements if they choose to do so. To borrow a phrase, libertarian paternalists urge that people should be "free to choose."" Hence we do not aim to defend any approach that blocks individual choices. 
The paternalistic aspect consists in the claim that it is legitimate for private and public institutions to attempt to influence people's behavior even when third-party effects are absent. In other words, we argue for self-conscious efforts, by private and public institutions, to steer people's choices in directions that will improve the choosers' own welfare. In our understanding, a policy therefore counts as "paternalistic" if it attempts to influence the choices of affected parties in a way that will make choosers better off.'2 Drawing on some wellestablished findings in behavioral economics and cognitive psychology, we emphasize the possibility that in some cases individuals make inferior decisions in terms of their own welfare-decisions that they would change if they had complete information, unlimited cognitive abilities, and no lack of self-control." In addition, the notion of libertarian paternalism can be complemented by that of libertarianbenevolence, by which plan design features such as default rules, framing effects, and starting points are enlisted in the interest of vulnerable third parties. We shall devote some discussion to this possibility. 
Libertarian paternalism is a relatively weak and nonintrusive type of paternalism, because choices are not blocked or fenced off. In its most cautious forms, libertarian paternalism imposes trivial costs on those who seek to depart from the planner's preferred option. But the approach we recommend nonetheless counts as paternalistic, because private and public planners" are not trying to track people's anticipated choices, but are self-consciously attempting to move people in welfare-promoting directions. Some libertarians are likely to have little or no trouble with our endorsement of paternalism for private institutions; their chief objection is to paternalistic law and government. But as we shall show, the same points that support welfarepromoting private paternalism apply to government as well. It follows standing of libertarianism, one that attempts to minimize influences on free choice, or to maximize unfettered liberty of choice. We suggest below that influences on freedom of choice are often impossible to avoid. We also offer reasons to believe that more choices are not always better than fewer. A policy of requiring active choices, we shall show, does promote a form of choice, but it has problems of its own. We hope not to have any real quarrels with libertarians here, simply because our approach allows people to opt out of any specified arrangements. 
12 For a similar definition, see Donald VanDeVeer, PaternalisticIntervention: The Moral Bounds on Benevolence 22 (Princeton 1986). 
13 Bounded rationality and bounded self-control are described in Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A BehavioralApproach to Law and Economics, 50 Stan L Rev 1471, 1477-79 (1998). 
14 When we use the word "planner" in this Article, we mean anyone who faces the job of designing institutional features such as rules, procedures, information packages, and the like. A large firm will typically have many employees who are serving as "planners" in this sense, from the human resources manager who chooses the set of health insurance options to the CEO who decides whether to pay the match in the 401(k) plan in shares of company stock. For most of our examples, planners are not government officials, though the arguments apply to this class of planners as well. that one of our principal targets is the dogmatic anti-paternalism of numerous analysts of law, including many economists and economically oriented lawyers." We believe that this dogmatism is 6based on a combination of a false assumption and two misconceptions. 
The false assumption is that almost all people, almost all of the time, make choices that are in their best interest or at the very least are better, by their own lights, than the choices that would be made by third parties. This claim is either tautological, and therefore uninteresting, or testable. We claim that it is testable and false, indeed obviously false. In fact, we do not think that anyone believes it on reflection. Suppose that a chess novice were to play against an experienced player. Predictably the novice would lose precisely because he made inferior choices-choices that could easily be improved by some helpful hints. More generally, how well people choose is an empirical question, one whose answer is likely to vary across domains." As a first approximation, it seems reasonable to say that people make better choices in contexts in which they have experience and good information (say, choosing ice cream flavors) than in contexts in which they are inexperienced and poorly informed (say, choosing among medical treatments or investment options). So long as people are not choosing perfectly, it is at least possible that some policy could make them better off by improving their decisions. [B]y explicitly addressing when and how people do and do not pursue their own best interests, economists will be better able to contribute to policy debates.To contribute to debates over regulating private financial decisions, we must study whether financial decisions are based on fallacious statistical reasoning and whether self-control problems lead people to borrow too heavily; to contribute to debates over teenage smoking, we must study whether teenagers become smokers against their long-run best interest. Economists will and should be ignored if we continue to insist that it is axiomatic that constantly trading stocks or accumulating consumer debt or becoming a heroin addict must be optimal for the people doing these things merely because they have chosen to do it. 
17 In some areas, of course, it will be difficult to reach uncontroversial conclusions on the basis of empirical study alone, because contested judgments of value are in the background. Do people choose well if they choose to marry young, or do they choose better if they cohabit for a long time before marrying? Do young, unmarried women choose well if they choose abortion? Empirical issues are highly relevant here, but they will hardly resolve all social disputes on these questions. We are not attempting to say anything controversial about welfare, or to take sides in reasonable disputes about how to understand that term. For discussion of these normative issues, see Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom 74-76 (Knopf 1999) (maintaining that welfare should be seen in terms of the substantive freedoms of people to choose a life that they have reason to value); Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, Preface, in Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, eds, Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology ix, xi-xii (Russell Sage 1999) (urging a view of human welfare that extends beyond traditional economic indicators to include "desirable goods such as love, mental challenge, and stress"). 
The first misconception is that there are viable alternatives to paternalism. In many situations, some organization or agent must make a choice that will affect the behavior of some other people. There is, in those situations, no alternative to a kind of paternalism-at least in the form of an intervention that affects what people choose. We are emphasizing, then, the possibility that people's preferences, in certain domains and across a certain range, are influenced by the choices made by planners.' The point applies to both private and public actors, and hence to those who design legal rules as well as to those who serve consumers. As a simple example, consider the cafeteria at some organization. The cafeteria must make a multitude of decisions, including which foods to serve, which ingredients to use, and in what order to arrange the choices. Suppose that the director of the cafeteria notices that customers have a tendency to choose more of the items that are presented earlier in the line. How should the director decide in what order to present the items? To simplify, consider some alternative strategies that the director might adopt in deciding which items to place early in the line: customers best off, all things considered. customers as obese as possible. on their own. 
Option 1 appears to be paternalistic, but would anyone advocate options 2 or 3? Option 4 is what many anti-paternalists would favor, but it is much harder to implement than it might seem. Across a certain domain of possibilities, consumers will often lack well-formed preferences, in the sense of preferences that are firmly held and preexist the director's own choices about how to order the relevant items. If the arrangement of the alternatives has a significant effect on the selections the customers make, then their true "preferences" do not formally exist. 
18 For claims to this effect, see Russell Korobkin, The Status Quo Bias and Contract Default Rules, 83 Cornell L Rev 608,675 (1998) (asserting that "the preference exogeneity assumption, implicit in all law-and-economics theories of efficient contract default rule selection, is probably false"); Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law,22 J Leg Stud 217, 224 (1993) (arguing that the demand for environmental regulation is affected by the initial allocation of rights by government planners). Important qualifications come from Robert C. Ellickson, Orderwithout Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes (Harvard 1991) (discussing settings in which people organize their affairs without reference to law). But even with those qualifications, there is no objection to libertarian paternalism; in the contexts explored by Ellickson, the default rule is irrelevant, not harmful. 
Of course, market pressures will impose a discipline on the selfinterested choices of those cafeteria directors who face competition. To that extent, those directors must indeed provide people with options they are willing to buy. A cafeteria that faces competition and offers healthy but terrible-tasting food is unlikely to do well. Marketoriented libertarians might urge that the cafeteria should attempt to maximize profits, selecting menus in a way that will increase net revenues. But profit maximization is not the appropriate goal for cafeterias granted a degree of monopoly power-for example, those in schools, dormitories, or some companies. Furthermore, even those cafeterias that face competition will find that some of the time, market success will come not from tracking people's ex ante preferences, but from providing goods and services that turn out, in practice, to promote their welfare, all things considered. Consumers might be surprised by what they end up liking; indeed, their preferences might change as a result of consumption." And in some cases, the discipline imposed by market pressures will nonetheless allow the director a great deal of room to maneuver, because people's preferences are not well-formed across the relevant domains. 
While some libertarians will happily accept this point for private institutions, they will object to government efforts to influence choice in the name of welfare. Skepticism about government might be based on the fact that governments are disciplined less or perhaps not at all by market pressures. Or such skepticism might be based on the fear that parochial interests will drive government planners in their own preferred directions (the public choice problem).2' We agree that for government, the risks of mistake and overreaching are real and sometimes serious. But governments, no less than cafeterias (which governments frequently run), have to provide starting points of one or another kind; this is not avoidable. As we shall emphasize, they do so every day through the rules of contract and tort, in a way that inevitably affects some preferences and choices.2' In this respect, the antipaternalist position is unhelpful-a literal nonstarter. 
The second misconception is that paternalism always involves coercion. As the cafeteria example illustrates, the choice of the order in which to present food items does not coerce anyone to do anything, yet one might prefer some orders to others on grounds that are paternalistic in the sense that we use the term. Would anyone object to putting the fruit and salad before the desserts at an elementary school cafeteria if the result were to increase the consumption ratio of apples to Twinkies? Is this question fundamentally different if the customers are adults? Since no coercion is involved, we think that some types of paternalism should be acceptable to even the most ardent libertarian. In the important domain of savings behavior, we shall offer a number of illustrations. To those anti-libertarians who are suspicious of freedom of choice and would prefer to embrace welfare instead, we urge that it is often possible for paternalistic planners to make common cause with their libertarian adversaries by adopting policies that promise to promote welfare but that also make room for freedom of choice. To confident planners, we suggest that the risks of confused or ill-motivated plans are reduced if people are given the opportunity to reject the planner's preferred solutions. 
The thrust of our argument is that the term "paternalistic" should not be considered pejorative, just descriptive. Once it is understood that some organizational decisions are inevitable, that a form of paternalism cannot be avoided, and that the alternatives to paternalism (such as choosing options to make people worse off) are unattractive, we can abandon the less interesting question of whether to be paternalistic or not, and turn to the more constructive question of how to choose among the possible choice-influencing options. To this end we make two general suggestions. First, programs should be designed using a type of welfare analysis, one in which a serious attempt is made to measure the costs and benefits of outcomes (rather than relying on estimates of willingness to pay). Choosers should be given more choices if the welfare benefits exceed the welfare costs. Second, some results from the psychology of decisionmaking should be used to provide ex ante guidelines to support reasonable judgments about when consumers and workers will gain most by increasing options. We argue that those who are generally inclined to oppose paternalism should consider these suggestions uncontroversial. 
The remainder of this Article is organized as follows. In Part I, we briefly support the claim that people's choices might not promote their own welfare. Part II, in some ways the conceptual heart of the Article, asks whether a form of paternalism is inevitable. We suggest that because of the likely effects of default rules, framing effects, and starting points on choices and preferences, paternalism, at least in a weak sense, is impossible to avoid. To be sure, planners can try to avoid paternalism by requiring people to make active choices, but sometimes people will resist any such requirement (which is along one dimension paternalistic too, simply because people sometimes do not want to choose). Part III investigates how a libertarian paternalist 1.167 might select among the major options, including minimal paternalism, required active choices, procedural constraints, and substantive constraints. Part IV explores a large question: How much choice should be offered? We identify a set of questions that must be answered in order to know whether people's welfare is likely to be promoted or undermined by a large option set. Part V explores objections. 
I. THE RATIONALITY OF CHOICES 
The presumption that individual choices should be respected is usually based on the claim that people do an excellent job of making choices, or at least that they do a far better job than third parties could possibly do.22 As far as we can tell, there is little empirical support for this claim, at least if it is offered in this general form. Consider the issue of obesity. Rates of obesity in the United States are now approaching 20 percent, and over 60 percent of Americans are considered either obese or overweight." There is overwhelming evidence that obesity causes serious health risks, frequently leading to premature death.24 It is quite fantastic to suggest that everyone is choosing 22 It is usually, but not always, based on this claim. Some of the standard arguments against paternalism rest not on consequences but on autonomy-on a belief that people are entitled to make their own choices even if they err. Thus John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859), reprinted in Utilitarianism,On Liberty, Considerationson Representative Government 69 (Dent 1972) (H.B. Acton, ed), is a mix of autonomy-based and consequentialist claims. Our principal concern here is with welfare rnd consequences, though as we suggest below, freedom of choice is sometimes an ingredient in welfare. We do not disagree with the view that autonomy has claims of its own, but we believe that it would be fanatical, in the settings that we discuss, to treat autonomy, in the form of freedom of choice, as a kind of trump not to be overridden on consequentialist grounds. In any case, the autonomy argument is undermined by the fact, discussed in Part I, that sometimes preferences and choices are a function of given arrangements. Most importantly, we think that respect for autonomy is adequately accommodated by the libertarian aspect of libertarian paternalism, as discussed below. 
We note as well that the complex relationship among preferences, choices, and autonomy is a large theme in the liberal tradition. See Don Herzog, Happy Slaves: A Critiqueof Consent Theory 229 (Chicago 1989) (challenging consent theory on the ground that some individuals may not really be capable of choice, or that the preexisting social roles people occupy do not provide them with real choice); Jon Elster, Sour Grapes:Studies in the Subversion of Rationality 109 (Cambridge 1983) (discussing adaptation of preferences to existing opportunities). Sometimes it is emphasized that preferences and choices are a product of unjust background conditions, jeopardizing autonomy, and that when choices are a product of background injustice, respect for those choices may not promote autonomy. See Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (North-Holland 1985). Our discussion does not engage these issues, but there is a clear connection between such arguments and claims about "adaptive preferences," see Elster, Sour Grapes at 109-10, and our emphasis on status quo bias and the endowment effect in Part II.C. 
23 See Center for Disease Control data, online at http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/ obesity/trend/prev-char.htm (visited May 10, 2003). This represents a 61 percent increase in obesity between 1991 and 2000; 38.8 million Americans qualify as obese. See id. See also Ali H. Mokdad, et al, The Continuing Epidemics of Obesity and Diabetes in the United States, 286 JAMA 1195 (2001). 
24 See, for example, Eugenia E. Calle, et al, Body-Mass Index and Mortality in a Prospective Cohort of US. Adults, 341 New Eng J Med 1097 (1999) (discussing increased risk of death from the optimal diet, or a diet that is preferable to what might be produced with third-party guidance. Of course, rational people care about the taste of food, not simply about health, and we do not claim that everyone who is overweight is necessarily failing to act rationally. It is the strong claim that all or almost all Americans are choosing their diet optimally that we reject as untenable. What is true for diets is true as well for much other risk-related behavior, including smoking and drinking, which produce over 500,000 premature deaths each year." In these circumstances, people's choices cannot reasonably be thought, in all domains, to be the best means of promoting their well-being. Indeed, many smokers, drinkers, and overeaters are willing to pay for third parties to help them choose better consumption sets. 
On a more scientific level, research by psychologists and economists over the past three decades has raised questions about the rationality of many judgments and decisions that individuals make. People fail to make forecasts that are consistent with Bayes's rule," use heuristics that can lead them to make systematic blunders,27 exhibit preference reversals (that is, they prefer A to B and B to A)," suffer from problems of self-control, " and make different choices depending on the framing of the problem.' It is possible to raise questions about all causes among the obese). See also National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Diseases, Understanding Adult Obesity, NIH Pub No 01-3680 (Oct 2001), online at http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/nutrit/pubs/unders.htm#Healthrisks (visited May 10, 2003) (noting links between obesity and cancer, diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, and stroke). 
(Cambridge 2002), relying on J. Michael McGinnis and William H. Foege, Actual Causes of Death in the United States, 270 JAMA 2207 (1993). For an interesting discussion, see Jonathan Gruber, Smoking's 'Internalities,' 25 Regulation 52, 54-55 (Winter 200 between smokers' short-term desire for self-gratification and their long-term desire for good health, and suggesting that cigarette taxation can help smokers exercise the self-control needed to act on behalf of their long-term interests). 
26 See David M. Grether, Bayes Rule as a Descriptive Model: The Representativeness Heuristic, 95 Q J Econ 537 (1980). Bayes's rule explains how to change existing beliefs as to the probability of a particular hypothesis in the light of new evidence. See Jonathan Baron, Thinking and Deciding 109-15 (Cambridge 3d ed 2000) (giving a mathematical explanation and examples of the rule's application). 
27 See, for example, Daniel Kahneman and Shane Frederick, Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment, in Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman, eds, Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 49,53 (Cambridge 2002); Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, 185 Science 1124 (1974); Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability, 5 Cognitive Psych 207 (1973). 
28 See Richard H. Thaler, The Winner's Curse: Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic Life 79-91 (Free Press 1992). In the legal context, see Cass R. Sunstein, et al, Predictably Incoherent Judgments, 54 Stan L Rev 1153 (2002). 
29 See Shane Frederick, George Loewenstein, and Ted O'Donoghue, Time Discounting and Time Preference: A Critical Review, 40 J Econ Lit 351,367-68 (2002). 
30 See Colin F. Camerer, Prospect Theory in the Wild: Evidence from the Field, in Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, eds, Choices, Values, and Frames 288, 294-95 (Cambridge 2000); Eric J.Johnson, et al, Framing, Probability Distortions, and Insurance Decisions, in id at 224,238. 
some of these findings and to think that people may do a better job of choosing in the real world than they do in the laboratory." But studies of actual choices reveal many of the same problems, even when the stakes are high." 
We do not intend to outline all of the relevant evidence here, but consider an illustration from the domain of savings behavior. Benartzi and Thaler have investigated how much investors like the portfolios they have selected in their defined contribution savings plans." Employees volunteered to share their portfolio choices with the investigators by bringing a copy of their most recent statement to the lab. They were then shown the probability distributions of expected retirement income for three investment portfolios simply labeled A, B, and C. Unbeknownst to the subjects, the three portfolios were their own and portfolios mimicking the average and median choices of their fellow employees. The distributions of expected returns were computed using the software of Financial Engines, the financial information company founded by William Sharpe. On average, the subjects rated the average portfolio equally with their own portfolio, and judged the median portfolio to be significantly more attractive than their own. Indeed, only 20 percent of the subjects preferred their own portfolio to the Note also the emerging literature on people's inability to predict their own emotional reactions to events, a literature that might well bear on the uses of libertarian paternalism. See Timothy D. Wilson and Daniel T.Gilbert, Affective Forecasting,35 Advances in Experimental Soc Psych 345 (2003). 
31 For some evidence in favor of consumer sovereignty, see Joel Waldfogel, Does Consumer Irrationality Trump Consumer Sovereignty?: Evidence from Gifts and Own Purchases (Feb 2003), online at http://papers.ssrn.com/abstractid=337261 (visited May 10, 2003). Waldfogel finds that people value their own purchases more highly than they value gifts from third parties-a finding that, in his view, provides support for the idea that consumers are the best judges of what goods will promote their welfare. We do not doubt the finding. Note, however, that Waldfogel is studying the context of ordinary consumer purchases, in which people are in an especially good position to know what they like. We are focusing on less familiar situations, which present special puzzles. 
32 
involved, see Werner F.M. De Bondt and Richard H. Thaler, Do Security Analysts Overreact?,80 Am Econ Rev 52 (1990) (demonstrating that security analysts overreact to market data and produce forecasts that are either too optimistic or too pessimistic); Robert J. Shiller, IrrationalExuberance 135-47 (Princeton 2000) (discussing anchoring and overconfidence in market behavior); Colin F. Camerer and Robin M. Hogarth, The Effects of FinancialIncentives in Experiments:A Review and Capital-Labor-ProductionFramework, 19 J Risk & Uncertainty 7 (1999) (finding that financial incentives have never eliminated anomalies or persistent irrationalities). See also Colin F. Camerer, BehavioralGame Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction 60-6 (Princeton 2003 hypothesis that people are self-interested, and adding, "If I had a dollar for every time an economist claimed that raising the stakes would drive ultimatum behavior toward self-interest, I'd have a private jet on standby all day"). 
33 See Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler, How Much Is Investor Autonomy Worth?, 57 J Fin 1593 (2002). 
34 Id at 1598. think about it and did not lose the enrollment form, then by choosing automatic enrollment, they are acting paternalistically by our definition of the term. They are not attempting to protect against harms to third parties, but to steer employees' choices in directions that will, in the view of employers, promote employees' welfare. Since no one is forced to do anything, we think that this steering should be considered unobjectionable even to committed libertarians. The employer must choose some set of rules, and either plan affects employees' choices. No law of nature says that in the absence of an affirmative election by employees, 0 percent of earnings will go into a retirement plan. Because both plans alter choices, neither one can be said, more than the other, to count as a form of objectionable meddling. 

Skeptical readers, insistent on freedom of choice, might be tempted to think that there is a way out of this dilemma. Employers could avoid choosing a default if they requiredemployees to make an active choice, either in or out. Call this option requiredactive choosing. Undoubtedly required active choosing is attractive in some settings, but a little thought reveals that this is not at all a way out of the dilemma. On the contrary, required active choosing is simply another option among many that the employer can elect. In fact the very requirement that employees make a choice has a strong paternalistic element. Some employees may not want to have to make a choice (and might make a second-order choice not to have to do so). Why should employers force them to choose? 
Required active choosing honors freedom of choice in a certain respect; but it does not appeal to those who would choose not to choose, and indeed it will seem irritating and perhaps unacceptably coercive by their lights. In some circumstances, required choosing will not even be feasible." In any case, an empirical question remains: What is the effect of forced choosing? Choi, et al, find that required active choosing increases enrollments relative to the opt-in rule, though not by as much as automatic enrollment (opt-out).' Our dis47 Consider the cafeteria example: Any menu has to predate choosing. The same is true in any context, such as social security privatization, in which planners must provide a menu of options. Perhaps it will be responded that planners might ask choosers to select "any option at all," but this is unlikely to be feasible. 
48 Compare Choi, et al, Defined Contribution Pensions at 86 (cited in note 1) (noting that 78 percent of employees offered enrollment in a program committing to savings from future raises accepted, and 62 percent accepted and stayed in through three pay raises), with id at 77 (showing enrollment rates in opt-out savings plans at three companies six months after hire at 93.4 percent, 85.9 percent, and 96.0 percent). cussion in Part III below offers some suggestions about the circumstances in which it makes most sense to force people to choose. 
Other skeptics might think that employers should avoid paternalism by doing what most employees would want employers to do. On this approach, a default rule can successfully avoid paternalism if it tracks employees' preferences. Sometimes this is a plausible solution. But what if many or most employees do not have stable or wellformed preferences, and what if employee choices are inevitably a product of the default rule? In such cases, it is meaningless to ask what most employees would do. The choices employees will make depend on the way the employer frames those choices. Employee "preferences," as such, do not exist in those circumstances. 
We think that savings is a good example of a domain in which preferences are likely to be ill-defined. Few households have either the knowledge or inclination to calculate their optimal life-cycle savings rate, and even if they were to make such a calculation, its results would be highly dependent on assumptions about rates of return and life expectancies. In light of this, actual behavior is highly sensitive to plan design features. 
Government 
Some enthusiasts for free choice might be willing to acknowledge these points and hence to accept private efforts to steer people's choices in what seem to be the right directions. Market pressures, and the frequently wide range of possible options, might be thought to impose sufficient protection against objectionable steering. But our emphasis has been on the inevitability of paternalism, and on this count, the same points apply to some choices made by governments in establishing legal rules. 

Default rules of some kind are inevitable, and much of the time those rules will affect preferences and choices." In the neglected words of a classic article: [A] minimum of state intervention is always necessary.... When a loss is left where it falls in an auto accident, it is not because God so ordained it. Rather it is because the state has granted the injurer an entitlement to be free of liability and will intervene to 49 See Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule, 77 NYU L Rev 106 (2002) (showing that employees sometimes value certain rights simply because they have been granted such rights in the first instance); Korobkin, 83 Cornell L Rev 608 (cited in note 18) (arguing that evidence of status quo bias belies the standard law-and-economics assumption that preferences are exogenous to the default rule). prevent the victim's friendSs,• i5f0 they are stronger, from taking compensation from the injurer. 
If the entitlement-granting rules seem invisible, and seem to be a simple way of protecting freedom of choice, it is because they appear so sensible and natural that they are not taken to be a legal allocation at all. But this is a mistake. What we add here is'that when a default rule affects preferences and behavior, it has the same effect as employer presumptions about savings plans. This effect is often both unavoidable and significant. So long as people can contract around the default rule, it is fair to say that the legal system is protecting freedom of choice, and in that sense complying with libertarian goals. 
Consumers, workers, and married people,' for example, are surrounded by a network of legal allocations that provide the background against which agreements are made. As a matter of employment law, and consistent with freedom of contract, workers might be presumed subject to discharge "at will," or they might be presumed protected by an implied right to be discharged only "for cause." They might be presumed to have a right to vacation time, or not. They might be presumed protected by safety requirements, or the employer might be free to invest in safety as he wishes, subject to market pressures. In all cases, the law must establish whether workers have to "buy" certain rights from employers or vice versa." Legal intervention, in this important sense, cannot be avoided. The same is true for consumers, spouses, and all others who are involved in legal relationships. Much of the time, the legal background matters, even if transaction costs are zero, because it affects choices and preferences.0" Here, as in the private context, a form of paternalism is unavoidable. 
In the context of insurance, an unplanned, natural experiment showed that the default rule can be very "sticky."" New Jersey created a system in which the default insurance program for motorists included a relatively low premium and no right to sue; purchasers were allowed to deviate from the default program and to purchase the right to sue by choosing a program with that right and also a higher premium. By contrast, Pennsylvania offered a default program containing a full right to sue and a relatively high premium; purchasers could elect to switch to a new plan by "selling" the more ample right to sue and paying a lower premium. In both cases, the default rule tended to stick. A strong majority accepted the default rule in both states, with only about 20 percent of New Jersey drivers acquiring the full right to sue, and 75 percent of Pennsylvanians retaining that right." There is no reason to think that the citizens of Pennsylvania have systematically different preferences from the citizens of New Jersey. The default plan is what produced the ultimate effects. Indeed, controlled experiments find the same results, showing that the value of the right to sue is much higher when it is presented as part of the default package." 
In another example, a substantial effect from the legal default rule was found in a study of law student reactions to different state law provisions governing vacation time from firms.7 The study was intended to be reasonably realistic, involving as it did a pool of subjects to whom the underlying issues were hardly foreign. Most law students have devoted a good deal of time to thinking about salaries, vacation time, and the tradeoffs between them. The study involved two conditions. In the first, state law guaranteed two weeks of vacation time, and students were asked to state their median willingness to pay (in reduced salary) for two extra weeks of vacation. In this condition, the median willingness to pay was $6,000.,, In the second condition, state law provided a mandatory, non-waivable two-week vacation guarantee, but it also provided employees (including associates at law firms) with the right to two additional weeks of vacation, a right that could be "knowingly and voluntarily waived." Hence the second condition was precisely the same as the first, except that the default rule provided the two extra weeks of vacation. In the second condition, students were asked how much employers would have to pay them to give up their right to the two extra weeks. All by itself, the switch in the default rule more than doubled the students' responses, producing a median willingness to accept of $13,000." 
We can imagine countless variations on these experiments. For example, the law might authorize a situation in which employees have to opt into retirement plans, or it might require employers to provide automatic enrollment and allow employees to opt out. Both systems would respect the freedom of employees to choose, and either system would be libertarian in that sense. In the same vein, the law might as55 See Johnson, et al, Framing, Probability Distortions, InsuranceDecisions at 238 (cited in note 30). 
56 Id at 235-38. 57 See Sunstein, 77 NYU L Rev at 113-14 (cited in note 49). 
58 The question asked students to assume that no adverse employment consequences could come from asking for, and receiving, those two extra weeks in vacation. See id at 113. 59 See id. sume that there is no right to be free from age discrimination in employment, permitting employees (through individual negotiation or collective bargaining) to contract for that right. Alternatively, it might give employees a nondiscrimination guarantee, subject to waiver via contract. Our suggestion here is that one or another approach is likely to have effects on the choices of employees. This is the sense in which paternalism is inevitable, from government no less than from private institutions. 
In emphasizing the absence of well-formed preferences, we are not speaking only of default rules. Consider the crucial role of "anchors," or starting points, in contingent valuation studies, an influential method of valuing regulatory goods such as increased safety and environmental protection.' Such studies, used when market valuations are unavailable, attempt to ask people their "willingness to pay" for various regulatory benefits.' Contingent valuation has become prominent in regulatory theory and practice. "2 Because the goal is to determine what people actually want, contingent valuation studies are an effort to elicit, rather than to affect, people's values. Paternalism, in the sense of effects on preferences and choices, is not supposed to be part of the picture. But it is extremely difficult for contingent valuation studies to avoid constructing the very values that they are supposed to discover." The reason is that in the contexts in which such studies are used, people do not have clear or well-formed preferences, and hence it is unclear that people have straightforward "values" that can actually be found. Hence some form of paternalism verges on the inevitable: Stated values will often be affected, at least across a range, by how the questions are set up. 
Perhaps the most striking evidence to this effect comes from a study of willingness to pay to reduce annual risks of death and injury in motor vehicles." The authors of that study attempted to elicit both maximum and minimum willingness to pay for safety improvements. People were presented with a statistical risk and an initial monetary amount, and asked whether they were definitely willing or definitely unwilling to pay that amount to eliminate the risk, or if they were "not sure." If they were definitely willing, the amount displayed was increased until they said that they were definitely unwilling. If they were unsure, the number was moved up and down until people could identify the minimum and maximum. 
The authors were not attempting to test the effects of anchors; on the contrary, they were alert to anchoring only because they "had been warned" of a possible problem with their procedure, in which people "might be unduly influenced by the first amount of money that they saw displayed."6 To solve that problem, the study allocated people randomly to two subsamples, one with an initial display of 25 pounds, the other with an initial display of 75 pounds. The authors hoped that the anchoring effect would be small, with no significant consequences for minimum and maximum values. But their hope was dashed. For every level of risk, the minimum willingness to pay was higher with the 75 pound startingpoint than the maximum willingness to pay with the 25 pound startingpoint!67 For example, a reduction in the annual risk of death by 4 in 100,000 produced a maximum willingness to pay of 149 pounds with the 25 pound starting value, but a minimum willingness to pay of 232 pounds with the 75 pound starting value (and a maximum, in that case, of 350 pounds)." The most sensible conclusion is that people are sometimes uncertain about appropriate values, and whenever they are, anchors have an effect-sometimes a startlingly large one. 
It is not clear how those interested in eliciting (rather than affecting) values might respond to this problem." What is clear is that in the domains in which contingent valuation studies are used, people often lack well-formed preferences, and starting points have important consequences for behavior and choice. 
65 See Michael Jones-Lee and Graham Loomes, Private Values and Public Policy,in Elke U.Weber, Jonathan Baron, and Graham Loomes, eds, Conflict and Tradeoffs in DecisionMaking 205,208-12 (Cambridge 2001). 
66 Id at 210. 67 ldat211. 68 Id. 
69 For a general discussion, see Payne, Bettman, and Schkade, 19 J Risk & Uncertainty 243 (cited in note 63). 
We have suggested that in the important context of medical decisions, framing effects are substantial." Apparently, most people do not have clear preferences about how to evaluate a procedure that leaves 90 percent of people alive (and 10 percent of people dead) after a period of years. A similar effect has been demonstrated in the area of obligations to future generations,7' a much-disputed policy question. 2 This question does not directly involve paternalism, because those interested in the valuation of future generations are not attempting to protect people from their own errors. But a regulatory system that attempts to track people's preferences would try to measure intergenerational time preferences, that is, to elicit people's judgments about how to trade off the protection of current lives and future lives.7 
Hence an important question, asked in many debates about the issue, is whether people actually make such judgments and whether they can be elicited. And indeed, an influential set of studies finds that people value the lives of those in the current generation far more than the lives of those in future generations.7 From a series of surveys, Maureen Cropper and her coauthors suggest that people are indifferent between saving 1 life today and saving 44 lives in 100 years. 7 They make this suggestion on the basis of questions asking people whether they would choose a program that saves "100 lives now" or a program that saves a substantially larger number "100 years from now."6 
But it turns out that other descriptions of the same problem yield significantly different results.71 Here, as in other contexts, it is unclear whether people actually have well-formed preferences with which the legal system can work. For example, most people consider "equally bad" a single death from pollution next year and a single death from pollution in 100 years"-implying no preference for members of the current generation. In another finding of no strong preference for the current generation, people are equally divided between two programs: one that will save 55 lives now and 105 more lives in 20 years; and one that will save 100 lives now and 50 lives 25 years from now. " It is even possible to frame the question in such a way as to find that future lives are valued more, not less, highly than current lives. The most sensible conclusion is that people do not have robust, well-ordered intergenerational time preferences. If so, it is not possible for government to track those preferences, because they are an artifact of how the question is put. The point applies in many contexts. For example, people are unlikely to have context-free judgments about whether government should focus on statistical lives or statistical life-years in regulatory policy; their judgments will be much affected by the framing of the question." 
Why Effects on Choice Can Be Hard to Avoid 
Why, exactly, do default rules, starting points, and framing effects have such large effects? To answer this question, it is important to make some distinctions. 
a) Suggestion. In the face of uncertainty about what should be done, people might rely on one of two related heuristics: do what most people do, or do what informed people do.8 Choosers might think that the default plan or value captures one or the other. In many settings, any starting point will carry some informational content and will thus affect choices. When a default rule affects behavior, it might well be because it is taken to carry information about how sensible people 78 Id at 43. 79 Id at 44. 
8t See id at 45. Frederick asked subjects to choose between two programs. The first would become more effective over time, saving 100 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 300 lives in the decade after that. The second would become less effective over time, saving 300 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 100 lives in the decade after that. Most people preferred the first program, apparently suggesting that future lives are valued more highly. Id. 
81 See Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004). 
82 See the discussion of imitation as a fast and frugal heuristic in Joseph Henrich, et al, What Is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in Gerd Gigerenzer and Reinhard Selten, eds, Bounded Rationality:The Adaptive Toolbox 343,344 (MIT 2001) ("Cultural transmission capacities allow individuals to shortcut the costs of search, experimentation, and data processing algorithms, and instead benefit from the cumulative experience stored in the minds (and observed in the behavior) of others."). usually organize their affairs. Notice that in the context of savings, people might have a mild preference for one or another course, but the preference might be overcome by evidence that most people do not take that course. Some workers might think, for example, that they should not enroll in a 401(k) plan and have a preference not to do so; but the thought and the preference might shift with evidence that the employer has made enrollment automatic. 
With respect to savings, the designated default plan apparently carries a certain legitimacy for many employees, perhaps because it seems to have resulted from some conscious thought about what makes most sense for most people."3This interpretation is supported by the finding that the largest effects from the new default rule are shown by women and African-Americans." We might speculate that members of such groups tend to be less confident in their judgments in this domain and may have less experience in assessing different savings plans. 
b) Inertia. A separate explanation points to inertia." Any change from the default rule or starting value is likely to require some action. Even a trivial action, such as filling in some form and returning it, can leave room for failures due to memory lapses, sloth, and procrastination. Many people wait until the last minute to file their tax return, even when they are assured of getting a refund. The power of inertia should be seen as a form of bounded rationality. Although the costs of switching from the default rule or the starting point can be counted as transaction costs, the fact that large behavioral changes are observed even when such costs are tiny suggests that a purely rational explanation is difficult to accept. 
c) Endowment effect. A default rule might create a "pure" endowment effect. It is well known that people tend to value goods more highly if those goods have been initially allocated to them than if those goods have been initially allocated elsewhere." And it is well known that, in many cases, the default rule will create an endowment effect. When an endowment effect is involved, the initial allocation, by private or public institutions, affects people's choices simply because it affects their valuations. 
d) Ill-formed preferences. In the cases we have discussed, people's preferences are ill-formed and murky. Suppose, for example, 83 See Madrian and Shea, 116 Q J Econ at 1177-78 (cited in note 1). 84 See id at 1160-61. 
85 See id at 1171 (noting that, under automatic enrollment, individuals become "passive savers" and "do nothing to move away from the default contribution rate"). 
86 See generally Korobkin, 83 Cornell L Rev 608 (cited in note 18); Richard H. Thaler, QuasiRational Economics (Russell Sage 1991). 
87 See note 43. that people are presented with various payouts and risk levels for various pension plans. They might be able to understand the presentation; there might be no confusion. But people might not have a well-defined preference for, or against, a slightly riskier plan with a slightly higher expected value. In these circumstances, their preferences might be endogenous to the default plan simply because they lack well-formed desires that can be accessed to overrule the default starting points. In unfamiliar situations, it is especially unlikely that well-formed preferences will exist. The range of values in the highway safety study is likely a consequence of the unfamiliarity of the context, which leaves people without clear preferences from which to generate numbers. The effects of framing on intergenerational time preferences attest to the fact that people do not have unambiguous judgments about how to trade off the interests of future generations with those of people now living.m 
For present purposes, the choice among these various explanations does not greatly matter. The central point is that effects on individual choices are often unavoidable. Of course it is usually good not to block choices, and we do not mean to defend non-libertarian paternalism here. But in an important respect the anti-paternalist position is incoherent, simply because there is no way to avoid effects on behavior and choices. The task for the committed libertarian is, in the midst of such effects, to preserve freedom of choice. 
Because framing effects are inevitable, it is hopelessly inadequate to say that when people lack relevant information the best response is to provide it. In order to be effective, any effort to inform people must be rooted in an understanding of how people actually think. Presentation makes a great deal of difference: The behavioral consequences of otherwise identical pieces of information depend on how they are framed. 
Consider one example from the realm of retirement savings. Benartzi and Thaler asked participants in a defined contribution savings plan to imagine that they had only two investment options, Fund A and Fund B, and asked them how they would allocate their investments between these two funds." (The two funds were, in fact, a diversified stock fund and an intermediate term bond fund.) All subjects were given information about the historic returns on these funds. However, one group was shown the distribution of annual rates of re88 See notes 75-80 and accompanying text. 
89 See Shlomo Benartzi and Richard H. Thaler, Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Repeated Gamblesand Retirement Investments, 45 Mgmt Sci 364,375 (1999). turn, whereas another group was shown simulated thirty-year rates of return. " The long-term rates of return were derived from the annual rates of return (by drawing years at random from history), and so the two sets of information were, strictly speaking, identical. Nevertheless, participants elected to invest about 40 percent of their money in equities when shown the annual returns and 90 percent when shown the long-term rates of return.' The lesson from this example is that plan sponsors cannot avoid influencing the choices their participants make simply by providing information. The way they display the information will, in some situations, strongly alter the choices people make. 
The point that the presentation of information influences choice is a general one. In the face of health risks, for example, some presentations of accurate information might actually be counterproductive, because people might attempt to control their fear by refusing to think about the risk at all. In empirical studies, "some messages conveying identical information seemed to work better than others, and [ ] some even appeared to backfire."'" When information campaigns fail altogether, it is often because those efforts "result in counterproductive defensive measures.""' Hence the most effective approaches go far beyond mere disclosure and combine "a frightening message about the consequences of inaction with an upbeat message about the efficacy of a proposed program of prevention. "4 
There are complex and interesting questions here about how to promote welfare. If information greatly increases people's fear, it will to that extent reduce welfare-in part because fear is unpleasant, in part because fear has a range of ripple effects producing social costs. We do not speak to the welfare issue here. Our only suggestions are that if people lack information, a great deal of attention needs to be paid to information processing, and that without such attention, information disclosure might well prove futile or counterproductive. And to the extent that those who design informational strategies are taking account of how people think and are attempting to steer people in desirable directions, their efforts will inevitably have a paternalistic dimension. 
90 See id. 91 Id at 377. 
92 Andrew Caplin, Fearas a Policy Instrument, in George Loewenstein, Daniel Read, and Roy Baumeister, eds, Time and Decision:Economic and PsychologicalPerspectives on IntertemporalChoice 441,443 (Russell Sage 2003). 
93 Id at 442. 94 Id at 443. D. Beyond the Inevitable (But Still Libertarian) 
The inevitability of paternalism is most clear when the planner has to choose starting points or default rules. But if the focus is on welfare, it is reasonable to ask whether the planner should go beyond the inevitable, and whether such a planner can also claim to be libertarian. To illustrate the problem, return to the simple cafeteria example discussed above. Putting the: fruit before the desserts is a fairly mild intervention. A more intrusive step would be to place the desserts in another location altogether, so that diners have to get up and get a dessert after they have finished the rest of their meal. This step raises the transaction costs of eating dessert, and according to a standard economic analysis the proposal is quite unattractive-it seems to make dessert eaters worse off and no one better off. But many people face problems of self-control, and the results include illness and disease, small and large." Once the costs of self-control are incorporated into the analysis, we can see that some diners would prefer this arrangement, namely those who would eat a dessert if it were put in front of them but would resist temptation if given a little help. To fit with libertarian principles, the planner could arrange two lines in the cafeteria: the tempting line and the non-tempting line. The tempting line would include everything, whereas the non-tempting line would make unhealthy foods less available. Since people could choose either line, this passes the libertarian test. (As a solution to the self-control problem, it might not be entirely adequate, because people would be tempted to join the tempting line.) Hence it is possible to preserve freedom of choice, and to allow opt-outs, but also to favor selfconscious efforts to promote welfare by helping people to solve problems of bounded rationality and bounded self-control. Efforts of this kind need not attempt to give people what they would choose ex ante, even in cases in which preferences exist; but such efforts would nonetheless allow people to move in their preferred directions. 
In the domain of employee behavior, there are many imaginable illustrations. Employees might be automatically enrolled in a 401(k) plan, with a right to opt out, but employers might require a waiting period, and perhaps a consultation with an adviser, before the opt-out could be effective." Thaler and Benartzi have proposed a method of 95 See O'Donoghue and Rabin, 93 Am Econ Rev at 187 (cited in note 16) (arguing that "imposing seemingly large sin taxes on unhealthy items while lowering taxes on other items may not hurt rational consumers by much," and may "create significant benefits for those who overconsume the unhealthy items due to self-control problems"); Jolls, Sunstein, and Thaler, 50 Stan L Rev at 1479 (cited in note 13). 
96 Note that some committed libertarians might be uncomfortable with waiting periods, separate cafeteria lines, and the like, especially if these are defended as a way of changing preferences. Our main goal here, however, is to help people to solve their self-control problems, and increasing contributions to 401(k) plans that also meets the libertarian test."7 Under the Save More Tomorrow plan, briefly described in the Introduction, employees are invited to sign up for a program in which their contributions to the savings plan are increased annually whenever they get a raise. Once employees join the plan, they stay in until they opt out or reach the maximum savings rate. In the first company to use this plan, the employees who joined increased their savings rates from 3.5 percent to 11.6 percent in a little over two years (three raises).98 Very few of the employees who join the plan drop out. We believe that this is successful libertarian paternalism in action. In fact, the ideas of automatic enrollment and Save More Tomorrow provide quite promising models for increasing saving; they might well be more effective than imaginable economic incentives, as for example through decreased taxes on savings. 
The same sort of strategy might be used in many domains. Moving from paternalism to protection of third parties, employers (or the state) might seek to increase charitable giving from workers. Is it possible to produce a form of libertarian benevolence, and if so, how might this be done? Moral suasion may or may not succeed, but compare a system of Give More Tomorrow. Because workers appear quite willing to part with a fraction of their future raises, such a system, like Save More Tomorrow, would be highly appealing to many people. In fact the ideas explored here might well be used to produce significant increases in charitable donations (of course, there are obvious complexities about institutional design and appropriate default beneficiaries'). 
It should now be clear that the difference between libertarian and non-libertarian paternalism is not simple and rigid. The libertarian paternalist insists on preserving choice, whereas the non-libertarian paternalist is willing to foreclose choice. But in all cases, a real question is the cost of exercising choice, and here there is a continuum rather than a sharp dichotomy. A libertarian paternalist who is especially enthusiastic about free choice would be inclined to make it relatively costless for people to obtain their preferred outcomes. (Call this a libertarianpaternalist.) By contrast, a libertarian paternalist who is espefor this reason the objection, from the standpoint of liberty, seems weak, at least if freedom of choice is preserved. 
97 See Thaler and Benartzi, J Polit Econ (forthcoming) (cited in note 2). 98 Id. 
99 We acknowledge that a Give More Tomorrow program is more easily abused than one involving Save More Tomorrow. In the latter case, the resources remain with the employee, whereas in the former, the resources go elsewhere, and perhaps to those whom employers favor. Any development of a Give More Tomorrow plan should have safeguards against employer favoritism or self-dealing, just as one would want safeguards to prevent self-dealing in the choice of mutual funds to include in the 401(k) plan. cially confident of his welfare judgments would be willing to impose real costs on workers and consumers who seek to do what, in the paternalist's view, would not be in their best interests. (Call this a libertarian paternalist.) 
Rejecting both routes, a non-libertarian paternalist would attempt to block certain choices. But notice that almost any such attempt will amount, in practice, to an effort to impose high costs on those who try to make those choices. Consider a law requiring drivers to wear seat belts. If the law is enforced, and a large fine is imposed, the law is non-libertarian even though determined violators can exercise their freedom of choice-at the expense of the fine. But as the expected fine approaches zero, the law approaches libertarianism. The libertarian paternalism that we are describing and defending here attempts to ensure, as a general rule, that people can easily avoid the paternalist's suggested option."" E. Illustrations and Generalizations 
Many actual and proposed legal provisions embody libertarian paternalism. Some of those provisions require disclosure of information; some of them shift the default rule; some of them preserve freedom of contract but impose procedural or substantive restrictions on those who seek to move in directions that seem, to the planner, to be contrary to their welfare. We divide this brief catalogue into two parts, the first dealing with labor and employment law, and the second dealing with consumers more generally."" 
Under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), employees are permitted to waive their rights when they are retiring, ' and hence the statutorily conferred right-to be free from age discrimination-does not reject the libertarian commitment to freedom of contract. But the employee is presumed to have retained that right unless there has been a "knowing and voluntary" waiver."" To ensure that the waiver is knowing and voluntary, the ADEA imposes a range of procedural hurdles. Thus the waiver must specifically refer "to rights or claims arising under" the ADEA;"" the employee must be 
I) We are not, therefore, attempting to enter into the debate between paternalists and antipaternalists, though obviously much of our discussion bears on that debate. 
101For an overlapping catalogue, see Camerer, et al, 151 U Pa L Rev at 1224 (cited in note 6). 
H)2 29 USC § 626(f)(1) (2000). 103 Id. 
HK4Id § 626(f)(1)(B). advised in writing to consult with an attorney before executing the agreement;'Ol the employee must be given "at least 21 days within which to consider the agreement";"' and the agreement must provide for a minimum of a seven-day post-execution revocation period.'7 The ADEA has an unmistakable paternalistic dimension insofar as it switches the default rule to one favoring the employee and also creates a set of procedural barriers to insufficiently informed waivers. At the same time, the ADEA goes beyond the inevitable minimal level of paternalism by imposing those barriers, which significantly raise the burdens of waiver. But the ADEA preserves freedom of choice and thus satisfies the libertarian criterion. 
Labor and employment law offers several other examples. The Model Employment Termination Act alters the standard American rule, which holds that employees may be discharged for no reason or for any reason at all." Under the Model Act, employees are given the right to be discharged only for cause.'9 But the Model Act complies with libertarian principles by allowing employers and employees to waive the right on the basis of an agreement, by the employer, to provide a severance payment in the event of a discharge not based on poor job performance.'0 That payment must consist of one month's salary for every year of employment."' This limitation on waiver is substantive and in that sense quite different from the procedural limitation in the ADEA; in this way it is less libertarian than it might be. But freedom of choice is nonetheless respected. 
An important provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act belongs in the same category."2 Under that provision, employees may waive their right not to work for more than forty hours per week, but only at a governmentally determined premium (time and a half)."' Here, as under the Model Act, a substantive limitation is imposed on workers' rights to opt out of a default arrangement. 

In the law of consumer protection, the most obvious examples of libertarian paternalism involve "cooling-off" periods for certain deci105 Id § 626(f)(1)(E). ]06 Id § 626(f)(1)(F)(i). 107 Id § 626(f)(1)(G). 
108 See Model Employment Termination Act, reprinted in Mark A. Rothstein and Lance Liebman, Statutory Supplement, Employment Law: Casesand Materials211 (Foundation 2003). 109 Id § 3(a). 110 Id § 4(c). 
III Id. 
I1t2 See 29 USC § 207(f) (2000). 113 Id. sions.'" The essential rationale is that under the heat of the moment, consumers might make ill-considered or improvident decisions. Both bounded rationality and bounded self-control are the underlying concerns. A mandatory cooling-off period for door-to-door sales, of the sort imposed by the Federal Trade Commission in 1972,"' provides a simple illustration. Under the Commission's rule, door-to-door sales must be accompanied by written statements informing buyers of their right to rescind purchases within three days of transactions."' Some states also impose mandatory waiting periods before people may receive a divorce decree.'"7 We could easily imagine similar restrictions on the decision to marry, and some states have moved in this direction as well."" Aware that people might act impulsively or in a way that they will regret, regulators do not block their choices, but ensure a period for sober reflection. Note in this regard that mandatory coolingoff periods make best sense, and tend to be imposed, when two conditions are met: (1) people are making decisions that they make infrequently and for which they therefore lack a great deal of experience, and (2) emotions are likely to be running high. These are the circumstances-of bounded rationality and bounded self-control respectively-in which consumers are especially prone to making choices that they will regret. 

We are now in a position to categorize a diverse set of paternalistic interventions: minimal paternalism, required active choices, procedural constraints, and substantive constraints. 
a) Minimal paternalism. Minimal paternalism is the form of paternalism that occurs whenever a planner (private or public) constructs a default rule or starting point with the goal of influencing behavior. So long as it is costless or nearly costless to depart from the default plan, minimal paternalism is maximally libertarian. This is the form of paternalism that we have described as inevitable. 
b) Required active choices. Unsure of what choices will promote welfare, a planner might reject default plans or starting points 114 See the valuable discussion in Camerer, et al, 151 U Pa L Rev at 1240-42 (cited in note 6). 
115 16 CFR §429.1 (a) (2003). 116 Id. 
117 See, for example, Cal Fam Code § 2339(a) (requiring a six-month waiting period before a divorce decree becomes final); Conn Gen Stat Ann § 46b-67(a) (requiring a ninety-day waiting period before the court may proceed on the divorce complaint). For a general discussion, see Elizabeth Scott, RationalDecisionmakingabout Marriageand Divorce,76 Va L Rev 9 (1990). 
18 See Camerer, et al, 151 U Pa L Rev at 1243 (cited in note 6) (citing state statutes that "force potential newlyweds to wait a short period of time after their license has been issued before they can tie the knot"). entirely and force people to choose explicitly (what we have described as the strategy of required active choices). This approach finds an analogue in information-eliciting default rules in contract law, designed to give contracting parties a strong incentive to say what they want."' To the extent that planners force people to choose whether or not people would like to choose, there is a paternalistic dimension to their actions. ("Choosing is good for both freedom and welfare," some appear to think, whether or not people agree with them!) We think that the argument for requiring choices stands or falls largely on the welfare consequences. 
c) Proceduralconstraints. A slightly more aggressive form of paternalism occurs when the default plan is accompanied by procedural constraints designed to ensure that any departure is fully voluntary and entirely rational. When procedural constraints are in place, it is not costless to depart from the default plan. The extent of the cost, and the aggressiveness of the paternalism, will of course vary with the extent of the constraints. The justification for the constraints will depend on whether there are serious problems of bounded rationality and bounded self-control; if so, the constraints are justified not on the ground that the planner disagrees with people's choices, but because identifiable features of the situation make it likely that choices will be defective. Such features may include an unfamiliar setting, a lack of experience, and a risk of impulsiveness. The Age Discrimination in Employment Act is our principal example here. 
d) Substantive constraints. Alternatively, a planner might impose substantive constraints, allowing people to reject the default arrangement, but not on whatever terms they choose. On this approach, the planner selects the terms along which the parties will be permitted to move in their preferred directions. The Model Termination Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act are illustrations. The extent of the departure from libertarianism will be a function of the gap between the legally specified terms and the terms that parties would otherwise reach. Here too the justification for the constraint depends on bounded rationality and bounded self-control. 
e) A thin line. A planner might reject freedom of choice on the ground that those who reject the default plan will err all or almost all of the time. Such a planner will impose significant costs on those who depart from the plan. As we have said, there is a thin line between non-libertarian paternalists and libertarian paternalists who impose high costs, procedural or substantive, on those who reject the plan. Almost all of the time, even the non-libertarian paternalist will allow 119See Ian Ayres and Robert Gertner, FillingGaps in Incomplete Contracts:An Economic Theory of Default Rules, 99 Yale L J 87,91 (1989). choosers, at some cost, to reject the proposed course of action. Those who are required to wear motorcycle helmets can decide to risk the relevant penalty, and to pay it if need be. Employers and employees might agree to sub-minimum wage work and risk the penalties if they are caught. In this particular sense, penalties are always prices. 
III. How TO CHOOSE: THE TOOLBOX OF THE 
LIBERTARIAN PATERNALIST 
How should sensible planners choose among possible systems, given that some choice is necessary? We suggest two approaches to this problem. If feasible, a comparison of possible rules should be done using a form of cost-benefit analysis, one that pays serious attention to welfare effects. In many cases, however, such analyses will be both difficult and expensive. As an alternative, we offer some rules of thumb that might be adopted to choose among various options. In general, it makes sense to experiment with possible approaches to identify their results for both choices and outcomes. We have emphasized automatic enrollment plans and Save More Tomorrow because studies have suggested that both of these have a great deal of potential. In other domains, plans are likely to be proposed in the face of highly imperfect information; more data will reveal a great deal. Large-scale programs are most justified if repeated experiments have shown that they actually work. 
A. Costs and Benefits 
The goal of a cost-benefit study would be to measure the full ramifications of any design choice. In the context at hand, the costbenefit study cannot be based on willingness to pay (WTP), because WTP will be a function of the default rule."" It must be a more openended (and inevitably somewhat subjective) assessment of the welfare consequences. To illustrate, take the example of automatic enrollment. Under automatic enrollment, some employees, who otherwise would not join the plan, will now do so. Presumably, some are made better off (especially if there is an employer match), but some may be made worse off (for example, those who are highly liquidity-constrained and do not exercise their right to opt out). A cost-benefit analysis would attempt to evaluate these gains and losses. 
If the issue were only enrollment, we think it highly likely that the gains would exceed the losses. Because of the right to opt out, 120 See Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler, 5 J Econ Persp at 202-03 (cited in note 43). See also Korobkin, 83 Cornell L Rev at 636-41 (cited in note 18). For a discussion of the variation of potential employees' VTP for vacation days based on default rules, see text accompanying notes 57-59. those who need the money immediately are able to have it. In principle one could also compare the costs of foregone current consumption and the benefits of increased consumption during retirement, though this is, admittedly, difficult to do in practice. It is also possible to make inferences from actual choices about welfare. For example, most employees do join the plan eventually, and very few drop out if automatically enrolled.'2' These facts suggest that, at least on average, defaulting people into the plan will mostly hasten the rate at which people join the plan, and that the vast majority of those who are so nudged will be grateful. 
Some readers might think that our reliance on behavior as an indication of welfare is inconsistent with one of the central claims of this Article-that choices do not necessarily coincide with welfare. But in fact, there is no inconsistency. Compare rules calling for mandatory cooling-off periods. The premise of such rules is that people are more likely to make good choices when they have had time to think carefully and without a salesperson present. Similarly, it is reasonable to think that if, on reflection, workers realized that they had been "tricked" into saving too much, they might take the effort to opt out. The fact that very few participants choose to opt out supports (though it does not prove) the claim that they are helped by a system that makes joining easy. 
Once the other effects of automatic enrollment are included, the analysis becomes cloudier. Any plan for automatic enrollment must include a specified default savings rate. Some of those automatically enrolled at a 3 percent savings rate-a typical default in automatic enrollment-would have chosen a higher rate if left to their own devices. ' If automatic enrollment leads some or many people to save at a lower rate than they would choose, the plan might be objectionable for that reason. Hence we are less confident that this more complete cost-benefit analysis would support the particular opt-out system, though a higher savings rate might well do so. A more sophisticated plan, avoiding some of these pitfalls, is discussed below. 
Similar tradeoffs are involved with another important issue: the appropriate default rule for organ donations. In many nationsAustria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, Singapore, Slovenia, and Spain-people are presumed to consent to allow their organs to be used, after death, for the benefit of others; but they are permitted to rebut the presumption, usually through an explicit notation to that effect on their drivers' licenses. ' In the 121 See Choi, et al, Defined Contribution Pensions at 78 (cited in note 1); Madrian and Shea, 116 Q J Econ at 1158-61 (cited in note 1). 
123See http://www.presumedconsent.org/solutions.htm (visited Sept United States, by contrast, those who want their organs to be available for others must affirmatively say so, also through an explicit notation on their drivers' licenses. The result is that in "presumed consent" nations over 90 percent of people consent to make their organs available for donation, whereas in the United States, where people have to take some action to make their organs available, only 28 percent elect to do so. ' We hypothesize that this dramatic difference is not a product of deep cultural differences, but of the massive effect of the default rule. Hence we would predict that a European-style opt-out rule in the United States would produce donation rates similar to those observed in the European countries that use this rule. Note in this regard that by one report, over 85 percent of Americans support organ donation -a statistic that suggests opt-outs would be relatively rare."' 
A recent study strongly supports this prediction." Suggesting that preferences are constructed by social frames, Johnson and Goldstein urge that with respect to organ donation, people lack stable preferences and that their decisions are very much influenced by the default rule. ' A controlled online experiment showed a substantial effect from the default rule: The opt-in system created a 42 percent consent rate, about half of the 82 percent rate for an opt-out system. ' The real-world evidence is even more dramatic. Presumed consent nations show consent rates ranging from a low of 85.9 percent (Sweden) to a high of 100 percent (Austria), with a median of 99 percent.2 The default also produces a significant, though less dramatic, increase in actual donations, meaning that many people are saved as a result of the presumed consent system."" There is reason to believe that in the United States, a switch in the default rule could save thousands of lives. 
definition of paternalism. The issue is the welfare of third parties, not of 124 Id (reporting opt-out rates in presumed consent nations); Jean Kadooka Mardfin, Heart and Soul: Anatomical Gifts for Hawaii'sTransplant Community 5, Hawaii Legislative Reference Bureau Report No 3 (1998), online at http://www.state.hi.us/lrb/rpts98/soul.pdf (visited Nov 20, 2003) permission for organ donation on [their] driver's license or on a signed donor card") 125 See http://www.presumedconsent.org/issues.htm (visited Sept 
working paper, Center for Decision Sciences, Columbia University, 2003) 
127 Id at 2. 128 Id at 6-7. 129 Id at 7, Figure 2. 
130 Id at 8-9. Many factors determine how many organs are actually made available and used for transplants. The transplant infrastructure is certainly important, and fewer organs will be available if family members and heirs can veto transplants, even under a presumed consent regime. Johnson and Goldstein estimate that switching to an opt-out system increases organs actually used by 16 percent, holding everything else constant. choosers. Here we are speaking not of libertarian paternalism, but of libertarian benevolence: an approach that attempts to promote benevolence, and to assist vulnerable people, without mandating behavior in any way. We suggest that changes in default rules, or a system of Give More Tomorrow, could produce large increases in public assistance- and that such approaches could do so in a way that avoids coercion. With respect to behavior, the analysis of libertarian benevolence is quite similar to that of libertarian paternalism. One of the advantages of that analysis is the demonstration that when third-party interests are at stake, the default rule will matter a great deal. It follows that planners can often deliver significant benefits to third parties simply by switching the default rule. In the case of organ donation, this is what we observe. 
Does one or another default rule promote welfare? At first glance, the opt-out rule common in Europe seems better, simply because it should save a large number of lives without compromising any other important value. The most that can be said against the opt-out rule is that through inertia, perceived social pressure, or confusion, some people might end up donating their organs when they would not, all things considered, prefer to do so ex ante. (Their ex post preferences are difficult to infer!) If this objection (or some other3'1 ) seems forceful, an alternative would be to require active choices-for example, to mandate, at the time of applying for a driver's license, that applicants indicate whether they want to allow their organs to be used for the benefit of others. We make only two claims about this example. First, the evaluative question turns in large part on empirical issues of the sort that it would be both possible and useful to investigate. Second, the opt-in approach is unlikely to be best.32 
Rules of Thumb 
In many cases, the planner will be unable to make a direct inquiry into welfare, either because too little information is available or because the costs of conducting the analysis are not warranted. The committed anti-paternalist might say, in such cases, that people should simply be permitted to choose as they see fit. We hope that we have said enough to show why this response is unhelpful. What people choose often depends on the starting point, and hence the starting point cannot be selected by asking what people choose. In these cir131 It is conceivable that the care of fatally ill patients might be sacrificed in order to harvest their organs, but no evidence suggests that this is a serious risk. 
132 It follows from this example that if private or public planners would like to increase charitable donations, they could easily do that simply by creating automatic deductions for charity. Even if workers are allowed to opt out, clever planners should easily be able to ensure a much higher level of donations. cumstances, the libertarian paternalist would seek indirect proxies for welfare-methods that test whether one or another approach promotes welfare without relying on guesswork about that question. We suggest three possible methods. 
First, the libertarian paternalist might select the approach that the majority would choose if explicit choices were requiredand revealed.In the context of contract law, this is the most familiar inquiry in the selection of default rules'- provisions that govern contractual arrangements in the absence of express decisions by the parties. Useful though it is, this market-mimicking approach raises its own problems. Perhaps the majority's choices would be insufficiently informed, or a reflection of bounded rationality or bounded self-control. Perhaps those choices would not, in fact, promote the majority's welfare. At least as a presumption, however, it makes sense to follow those choices if the planner knows what they would be. A deeper problem is that the majority's choices might themselves be a function of the starting point or the default rule. If so, the problem of circularity dooms the market-mimicking approach. But in some cases, at least, the majority might go one way or the other regardless of the starting point; and to that extent, the market-mimicking strategy is workable. Note that in the cafeteria example, some options would not fit with the majority's ex ante choices (healthy but terrible-tasting food, for example), and that for savings, some allocations would certainly violate the choices of ordinary workers (say, an allocation of 30 percent or more to savings). In fact a clear understanding of majority choices might well support a default rule that respects those choices even if the planner thinks that an inquiry into welfare would support another rule. At the very least, planners should be required to have real confidence in their judgment if they seek to do something other than what a suitably informed majority would find to be in its interest. 
Second, the libertarian paternalist might select the approach that we have called required active choices, one that would force people to make their choices explicit.This approach might be chosen if the market-mimicking strategy fails, either because of the circularity problem or because the planner does not know which approach would in fact be chosen by the majority. We have seen the possibility of requiring active choices in the context of retirement plans and organ donations; it would be easy to multiply examples. In the law of contract, courts sometimes choose "penalty defaults" -default rules that penalize the party in the best position to obtain a clear statement on the question at hand, and hence create an incentive for clarity for the person who is 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 191, 2003). 
Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay 
Cass R. Sunstein 
July 2003 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=421341 Preliminary draft 7/14/03 Forthcoming Columbia Law Review All rights reserved 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
In protecting safety, health, and the environment, government has increasingly relied on cost-benefit analysis. In undertaking cost-benefit analysis, the government has monetized risks of death through the idea of “value of a statistical life” (VSL), currently assessed at about $6.1 million. Many analysts, however, have suggested that the government should rely instead on the “value of a statistical life year” (VSLY), in a way that would likely result in significantly lower benefits calculations for elderly people, and significantly higher benefits calculations for children. I urge that the government should indeed focus on statistical life-years rather than statistical lives. A program that saves young people produces more welfare than one that saves old people. Nor does a focus on life-years run afoul of ethical limits on cost-benefit analysis. It is relevant in this connection that every old person was once young, and that if all goes well, young people will eventually be old. In fact, a focus on statistical lives is a more plausibly a form of illicit discrimination than a focus on life-years, because the idea of statistical lives treats the years of older people as worth far more than the years of younger people. The hard question involves not whether to undertake this shift, but how to monetize life-years, and here willingness to pay (WTP), despite it many problems, is generally the place to begin. Discussion is also devoted to the uses and limits of the willingness to pay criterion in regulatory policy, with reference to the underlying welfare goal and to the nature of moral and distributional constraints on cost-benefit balancing. 
In the last two decades, numerous regulatory agencies have conducted costbenefit analysis (CBA) of proposed rules.1 To undertake this analysis, they have had to quantify the value of a statistical life (VSL).2 Recently the range, for that value, has been * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Matthew Adler, Carolyn Frantz, John Graham, Robert Hahn, C Christine Jolls, Daniel Kahneman, Lisa Heinzerling, Saul Levmore, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, Adrian Vermeule, W. Kip Viscusi, and Scott Walsten for helpful comments on a previous draft. I am also grateful to participants in an extremely helpful legal theory workshop at the University of Chicago Law School. Participants in two conferences provided valuable help: A Brookings Institute Conference on Inequality and Happiness and an American Enterprise Institute/Brookings Joint Center on Regulatory Studies Conference on Valuing Life. Smita Singh provided excellent research assistance. 1 See Robert Hahn, Global Regulatory Reform (2001); W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994). 2 See id. in the neighborhood of $6.1 million.3 But there is a conspicuous difficulty with the use of a uniform VSL. Some regulatory programs benefit people who are relatively young; others benefit people who relatively old. If a program would prevent fifty deaths of people who are twenty, should it be treated the same way as a program that would prevent fifty deaths of people who are seventy? Some people believe that other things being equal, a program that protects young people is better than one that protects old people,4 because it delivers greater benefits In their view, government should consider not simply the number of lives at stake, or the VSL; it should concern itself also or instead with the number of life-years, or the value of statistical life-years (VSLY). At the very least, VSLY is a more precise measure of what is at stake. 
At least since 1976, analysts have suggested the possibility of focussing regulatory policy on either life-years or quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).5 Through the latter measure, the issue is not merely the number of life-years saved by regulation; attention is also paid to qualitative improvements in health.6 An aggregate measure of QALYs would catalogue all of the health-related benefits of regulation. And for many years, some agencies have experimented with the idea that cost-benefit analysis should consider either QALYs or life-years, not merely the number of lives saved.7 For simplicity, my major focus here is on life-years, which imposes lower informational demands on regulators than do QALYs, and which is also less contentious in principle.8 A moment’s reflection will show that VSLY can produce different results from VSL. If the beneficiaries of a regulation are mostly elderly people, then the regulation will seem far less attractive with the use of VSLY than with VSL.9 But if the beneficiaries are 3 See Robert Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 323, 334-35 (2001). For discussion of why these numbers might be too low, see Dora Costa and Matthew Kahn, The Rising Price of Nonmarket Goods, 93 American Economic Review 227, 229 (Papers and Proceedings) (2003) (suggesting a likely current value of $12 million) Richard Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 COL L REV 941 (1999) (suggesting the need to inflate current figures for increases in social wealth and in the particular context of dreaded and involuntary risks); Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, 90 Geo. L. J. 2255 (2002) (discussing plausible reasons to adjust current figures upwards); Dora L. Costa and Matthew Kahn, Changes in the Value of Life: 1940-1980 (2002), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? abstract_id=364740. For recent evidence that the current numbers are indeed too low, see W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of A Statistical Life (2003), available on ssrn.com (finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males). 4 See, e.g., Michael J. Moore and W. Kip Viscusi, The Quantity-Adjusted Value of Life, 26 Economic Inquiry 369 (1988). 5 Richard Zeckhauser & Donald Shepard, Where Now for Saving Lives?, Law & Contemp. Probs., Autumn 1976, at 5. 6 Id. 7 For examples, see Appendix. 8 The reason is that in assessing life-years, government need not concern itself with issues of the quality of life. I offer a brief discussion of QALYs below. 9 I am assuming a relatively uniform value, for each statistical life year, and hence assuming that the valuation of each of the remaining years of seniors is not going to be much higher than the valuation of each of the remaining years of younger people. If older people’s remaining years have a much higher valuation, the conclusion in the text does not follow. For discussion, see below. mostly children, then a regulation is likely to seem far more attractive with VSLY than with VSL.10 
The issue received a great deal of public attention in connection with recent debates within Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).11 EPA’s own assessment of the benefits of the Clean Air Act includes a calculation of VSLY, using two estimates, $270,000 (not discounted) and $166,000 (discounted at an annual rate of 3 percent).12 In its “Clear Skies” proposal, EPA estimated benefits both by using the $6.1 million figure and by using an alternative method that produced numbers of $3.7 million for those under 70 and $2.3 million for those 70 and older.13 The difference between $3.7 and $2.3 million triggered intense criticism of a “senior death discount.”14 Eventually EPA abandoned the idea of varying VSL on the basis of age,15 perhaps as a result of public pressure, and after the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) found methodological problems with the study that supported the age-adjustment analysis.16 But OMB has been strongly encouraging federal agencies, including the EPA, to consider VSLY,17 and OMB’s draft guidelines on costbenefit analysis ask agencies to “consider providing estimates of both VSL and VSLY.”18 
Thus OMB has urged that “agency analysts, when performing benefit-cost analysis, present results using both the VSL and the VSLY methods.”19 Relying on evidence that older people show unusually high VSLY, OMB also suggests “that agencies present analyses with larger VSLY estimates for senior citizens.”20 Building on 10 The same qualification is appropriate here as in note 9; if children’s life-years are valued in terms of WTP, and if their WTP is low, the statement in the text would not follow. 11 For recent discussion, see Robert H. Hahn and Scott Wallsten, Is Granny Worth $2.3 Million or $6.1 Million?, http://www.aei.brookings.org/policy/page.php?id=138 12 See Environmental Protection Agency, Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970 to 1990 (1997). See the criticism of this approach in Environmental Protection Agency, Children’s Health Valuation Handbook 3-13 (2003), suggesting that “the relationship between the value of risk reductions and expected remaining life years is more complex than the simple discounted linear relationship . . . Current research does not provide a reliable method for estimating a value of a statistical life-year.” I explore this problem below. 13 See id.; Environmental Protection Agency, Technical Addendum: Methodologies for the Benefit Analysis of the Clear Skies Initiatives 35-37 (2002), relying on M.W. Jones Lee et al., The Value of Preventing Non-Fatal Road Injuries; Findings of a Willingness-to-Pay National Sample Survey, TRY Working Paper, WP SRC2. 14 See John Tierney, Life: The Cost-Benefit Analysis, section 4, p. 3, The New York Times, May 18, 2003. 15 Id. 16 See Memorandum of John D. Graham, Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, to the President’s Management Council 1 (May 30, 2003). 17 See id.; Dana Wilkie, White House Continues to Push For “Age” Discount In Rulemaking, Copley News Service (May 16, 2003), available at https://www.lexis.com/research/retrieve?_m=b9948ff37008fac2330 e2ce6a66f5e57&docnum=4&_fmtstr=FULL&_startdoc=1&wchp=dGLbVtz-lSlWk&_md5=aaa30b6f202f7 e1e23717bc35a2806b1. 18 See Office of Management and Budget, Draft 2003 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). 19 See Memorandum of John Graham, supra note, at 2. 20 Id. I raise questions about this recommendation below. In brief, older people might be willing to pay more for risk reduction than younger people, but the higher willingness to pay need not reveal a greater welfare gain from risk reduction. existing studies, one proposal would value each year of life at $273,000 for people over 65 but at $172,000 for people who are younger.21 Because the number of remaining years is a central part of the proposed calculus, a 65-year old, with a life expectancy of ten more years, would be valued at $2.7 million, whereas a 40-year old, with thirty-five years left, would be valued at $6 million. Thus regulations protecting people over forty would be worth less than they would under the $6.1 million benchmark, whereas those under forty would be worth more. A ten-year old, with sixty-five years left, would be valued at over $11 million. 
Would focussing on life-years make a large difference for policy? How much? The answers depend on what it means to focus on life-years. At first glance, a decision to look at VSLY is highly likely to reduce the expected benefits of programs that mostly help older people. This was the effect of a life-years calculation for the Clear Skies Initiative.22 A focus on VSLY is also likely to increase the expected benefits of programs that protect children and young people. The extent of the increase depends on value of the relevant life-years and the discount rate. Suppose that a uniform number is used for the remaining life-years of young people. With no discount rate, or a low discount rate, a program that protects such people will be far more valuable under VSLY than VSL. With a high discount rate, the difference between VSLY and VSL will be compressed, but it will still result in higher numbers for younger people. 
My simplest claim in this essay is that in terms of welfare, it is fully appropriate to focus on life-years, not merely lives, and that both academic and public criticisms of the life-years approach are misconceived. The reasons for this conclusion are simple: No program literally “saves” lives; life-extension is always what is at issue. If the goal is to promote people’s welfare by lengthening their lives, a regulation that saves 500 life-years (and, let us say, twenty-five people) is, other things equal, better than a regulation that saves 50 life-years (also, let us say, twenty-five people). A program that saves younger people is better, along every dimension, than an otherwise identical program that saves older people23—a statement that seems controversial only if we see life as a snapshot in which people are frozen at their current points in the age distribution. 
Any defense of relying life-years has to come to terms with some equitable objections to what seems to be a form of age discrimination.24 A central goal here is to answer those objections. Hence I suggest not only that more life-years mean more 21 See Hahn and Wallsten, supra note. EPA’s current estimates are $170,000 for those under age 65 and $434,000 for those over age 65. See Memorandum of John Graham, supra note, at 2 note **. For a lifetime risk faced by someone who is now 40, it would be sensible to calculate each life year, before 65, at the lower rate, and to calculate each life year, after that age, at the higher rate, subject to the appropriate discount rate. OMB says, delicately, that “[m]ore research is needed to provide a complete picture of how VSLY varies over the lifespan.” Id. 22 See supra note. 23 The “other things being equal” proviso is important here. I put to one side the problem of transition, taken up below. Note also that a decision to shift from VSL to VSLY will be harmful to people who are now older and who did not benefit from earlier use of VSLY. 24 See the overview in John McKie et al., The Allocation of Health Care Resources: An Ethical Evaluation of the QALY Approach 47-72 (1998). welfare, other things being equal, but also that a focus on life-years does not offend ethical constraints on the pursuit of increased welfare through regulation.25 Of course it is tempting, and in a sense right, to urge that each life should count for no more and no less than one. On this view, a focus on life-years might be seen to violate the equality principle, because it treats elderly people as if they were worth less (literally) than younger people. This argument, I suggest, is rooted in a generally sound moral intuition: Sometimes the pursuit of welfare should be constrained by considerations of justice. It is at least imaginable, for example, that one hundred white people would receive more welfare from the elimination of a risk of 1/100,000 than would one hundred AfricanAmericans. But even if this is so, government should not create an “African-American death discount.”26 The reason is that the welfare difference—assuming that it exists—is at least partly a product of past and present injustice. By contrast, injustice is not the source of the welfare difference between the protection of one hundred children and the protection of one hundred elderly people. Because every old person was once young, an emphasis on life-years does not discriminate against anyone; the very people who lose, in a sense, when older also gained when younger. In fact the use of statistical lives, rather than life-years, is plausibly taken as a form of discrimination against younger people, because it treats each of their anticipated years as less valuable than those of older people. As I shall also show, an emphasis on life-years does not run afoul of the principles that animate the prohibition on age discrimination. My most modest suggestion, then, is that in producing regulatory impact analyses,27 agencies should do a sensitivity analysis in which they inquire into life-years as well as lives—and take account of that sensitivity analysis in deciding what to do. 
Even if we agree that life-years matter, there remains the separate and quite vexing question of how to turn them into monetary equivalents. For VSL, willingness-topay (WTP) studies are used to produce the relevant values.28 Economists and economically oriented urge that CBA is properly based on WTP for the various benefits of regulation.29 Hence the real issue, an empirical one, is whether WTP varies over the life-cycle. If thirty-year-olds are willing to pay more (or less) to eliminate a statistical risk than sixty-year-olds, then the difference should be reflected in cost-benefit analyses of regulatory proposals. On this view, policymakers should use different values for old 25 Hence I am suggesting that for purposes of regulatory policy, the goal is to promote welfare, subject to justice-related constraints. It might be urged instead that here as elsewhere, justice is part of the social maxim and. I do not believe that these different approaches lead to different analysis of the issues I am discussing here. For a general discussion of welfare and fairness, see Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell, Fairness vs. Welfare (2002). Because Kaplow and Shavell use a capacious understanding of welfare, one that includes distributional considerations, my identification of ethical (and in a sense fairness-related) constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulation is not at odds with their claims. 26 The issue is complex if the beneficiaries of regulation must pay all of its social cost. Suppose, for example, that a program benefiting African-Americans would also impose costs, in the form (for example) of higher water bills. If so, and if the beneficiaries have full information, a lower VSLY, for them, might be justified in principle. Government does people no favors by requiring them to pay more than their WTP, at least if no information failure is involved. For discussion, see below. 27 As required by Executive Order 12866, 3 CFR 638 (1993). 28 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 29 See, e.g., Anna Alberini et al., Does the Value of a Statistical Life Vary with Age and Health Status? Evidence from the United States and Canada (unpublished manuscript 2002). people and young people if and only if WTP studies show such a disparity.30 This view has been endorsed by the Office of Management and Budget itself.31 And indeed, WTP is the basis for current evaluations of regulatory benefits.32 
I do not attempt to engage the complex debate over WTP fully here. But I do urge that with respect to lives or life-years, the argument for relying on WTP is most secure in cases in which the beneficiaries of regulation have to pay all of its cost. So long as people have adequate information, government does them no favors by requiring them to purchase goods for which they are not willing to pay. When the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay its full cost, the argument for making WTP conclusive is less strong. Nonetheless, I urge that there is no special reason to depart from WTP if government is focussing on statistical life-years rather than statistical lives. My more ambitious suggestion, then, is that at least in general, cost-benefit analysis (CBA) should be conducted with primary attention to VSLY rather than VSL. If CBA is to be used at all, it is because CBA is a rough way of testing whether a regulation will promote people’s welfare, understood to mean their actual well-being in their lives.33 An inquiry into VSLY is an important way of answering that question. I also urge that agencies should be permitted to make adjustments from WTP when the beneficiaries of regulation lack information or when they would pay only a fraction of its cost. Of course there are hard questions here about the relationship between accuracy and administrability. Lacking good information about population-wide variations in WTP, government might relate on uniform figures, for life-years or lives, simply because more accurate numbers do not exist. 
In principle, the choice between lives and life-years is clear and simple. It gives the appearance of difficulty only because of a kind of optical illusion, which suggests some choice “between” older people and younger ones. But a discussion of the underlying problems provides a window onto a much larger and more complex set of questions. I touch on three more general issues. First, economists and policymakers should not take the willingness to pay criterion too seriously, and they are in danger of 30 See id. 31 See 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003), suggesting that those who endorse VSLY assume “that the public is willing to pay more money for a rule that saves an average of 10 life years per person than a rule that saves one year per person.” 32 See, e.g., Environmental Protection Agency, Technical Addendum: Methodologies for the Benefit Analysis of the Clear Skies Initiatives 30-38 (2002); W. Kip Viscusi, Faral Tradeoffs (1993); Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 33 See Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L J 165 (1999). Throughout I use the idea of welfare in a nonsectarian sense. I do not mean to identify the idea with the utilitarian account, and I do not mean to reduce welfare to “happiness,” narrowly defined. As I use the term, it is agnostic on the controversial normative questions. On utitarianism and consequentialism, see Amartya Sen, Utilitarianism and Welfarism, 76 J Phil 463 (1979); for general discussion, see Amartya Sen, Development As Freedom (1999). I believe that without resolving any difficult normative questions, it is possible to show that VSLY is preferable to VSL, and more generally to show that WTP is an inadequate proxy for welfare in many circumstances. On some of the empirical issues involved in measuring welfare, see Bruno S. Frey and Aliois Stutzer, Happiness and Economics 4-11 (2001);Alberto Alesina et al., Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and Americans Different? (2001). doing precisely that.34 As a measure of welfare, that criterion has several advantages, above all in circumstances in which regulation amounts to a forced exchange, requiring people to “buy” a benefit that they may or may not find it in their interest to buy. But in some contexts, no forced exchange is involved, because the beneficiaries of regulation do not have to pay for it. And in some contexts, willingness to pay is a poor proxy for welfare. In such contexts, regulators should abandon it and think about welfare directly if they can.35 I attempt to bring recent work on people’s mispredictions of the welfare effects of their own choices to bear on that question,36 with the suggestion that this work raises doubts about the use of WTP in many situations.37 There is a large research agenda here. 
The second issue has to do with the relationship between welfare and equity in the context of government regulation. While promoting welfare is the basic goal of environmental regulation, there are important ethical constraints on the pursuit of that goal. Those constraints support some, but not all, of the moral reservations about CBA and WTP that are stressed by their critics.38 As I have suggested, it would generally be unacceptable for government to adopt a higher VSL or VSLY for men and whites than for women and African-Americans.39 Related problems infect the use of QALYs in certain circumstances. Suppose, for example, that an otherwise identical government intervention could produce more QALYs if directed at the moderately disabled than at the severely disabled; is it so clear that the intervention should therefore favor the moderately disabled? I do not believe so. An understanding of the nature and the weaknesses of the ethical objections to VSLY helps explain the strength of objections to the promotion of welfare through regulation in other settings. 
Finally, I hope to make some progress in clarifying the debate between those who emphasize WTP and those who emphasize life-years and QALYs.40 I suggest that QALYs can be used as part of a cost-effectiveness analysis; it would be fully possible to investigate how many QALYs can be obtained for a given investment of resources. But when mortality and morbidity gains are converted into monetary equivalents, QALYs are 34 See id. 35 Of course this is a difficult task, and I offer some thoughts here only about the easy cases. For general discussion, see Daniel Kahneman, et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q. J Econ 375 (1997). 36 See id.; Daniel Kahneman, A Psychological Perspective on Economics, 93 Am. Econ. Rev. 162 (Papers and Proceedings) (2003); George Loewenstein and David Schkade, Wouldn’t It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings, in Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, eds., WellBeing: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 85 (Russell Sage 1999). 37 See Jonathan Gruber and Sendhil Mullainathan, Do Cigarettes Taxes Make Smokers Happier? (2003, available at http://www.brook.edu/comm/events/20030605.htm), for an empirical demonstration that higher taxes on cigarettes actually increase the happiness of smokers, apparently because smoking decreases happiness and taxes decrease smoking. One of the many intriguing features of this essay is this: People are willing to pay for cigarettes, and thus in order to smoke, but smoking decreases welfare (on almost any understanding of that term) for many or most smokers. 38 See Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Priceless: Human Health, the Environment, and the Limits of the Market (forthcoming 2004). 39 But see note supra. 40 For an overview, see James Hammitt, QALYs vs. WTP, Harvard Center for Risk Analysis (2002). insufficiently informative. Indeed they tell us nothing at all. The value of WTP is that it allows for the conversion. In some circumstances, affected people might be willing to pay a large amount for relatively few QALYs—if, for example, they are wealthy or inclined to spend much of their wealth on risk-reduction. In other circumstances, affected people might be willing to pay a small amount for relatively many QALYs—if, for example, they are poor or inclined to spend little of their wealth on risk-reduction. In fact this seemingly paradoxical result—higher WTP for few QALYs than for many—is far from unlikely. There is no question that other things being equal, more QALYs are better than fewer. But where the beneficiaries of regulation would pay all or almost all of its cost, WTP is normally the appropriate starting-point for the measurement of benefits. 
The remainder of this essay is organized as follows. Part II discusses the choice between life-years and lives. Here I urge that life-years are an appropriate focus of regulatory concern. I also explore ethical and distributive constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulation; I suggest that such constraints are real and important, but that the use of life-years does not run afoul of them. Part III turns to the vexing question of monetization. I suggest that the use of WTP does not raise any special or distinctive conceptual issues in the context of life-years. Unfortunately, current evidence does not provide clear findings about how WTP for life-years or the remainder of life varies over the lifespan. A constant WTP is not supported by existing evidence, and there is some reason to think that older people are willing to pay more, per life-year, than younger people. I investigate this possibility and what might lie behind it. Part IV briefly identifies some options for policy. My most cautious suggestion here is that a life-years calculation should be part of the analysis that underlies policy judgments. Part V discusses three extensions of the analysis: the possibility of resolving the debate over life-years by reference to survey evidence; the choice between QALYs and WTP; and the fact that WTP might not adequately measure welfare. Part VI is the conclusion. 
Should government focus on statistical lives or instead statistical life-years? We should be clear on the nature of the opposition between the two. No regulatory program can eliminate death; if it is successful, it will merely extend life. If regulators focus solely on statistical lives, they will be lengthening lives, and they will be analyzing the consequences of regulation without regard to the extent of the lengthening. In fact they will be ignoring that intuitively relevant consideration. The initial question, then, is whether regulators should focus on statistical lives41 rather than life-years, even while acknowledging the fact that life extension is all that is involved. 
My goal in this section is to show that a focus on life-years should be found desirable from a variety of different perspectives, and that it does not offend justicerelated constraints on regulatory policy. I suggest that if welfare is the goal of regulatory policy, it is important to assess the number of life-years at stake. I suggest as well that 41 I deliberately leave ambiguous the meaning of “a focus.” At a minimum, I mean to suggest that government should assess the number of life-years at stake, and use the resulting figure when the ultimate decision is otherwise difficult. See Part V below. such an assessment should be appealing to those who are concerned with fairness or reciprocity—and also to those who believe that as a matter of principle, regulatory policy should attempt to ensure citizens with lives of ordinary lengths. If these claims are correct, it should be possible to obtain an incompletely theorized agreement42 on the relevance of life-years—an agreement from a diverse set of theoretical perspectives, and one that does not depend on resolution of disagreements about the proper foundations of regulatory policy. 
It should be clear that an emphasis on statistical lives neglects highly pertinent information. Why should analysts blind themselves to that information? Other things being equal, and as a matter of simple logic, the welfare gain from a program saving (say) 1000 people between forty and sixty-five is unquestionably higher than the welfare gain from a program saving (say) 1000 people who are 65 and over. The former program does everything that the latter program does, and much else besides. After all, the sixty-five year-olds were themselves forty once, and it would be astonishing if the welfare gain, to each of us, of ten more years of life were equivalent to the welfare gain of forty more years of life. 
Nor does an emphasis on life-years disregard or downplay the welfare of older people. Once programs focussing on life-years are in place, old people will benefit from them no less than younger people, simply because those programs helped them at a younger stage and hence increased the likelihood that they would become old.43 In this sense, the idea that a life-years approach prefers younger people over older people is based on a kind of optical illusion—one that sees human life as a snapshot with everyone always at their current age, rather than a moving picture in which people age over time.44 In any case the life-years approach considers everyone’s life-years the same, old people no less than young people, and hence will argue for careful attention to risks that face significant numbers of old people. 
To see the claim for considering life-years, imagine that people are placed behind a veil of ignorance,45 in which they do not know their personal characteristics; they are 42 On the general idea, see Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 43 There is one exception to this conclusion: People who became old while government used statistical lives but after it switches to statistical life-years. Such people could not, by hypothesis, benefit from statistical life-years when they were younger. But it would extremely odd to invoke this short-term problem as a reason to continue with the idea of statistical lives if it is obviously inferior. 44 Note that a claim for attention to life-years does not mean that the nation is devoting too little or too much in the way of resources to protect public health. Even if the United States doubled, tripled, or quadrupled the money it spends on environmental protection, for example, it would be necessary to decide how that money should be spend, and here it would remain necessary to choose between statistical lives or statistical life-years. 45 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971). I am using the idea of the veil of ignorance for heuristic purposes, but not in the way Rawls does. Rawls is interested in issues involving the basic structure of society, and it is not at all clear that he believes that the veil should be used to assess the justice of particular issues that are contested on grounds of justice. Nonetheless, I believe that the veil of ignorance is an illuminating way of testing the legitimacy of asking about life-years. unaware of their race, sex, wealth, or (most pertinently) age. Note that the veil of ignorance is intended to be an extremely stringent constraint on choice, one that ensures that morally irrelevant factors will not play a biasing role.46 If those behind the veil would choose statistical life-years over statistical years, we have good reason to believe that lifeyears are the appropriate focus of regulatory attention. Would people behind the veil be indifferent between a program that would eliminate risks that people would face at thirty and one that would eliminate otherwise identical risks faced at sixty? If people do not know how old they are, would they have the slightest difficulty concluding that it is better to eliminate a 1/50,000 risk faced by one million teenagers than a 1/50,000 risk faced by one million social security recipients? At first glance, the choice is entirely clear. The program that saves more life-years is better, because it provides more welfare to its beneficiaries, and does so without offending any ethical consideration.47 From behind a veil of ignorance, choosers would surely select the program that protects younger people, and hence would make life-years highly relevant to their own judgments. 
You do not know how long you will live. Which of the following two programs do you prefer: 
(a) A program that would eliminate, starting now and for the rest of your life after that point, a 1/200,000 risk of death. 
(b) A program that would eliminate, starting at sixty-five and for the rest of your life after that point, a 1/200,000 risk of death. 
It would be truly astonishing if most people did not prefer Program (a) over Program (b). Perhaps a preference for Program (a) reflects, in part, the discounting of future years, which (rationally or not48) may not loom so large in people’s current calculations.49 But the difference is highly likely to reflect not merely discounting but also the fact that Program (a) provides more risk-free years. In answering questions of this kind, reasonable people take account of the fact that the welfare benefit of Program (a) is significantly higher than the welfare benefit of Program (b). In fact Program (a) literally dominates Program (b): It provides everything that Program (b) does, and more years of reduced risk as well. It would be easy to design questions, for those behind the veil of ignorance, that have this characteristic. A focus on statistical life-years allows choosers to select programs that are better, on every dimension, than programs that seem identical to those who focus on statistical lives. 46 See id. It is noteworthy here that Rawls uses the veil of ignorance as a way of challenging utilitarianism itself. Id. 47 I take this point up in more detail below. 48 On hyberbolic discounting, see David Laibson, Intertemporal Decision Making, Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (forthcoming), available at http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/laibson/papers /euler.pdf ; David Laibson and Christopher Harris, Hyberbolic Discounting and Consumption, available at id.; Richard Thaler, The Winner’s Curse (1993). 49 On that issue, see Revesz, supra note. 
Some cases are not as simple as this one, because they do not involve lifetime risks. We could imagine a Program (c) that eliminates a risk faced mostly by people between the ages of twenty and twenty-five, and a Program (d) that eliminates a risk faced mostly by people between the ages of seventy and seventy-five. Program (c) cannot be said to do everything that Program (d) does, and more. Program (d) protects people who are not protected by Program (c); there is a real choice here. But Program (c) does provide far more life-years, and because it enables (a certain number of) people to reach the age of seventy in the first place, it is surely preferable, other things being equal, to Program (d). 
Does a focus on life-years discriminate against older people in some invidious or unacceptable way? It is tempting to reach this conclusion. 50 But illicit discrimination is not involved. In fact it is the idea of statistical lives that is far more plausibly discriminatory than the idea of statistical life-years, because the former treats the remaining life-years of old people as more valuable than the remaining life-years of young people.51 And because every old person was once young, and (with a little luck) young people will eventually become old, an approach that emphasizes life-years does not treat old people unfairly. But to approach this question, let us begin with cases in which ethical constraints on the pursuit of welfare seem most insistent. 
Suppose that we could measure welfare directly through a kind of hedometer. Suppose too that the hedometer does not rely on contentious conceptions of welfare; it is not narrowly limited to pleasure or happiness, and it includes the proper ingredients of welfare however these are defined.52 Suppose too that the hedometer is able to show that in a relevant population, white people receive more welfare from their lives than do African-Americans. Hence, let us suppose, a program that would save fifty white people (from cancer as a result of arsenic in drinking water, for example) will produce greater welfare gains than a program that would save sixty African-Americans (from air pollution in the inner city, for example). Certainly it is not unimaginable that the welfare gain is higher for programs that protect whites than for programs that protect an equivalent number of African-Americans (though the opposite might also be true). Gender differences are possible as well. Perhaps men flourish more than women (though here too the opposite might be true). If these examples seem too contentious, imagine that there are two social groups, the Flourishing and the Depressed. Members of both groups are easily identifiable, and their present and future welfare is captured in the names of their respective groups. By stipulation, a program that protects the lives of the Flourishing will produce more welfare than one that protects the lives of the Depressed. To sharpen the normative question, stipulate too that the Flourishing are responsible for 50 See McKie et al., supra note, at 47-72. 51 Note that this is objectionable if, other things being equal, each person’s life-year counts for no less and no more than one. It is all the more objectionable if older people are seen as having a larger “stock” of lifeyears and hence as comparatively “rich” in welfare terms. In that event, the life-years of younger people deserve higher priority on distributive grounds. I do not explore these complexities here. 52 Hence the term eudaimeter seems to me more fitting but more unruly. See the discussion of eudaimonia in Marths Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness 142,-43, 343-72 (rev. ed. 2001). the depression of the Depressed; that if not for the active efforts of the Flourishing, the Depression would come closer to flourishing too. 
This example is hypothetical and we lack hedometers. For the moment, let us turn to willingness to pay (WTP) instead.53 W. Kip Viscusi finds that African-American males have a significantly lower WTP than white males: $7.7 million versus $15.1 million.54 He also finds that African-American females have a lower WTP than white females: $8.7 million versus $11.3.55 Thus the overall VSL for the white sample is $13.4 million, whereas the overall VSL for the African-American sample is $9.3 million, and the VSL for the male sample is $15.1, much higher than the VSL of $11.3 for the female sample.56 If WTP is the basis for government policy, agencies should be assigning a much higher VSL for whites and men than for African-Americans and women. Viscusi himself does not reach this conclusion. He says that “because of differences in market opportunities, it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness to black workers to bear risk.” 
Of course the WTP numbers do not show or even suggest that when regulatory programs save lives, African-Americans and women gain less, in terms of welfare, than whites and men. By itself, the lower WTP demonstrates no such thing; as we shall see, WTP is merely a proxy for welfare, and an especially crude one in the face of disparities in income, wealth, and opportunities. Suppose that Donald Trump is willing to pay $500 to eliminate 1/50,000 risk of having migraine headaches for the next year; suppose too that I am willing to pay only $25 to eliminate the same risk. The difference might well stem only from differences in wealth; the welfare loss, from migraine headaches, would be the same for the both of us. But it is certainly imaginable that some people, defined in demographic terms, do obtain more welfare from their lives than others. To see whether there are ethical constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulation, let us simply stipulate that this is the case. 
Should government devote more resources to the protection of those racial or ethnic groups that would gain more welfare from protection? Most people would find the very question absurd. In cases of these sorts, there is an equality-based check on the pursuit of greater welfare. In fact racial discrimination on this basis would be unconstitutional. But what is the source of the equality-based check? In the context of race discrimination, a central problem is that if African-Americans receive less welfare from their lives than do white people, a large part of the reason lies in social and legal practices, past and present, which help produce that state of affairs. This form of inequality reflects injustice. If government takes the inequality as a kind of given for the purposes of policy, it is compounding the injustice. In fact it is actually creating a kind of vicious circle, in which disparities in welfare justify increased disparities in welfare, which in turn justify ever-increasing disparities in welfare. The ethical intuition is simple: 53 See W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of A Statistical Life (2003), available on ssrn.com. 54 See id. at 29. 55 Id. 56 Id. at 25. Where disparities in the welfare effects of regulatory policies are a product of background injustice, government is properly blocked from taking those disparities into account.57 
This point has implications for the debate over the use of quality-adjusted life years in regulatory policy. Insofar as the idea of QALYs is designed to rank health gains along with fatalities averted, it makes a great deal of sense; reductions in curable cancers, asthma attacks, and chronic bronchitis surely count as gains, whoever receives them. But suppose that people with severe physical and emotional ailments can be benefited only moderately by protective interventions—and hence that the number of QALYs, from such interventions, is relatively low, simply because those who are helped cannot, in light of their disability, be helped much. Should government concentrate instead on programs for people with less severe ailments? If government should not, it is because it is unjust to disfavor those whose aliments are most serious.58 This problem is not the same as the problem of disparities across lines of race and gender, but it raises related concerns. 
Thus far I have suggested that considerations of justice constrain the promotion of welfare through regulatory controls. But is the use of statistical life-years morally unacceptable in the same way as a VSL that discriminates on the basis of race or gender? This seems quite implausible. The initial point is that it is hard to argue that injustice accounts for the welfare disparity between protection of a thirty-year-old and protection of a sixty-year-old. The disparity comes from the simple fact that younger people have more years left. Now that disparity might itself be an injustice if social practices, or even nature, singled out certain groups of people and gave them shorter lives. Hence the use of life-years would indeed be problematic if it systematically burdened members of identifiable social groups (an issue to which I will return). But by itself, the notion of lifeyears is demographically neutral in both theory and practice.59 
Under the life-years approach, older people are treated worse for only one reason: They are older. This is not an injustice. Every old person was young once, and every young person will be old too (if given the chance). In fact an important form of reciprocity is built into the life-years approach. If regulatory policy is based on life-years, every person will, in a sense, be both benefited and burdened, and in exactly the same way. Indeed, every person will be both a beneficiary and a victim of the relevant discrimination. People—the same people—will be benefited when they are younger and burdened when they are older. They have no cause to complain of an approach from 57 I am putting to one side the possibility of adopting welfare-promoting regulatory policies alongside redistributive tax-and-spending policies. See below. 58 See the discussion of the natural lottery in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1973). 59 There is a possible qualification here if African-Americans (for example) live shorter lives, and if VSLY therefore ensures that African-American lives will be valued, on average, less than white lives. In theory, this is indeed a possible problem. But in practice, regulatory policies that use VSLY do not run into that problem, because they are too coarse-grained to discriminate in this fashion. which they gained at an earlier stage.60 It is hard to see how the relevant form of discrimination is illicit. In fact it is not clear that it is a form of discrimination at all. Everyone’s life year counts as no less and no more than one. In fact it would be possible to conclude that this argument from reciprocity is a free-standing justification of the lifeyears approach, putting issues of welfare entirely to one side. 
In an important sense, a focus on statistical lives is discriminatory, not a focus on statistical life-years. The former discriminates against younger people, simply because it treats each of their years as less valuable than those of older people. A program that uses statistical lives accords far more value to each remaining year of an old person’s life than to each remaining year of a young person’s life.61 The point is not purely semantic. Suppose that we conclude that lifetime well-being is what matters, and that other things being equal, policies should not give some people more lifetime well-being than others. A policy that looks solely at statistical lives will violate this principle. Compare a group of people who die from a certain risk at fifty with a group of people who die from the same risk at seventy. Other things being equal, the latter group has received significantly more lifetime well-being than the former, and attention to statistical lives forces government to ignore this fact. If anything, an age-neutral statistical lives approach is subject to a claim of illicit discrimination, not an approach that focuses on life-years. 
A possible argument would come from the criminal law. Those who kill older people are not punished less harshly than those who kill younger people. In fact it would be extremely surprising to find a criminal sentencing policy that imposes higher sentences on those who kill people thirty and under than on those who kill people fifty and over.62 If criminal punishment treats lives as equivalent, and does not make life-years relevant, why, it might be asked, should regulation be any different? Part of the answer lies in the sheer heinousness of murder. The intentional killing of another human being is, in terms of its consequences, so bad that the age of the victim is a matter of relative indifferences. Perhaps the system of criminal justice focuses not solely on social consequences but also on the character of the act and the perpetrator. If this is the focus, a murderer of a young person is unlikely to be worse than a murderer of an older person. 
Distinctions among different kinds of crimes raise many complexities, and it is certainly reasonable to think that a murder of another human being regulation is more 60 Arguments from reciprocity are not always convincing. Suppose, for example, that certain people were beneficiaries of racial discrimination in the past, and at some future point they are harmed by racial discrimination. At least it is not clear that the latter form of discrimination can be justified by reference to the former. If not, the problem is that discrimination is unjust. If my arguments in the text are correct, this problem does not apply to the life-years criterion, because there is no injustice. 61 For a utilitarian, this approach is objectionable because each life-year, other things being equal, is an equal source of utility, and hence a program should prefer more life-years rather than fewer. We could imagine a kind of utilitarian or consequentialist who would give higher priority to the welfare of the least well-off. In this context, who counts as the least well-off? In an important sense, young people fall in that category, because they have not yet had the opportunity to accumulate welfare; older people already have a large welfare “stock.” But a resolution of these complexities is not important for my analysis here. 62 It would be less surprising to find a sentencing policy that imposes severe punishment on those who murder children. But here the reason for the severity would be the special vulnerability of children, not the fact that they have many life-years left. analogous to the system of civil damages, which do seem to turn on life-years. Many state courts, including several state supreme courts, have calculated damages in wrongful death cases by assigning a net value to each remaining year the decedent would likely have lived. These courts have used life expectancy tables and projected annual earnings to determine lost income.63 Several courts have gone further and used estimated life expectancy to determine damages for loss of society or consortium.64 In these states, the lives of young people are presumptively more valuable than those of the elderly. In this respect, the use of life-years, as part of an understanding of appropriate policy, is hardly foreign to the legal system. 
Consider another way to get at the issue. On one view, people have a moral entitlement to have a chance to live to the end of a human life of normal length.65 It follows that there is a special moral objection if members of a relevant population are dying at the age of thirty or forty, an objection that does not apply if members of a relevant population are dying at the age of seventy or eighty. If people have a moral entitlement to avoid (excessive risks of) premature death, then government legitimately devotes special attention to otherwise identical risks faced at relatively early places in the lifespan. Those who emphasize the importance of providing people with ordinary longevity should find a focus on life-years compatible with their goals, and highly congenial insofar as that focus makes it more likely that citizens will have a chance to have lives of ordinary length.66 In any case a special virtue of focussing on life-years is that it ensures attention to a crucial question, which is whether affected citizens have had an opportunity to live a number of years already.67 63 See, e.g., Payne v. Eighth Judicial Dist. Court, 60 P.3d 469, 473 (Mont. 2002); Romero v. Byers, 872 P.2d 840, 845-46 (N.M. 1994); Bemenderfer v. Williams, 745 N.E.2d 212, 219 (Ind. 2001); Davidson v. Lindsey, 104 S.W.3d 483, 493 n.2 (Tenn. 2003). 64 See, e.g., Thomas v. Hilburn, 654 So.2d 898, 903 (Miss. 1995); Durham ex rel. Estate of Wade v. U-Haul Int’l, 745 N.E.2d 755, 766 (Ind. 2001). 65 See Martha Nussbaum, Women and Human Development 78 (2000). Nussbaum lists, as the first of “central human functional capabilities, “Being able to live to the end of a human life of normal length; not dying prematurely, or before one’s life is so reduced as to be not worth living.” Complex issues are raised by the application of this idea to the context of social risks (and hence I do not adopt her phrasing here). Suppose, for example, that citizens in a population of 200 million are exposed to a median annual mortality risk of 1/500,000 from all causes (including, for example, motor vehicle accidents, cigarette smoking, alcohol use, air pollution, water pollution, pesticides, occupational accidents, homicide, hunger, and much more). This would be an exceptionally safe population—safer, in fact, than any society in the history of the world. But of that population, 400 people would die each year, many of them prematurely. 66 A focus on life-years is not, of course, the same as an effort to ensure that everyone has a chance to have a lifespan of ordinary length. My only suggestion is that an approach that looks at statistical lives, and does not look at life-years, is less likely to provide that chance than an approach that make life-years relevant. 67 Note that this is a different question from the life-years question, though it is overlapping. Consider two programs. (a) Program A would remove a statistical risk from a population of people who are forty; their life expectancy is sixty-five. (b) Program B would remove the same statistical risk from a population of people who are fifty; their life expectancy is eighty. On the life-years approach, Program B is to be preferred. But if we are focussing on the numbers of years that people have had already, Program A might be better. 
Do these arguments undermine the widely acceptable principle against age discrimination? If so, the arguments might be thought to have mischaracterized the ethical issues involved—or to have broad and perhaps radical implications, calling for a rethinking of the broadly accepted prohibition on age discrimination. 
Under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act,68 employers are forbidden from discriminating against people over forty. They cannot choose a thirty-year-old over a fifty-year-old. Indeed, they cannot discriminate even if they can claim that they are relying on a statistically sound generalization—as sound as those on which employers and others rely every day.69 It is not acceptable for an employer to conclude that thirtyyear-old teachers are more fit, energetic, and creative than fifty-year-old teachers, even if this is generally true, and even if it is difficult, in individual cases, to test creativity before people have started to work.70 Nor would it be permissible for an employer to adapt the argument I have been defending here. An employer could not say that he wants to hire people who have a large number of life-years left—even if the employer could say, not implausibly, that he would like employees with many life-years rather than fewer, and even if he could add, also not implausibly, that a life-years approach to hiring does not, in a sense, discriminate against anyone. (Recall that every older person was young once and that every younger person, if lucky, will eventually be older too.) The question, in short, is whether it is possible to defend the use of statistical life-years over statistical lives while also accepting the prohibition on age discrimination in employment. I believe that it is. 
To be sure, the prohibition on age discrimination in employment does not have the same moral standing as the corresponding prohibitions on race and sex discrimination.71 But it is easy to see how the former prohibition might be justified. Some age discrimination is undoubtedly a product of unthinking prejudice—of a false belief that older people are unable to engage in certain tasks.72 If prejudice is frequently responsible for age discrimination, perhaps age discrimination should generally be banned. A supplemental rationale would be that discrimination on the basis of age inflicts an unusual kind of dignitary harm—one that makes it different from, and worse than, most kinds of employment-related injury. If an employee is fired because he is fifty-five, or not hired for that reason, the psychological and dignitary injury is plausibly worse, even far worse, than that faced by people who are fired or hired for other reasons. At least this point seems to animate the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.73 68 See 29 USC 621-34. 69 See Samuel Estreicher and Michael C. Harper, Cases and Materials on Employment Discrimination and Employment Law 445 (2000). In some narrow circumstances, however, age might be a bona fide occupation qualification. See Western Air Lines v. Criswell, 472 US 400 (1985). 70 See id. 71 See Samuel Issacharoff & Erica W. Harris, Is Age Discrimination Really Age Discrimination? The ADEA’s Unnatural Solution, 72 N.Y.U.L Rev. 780, 783 (1997). 72 See Estreicher and Harper, supra note, at 444-45. 73 See id. 
The key point is that whether prejudice or dignitary harm is the basis of the ADEA, the same problems do not raise doubts about the government’s use of statistical life-years. When government uses life-years, it is not because it is prejudiced against older people or acting on the basis of unreliable stereotypes about them. There is no overgeneralization here. Nor is it easy to show that a dignitary harm, of the sort involved in the employment context, is an issue here. It is one thing to be told, by a specific employer, that you will be fired or not hired because you are too old. It is quite another thing for the government to use an approach that focuses on life-years rather than lives. To be sure, it is possible to characterize such an approach in a way that does inflict dignitary harm. Perhaps some objections to life-years stem from a perception that this measures values older people less, treating them as “worth” some fraction of younger people. But these objections rest on a highly misleading way of framing what life-years is all about. 
There is, however, one set of ethical constraints on the life-years approach. Compare two programs: (a) Program A would eliminate a risk faced by people who are ten years old or younger, but who have a life expectancy of forty years or less, because they have a preexisting condition that will likely lead to premature mortality. (b) Program B would eliminate a risk faced by people who are thirty years old, but who have a life expectancy of seventy or more, because they are in good health. 
On the life-years approach, Program B is better. But is it better in principle? Note that if it is objectionable, it is not for the same reason as an approach that discriminates on the basis of race or sex. Social injustice is not responsible for the low life expectancy of the people who would be helped by Program A. (Let us so stipulate; if social injustice is involved, the case is close to those of race and sex discrimination.) Instead the problem, for the beneficiaries of Program A, is bad luck in the “natural lottery.”74 People whose life expectancy is low, as a result of preexisting conditions, have been dealt an unfortunate blow by fate. In my view, government should take reasonable steps to ameliorate such blows, and should not make them worse through social policies. A lifeyears approach that is blind to the natural lottery would be unjust, 
This point very much bears on medical interventions and on government funding for medical projects. But it is rarely raised in regulatory policy. Typically government is deciding whether to adopt regulations that reduce pollution or otherwise increase safety across large populations. From the standpoint of the natural lottery, the life-years criterion does not raise objections in the vast bulk of such cases.75 But it might well turn 74 See Rawls, supra note, at XX. 75 Compare another puzzle. (1) Program A would save 1000 infants. (2) Program B would save 1000 tenyear-olds. On the life-years approach, Program A is of course better, other things being equal. On willingness to pay grounds, taken up in part III, this is much less clear; there are hard empirical and conceptual questions here. And there are theoretical reasons to question a preference for Program A. out to create intriguing questions in the context of programs that disproportionately benefit men or women. The life expectancy of women is higher than the life expectancy of men. As of 2000, the average life expectancy for men at birth was 74.1, but 79.5 for women.76 A breast cancer prevention program might well protect more life-years than an otherwise identical program designed to protect men.77 In my view, a neutral use of the life-years approach should not be thought to be unacceptably discriminatory even if it produces more attention to women than to men, though a formal commitment to sex equality, or to counteracting the effects of natural lottery, would raise real doubts. 
These points suggest that in deciding whether to regulate, government should consider life-years saved, not merely lives saved (a misleading way of framing the alternative, which is really lives extended).78 And if life-years are the focus, it would be possible to engage in cost-effectiveness analysis, seeing how many life-years are obtained for given investments in regulatory protection. Government might therefore reallocate some of the resources devoted to programs protecting the elderly to programs protecting younger people.79 But suppose that government seeks to engage not merely in costeffectiveness analysis but also in cost-benefit analysis. If this is what it seeks to do, it will have to turn life-years into monetary equivalents. For most economists, the valuation of regulatory benefits, and the monetization of life-years, depends on WTP.80 Should WTP be used here? 
At first glance, the use of WTP, as a way of monetizing benefits, creates no special or novel issues in the context of life-years. Under the economic framework, the goal should be to calculate people’s WTP for statistical years over the lifespan. We Because Program B would save people who have accumulated memories and experiences, the individual loss might be higher; and because of the investment of family and friends, the social loss might be higher as well. For relevant discussion, see Ronald Dworkin, Life’s Dominion (1996). A full account would of course have to come to terms with this question, which might justify further constraints on the use of lifeyears. 76 See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/lifexpec.htm. 77 To make the issue more concrete, compare two programs. (1) Program A would save 1000 women with a median age of sixty. (2) Program B would save 1000 men with a median age of sixty. Under the life-years approach, Program A is better, because it would protect more life-years. 78 There are some exotic variations that I do not deal with here. Compare two programs. (1) Program A would save 50 people who are ten years old. (2) Program B would save 100 people who are forty-six years old. If life expectancy is 80, then the first program would save 3500 life-years, whereas the second would save 3400 life-years. Is it so clear that program A is to be preferred? If not, it might be because reasonable people would prefer something like a weighted average of lives saved and life-years saved, so that a large number of people, and a small number of life-years, would receive more attention than life-years alone suggest, just as a small number of people, and a large number of life-years, would receive less attention. I do not deal with that possibility here. If government concentrated on life-years for purposes of regulation, it is likely that this issue would balance out in the end. The area of medical treatment is one in which the issue might have more practical importance. 79 This would be an extension of the reallocations aimed at in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle (1993). 80 See, e.g., V. Kerry Smith, Do the “Near” Elderly Value Mortality Risks Differently? (unpublished manuscript 2002). regulation, the question is much easier. If they are paying only $10 for benefits valued at $50, they are net gainers. It follows that if social planners are particularly interested in the welfare of the possible beneficiaries, the program is justified. 
But there is an obvious response. To assist the relevant population, it would be better to give them a cash subsidy rather than to provide them with a regulatory benefit that is, by hypothesis, less valuable to them than it is costly to those who must provide it. And under plausible assumptions, a subsidy would indeed be better than a regulatory benefit, both because it is more efficient and because it is a better means of accomplishing the redistributive goal. In the face of background injustice, or indefensible inequality, the tax system should usually be used as a corrective.118 On a widely held view, regulation should involve maximization; redistributive tax and spending policies, rather than regulation, should be used to promote redistribution.119 The issue is disputed.120 But if a redistribution is not going to come from tax and spending policies, it is certainly possible that provision of the regulatory benefit is preferable to the status quo on grounds of both welfare and distribution. Note that a uniform VSL or VSLY is itself a kind of redistributive strategy (imperfect to be sure).121 
Fortunately, it is not necessary to resolve the hard questions here. If the life-years approach ends up valuing younger people more than older people (because they have more life-years left), the older people have no claim for special government help. But we can reach some more general conclusions about WTP and regulatory policy. If the beneficiaries of regulation pay its full cost, and if there is no informational or cognitive problem, WTP provides the correct figure. If the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay its full cost, regulation might be justified even if it exceeds WTP. For purposes of policy, one problem is that in many cases, government cannot easily determine how much of the cost of regulation is borne by its purported beneficiaries. With perfect tools, regulators would have a complete sense of the incidence of regulatory costs, and an understanding of the distribution of benefits and burdens would be helpful in making regulatory choices.122 But government lacks those tools. The best approach is probably to begin with WTP to measure the value of statistical life-years, and then to make distributional 118 See, e.g., David A. Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. Chi L Rev 439 (2003); Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System Is Less Efficient Than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 28 J Legal Stud 667 (1994); Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking, 71 Am Econ Rev. 414 (1981). 119 See Weisbach, supra note; Kenneth J. Arrow et al., Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health, and Safety Regulation 8 (1996) 120 See Chris Sanchirico, Deconstructing the New Efficiency Rationale, 86 Cornell L Rev 1003, 1069 (2001; Chris Sanchirico, Taxes versus Legal Rules as Instruments for Equity: A More Equitable View, 29 J Legal Stud 797, 820 (2000). 121 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, in Cost-Benefit Analysis 7 (Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner eds. 2001); see also Kahn, supra note. In the racial context, a uniform VSL can even be seen as a form of affirmative action, in the sense that it gives a “boost” to African-American VSL because of a perception of past social discrimination. Note that the boost also results in a reduction of white VSL, at least if regulators use the median VSL. 122 Note that in its recent draft guidelines, OMB asks regulators to try to assess the distributional effects of regulation. See Office of Management and Budget, Draft 2003 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). adjustments in appropriate cases.123 Along these dimensions, the analysis of statistical life-years does not differ from the analysis of statistical lives. 
Of course government does not lack control over the distributional incidence of efforts to protect safety, health, and the environment. Government might provide a benefit for free, perhaps by accompanying regulation with a cash payment to those who are supposed to benefit. But an analysis of this possibility would take me well beyond the present discussion.124 For reasons I have given, older people, as such, are not a strong payment for cash subsidies, even if future studies find that their WTP is sometimes relatively low under a VSLY approach. 
Government agencies tend to use a uniform VSL. Proposals for the use of VSLY tend to use a uniform number or a number that makes only simple, crude distinctions— between, say, people under and over 65.125 But we can make some conceptual progress here, and eventually practical progress as well, if we recognize that if government had perfect information, and if it could individuate regulatory benefits, its valuations would be much more fine-grained. In fact the use of VSLY, as opposed to VSL, can be seen as an initial step toward more in the way of individuation. To put the point in the simplest terms: To the extent that the beneficiaries of regulation bear its full costs and have perfect information, a perfectly informed government might use a perfectly individuated WTP, giving people precisely the level of protection that they deem to be in their interests with respect to the risk in question.126 
It follows that a uniform VSL, or a uniform VSLY, is not easy to justify. It can be supported partly on the ground that government lacks the tools to bring about sufficient individuation across either people or risks. We have seen that government does not know how VSLY varies across the life cycle. With their various endowments and preferences, individuals show a great deal of heterogeneity with respect to statistical hazards. We have seen that wealthy people will pay more than poor people; risk-averse people will of course pay more than risk-inclined people In addition, social risks, even risks of death, are hardly all the same. Many people are risk-averse with respect to some hazards but risk-inclined with respect to others. In deciding whether to be risk-averse, numerous distinctions might be deemed relevant. People might reasonably distinguish, for example, between a risk of death from cancer and a risk of death from heart disease, and they might also distinguish among workplace risks, risks of motor vehicle accidents, and risks associated with air pollution.127 If government were omniscient, it would individuate regulatory programs along all these dimensions. And if regulatory tools could be perfectly individuated, government might provide every individual with regulatory protection that perfectly matched his preferences and hence his situation-specific WTP— 123 See Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (2002). 124 For some remarks, see Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 125 See note supra. 126 I am assuming that WTP is based on informed preferences and that there are no third party effects. 127 See relevant discussion, see Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2001). assuming, again, that people are being forced to pay the cost of that protection.128 There would be no single VSL or VSLY; the relevant values would be highly particular to persons and situations. 
Why, then, does government rely on such crude population-wide, largely riskinvariant129 measures? One reason is that it lacks good information about the WTP of subgroups; another reason is that for many regulatory programs, it must simultaneously protect large populations. In these circumstances, a decision to adopt subgroup-specific WTP would be hard to defend unless the program in question would benefit and burden mostly or entirely classes of people who could be defined in terms of those subgroup characteristics. As knowledge grows, it might be expected that less uniform numbers will be used in the future.130 I cannot discuss that issue in any detail here, but the shift from VSL to VSLY can be seen as a small but unmistakable movement in that direction. 
I have suggested that on grounds of welfare and equity, it makes a great deal of sense to focus on statistical life-years rather than statistical lives. At a minimum, regulators should have, and give, a sense of the life-years expected to be saved by regulation. The hard question involves the translation of life-years into monetary equivalents. The basic claim of WTP is that it provides a (crude but administrable) proxy for the welfare effects of various courses of action. Other things being equal, more lifeyears provide more welfare than fewer, whatever the results of WTP studies. But if young people show a low VSLY, and if old people show a high one, government does people no favors by using a uniform number if they are well-informed and if they bear the cost of the benefits that are being provided. Because VSLY might vary over the lifespan, there is a risk that a uniform VSLY will produce significant errors—possibly, in fact, more serious errors than a uniform VSL.131 Ideally, a government that uses WTP, and seeks accuracy, would inquire into WTP over lifespans and use varying VSLY depending on the ages of the beneficiaries of regulation. Lacking that information, government might do best to proceed more modestly and cautiously. 
We could imagine a range of possibilities. At a minimum, a focus on life-years allows alternatives to be ranked in terms of cost-effectiveness: A program that saves 10,000 life-years is better than one that saves 4000, and more resources should be devoted to the former than to the latter. With respect to CBA, the most modest approach would be purely informational: to calculate both VSL and VSLY (using the most 128 As noted, subsidies might be appropriate in cases in which people’s WTP is low because of (say) poverty despite the possibility of large gains from regulation. 129 But see the sensitivity analysis in the context of arsenic, giving a premium because of the dread and involuntary nature of the cancer, discussed in Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 130 Id. 131 The reason is that if a uniform VSLY leads to far too low numbers for some people, and far too high numbers for others, the multiplication of life-years by the monetary value might produce less accuracy than would reliance on a simple, single VSL. Suppose, for example, that the government is choosing between a VSL of $6.1 million and a VSLY of $200,000. If young people show a VSLY of $60,000, and if old people show a VSLY of $350,000, it is possible that VSL will actually provide a better match to actual WTP. accurate available measure) and to inform the public of the calculations. A mildly less modest approach would be to continue with VSL, but in close cases, to treat VSLY, or the age distribution of the protected population, as a kind of tie-breaker. When CBA produces difficult calls, agencies might be told not to act if the benefited class is mostly elderly, but to do so if the benefited class is mostly young. On this view, the age distribution would be consulted only if the case were otherwise in equipoise. 
The most ambitious approach would be to abandon VSL and to use VSLY instead, at least if reasonably accurate numbers are available. On this view, VSL would be seen as a crude first step toward the more refined inquiry than VSLY makes possible. A number of intermediate approaches are possible. Perhaps VSL would be the basic foundation for analysis, but a sensitivity analysis would run the numbers with VSLY. Perhaps regulators would have the authority, subject to political constraints, to use one or another number when the circumstances make that decision seem reasonable.132 Of course any effort to engage in analysis of costs and benefits would be constrained in the usual fashion, with, for example, permission to consider distributional considerations, especially if poor people stand to lose or to gain a great deal from regulation.133 
The discussion thus far has been narrowly focussed on the choice between statistical lives and statistical life-years. But an exploration of the relevant issues has some broader implications. I explore three questions here: the possible opposition between the use of surveys to resolve hard normative questions; the choice between QALYs and WTP in regulatory policy; and the possible opposition between welfare and WTP. 
It might be tempting to argue that the choice between statistical lives and VSL or statistical life-years and VSLY should be made not by asking people about their WTP, but by asking them their preferences as between programs that focus on VSL or VSLY.134 People might be asked if they believe that government should treat each averted fatality as no more and no less than one, or if government should instead consider the age of those whose lives are saved. If it turns out that people prefer life-years, then we 132 One implication of the present discussion involves the possibility of legal challenges to the decision to use either VSL or VSLY, and also to particular decisions about how to measure them. Under some statutes, cost-benefit analysis is the basis for decision, and in such cases, the agency’s calculations are subject to challenge. See, e.g., Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991). In light of the present state of uncertainty, it would not be arbitrary for an agency to choose either VSL or VSLY, though there are plausible challenges to both measures. See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note, for relevant discussion. 133 See Robert Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, Broader and Deeper Cost-Benefit Analysis?, U Pa L Rev (2002). Note that OMB suggests attention to distributional considerations in its draft guidelines. See Office of Management and Budget, Draft 2003 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). 134 For a related survey, see McKie et al., supra note, at 117-127. might select appropriate numbers by asking subjects to choose between programs with different amounts for VSLY, or by seeing, through surveys, how people value life-years over the course of a lifespan. It might turn out, for example, that people consider each life-year as equivalent to (say) $200,000; or perhaps people will value life-years at a special premium when the beneficiaries are either especially old or especially young. Perhaps people do not believe that every life-year counts as equivalent to every other, but would prefer to devote special attention to the life-years of those at identifiable points at the age distribution. In any case, the suggestion would be that policy should be set by consulting not WTP, but instead the public’s judgments about the appropriate values. 
This solution has some intuitive appeal; it seems responsive, as a democracy should be, to citizens’ judgments. Hence this solution has been used as a way of getting some purchase on the normative issues.135 If WTP in the market seems to have distortions, surveys might seem better, perhaps because they invite people to consult their conscience, not simply their self-interest. But this approach has two fundamental problems. The first is that people’s answers are highly likely to depend on how the questions are set up. The second is that even if people do have stable answers to such questions, it is unclear that those answers have any moral standing for purposes of policy and law. The problems with surveys, in this context, suggest that surveys are not likelihood to be a helpful way to solve many normative issues of this kind. 
generations,136 a much-disputed problem in regulatory policy.137 A regulatory system that attempts to track people’s preferences would try to measure intergenerational time preferences, that is, to elicit people’s judgments about how to trade off the protection of current lives and future lives. Hence an important question, asked in many debates about the issue, is whether people actually make such judgments and whether they can be elicited. And indeed, an influential set of studies finds that people value the lives of those in the current generation far more than the lives of those in future generations.138 From a series of surveys, Maureen Cropper and her coauthors suggest that people are indifferent between savings one life today and saving 45 lives in 100 years.139 They make this suggestion on the basis of questions asking people whether they would choose a program that saves “100 lives now” or a program that saves a substantially larger number “100 years from now.”140 135 See id. 136 See Shane Frederick, Measuring Intergenerational Time Preference: Are Future Lives Valued Less?, 26 J. Risk and Uncertainty 1 (2003). 137 Richard Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Col L Rev 941 (1999); Comment, Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory CostBenefit Analysis, 65 U Chi L Rev 1333 (1998). 138 See Maureen Cropper et al., Rates of Time Preference for Saving Lives, 82 Am. Econ. Rev. 469 (1992); Maureen Cropper et al., Preferences for Life Saving Programs: How the Public Discounts Time and Age, 8 J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1994). 139 Id. 140 Id. 
But it turns out that other descriptions of the same problem yield significantly different results.141 Here, as in other contexts, it is unclear whether people actually have well-formed preferences with which the legal system can work.142 For example, most people consider “equally bad” a single death from pollution next year and a single death from pollution in 100 years143—implying no preference for members of the current generation. In another finding of no strong preference for the current generation, people are equally divided between two programs: one that will save 55 lives now and 105 more lives in twenty years; and one that will save 100 lives now and 50 lives 25 years from now.144 It is even possible to frame the question in such a way as to find that future lives are valued more, not less, highly than current lives.145 The most sensible conclusion is that people do not have robust, well-ordered intergenerational time preferences.146 If so, it is not possible for government to track those preferences, because they are an artifact of how the question is put. 
The issue of statistical lives or VSL vs. statistical life-years or VSLY is similar on this count. It should be easy to construct questions that would yield a preference for VSL: 
Government is considering a policy that would count the value of elderly people as significantly less than the value of younger people. According to one proposal, for every dollar that most people are worth, people over 70 are worth 53 cents. Do you approve of this proposal? 
We can safely predict that most respondents would answer “No.” But it should also be easy to construct questions that would suggest public disapproval of a uniform VS: 
Would you favor (a) a program that would save one hundred children from dying of a fatal cancer at the age of ten or instead (b) a program that would save one hundred and one senior citizens from dying of a fatal cancer at the age of eighty? 
We can safely predict that most people would favor (a). In fact I have conducted a small survey myself, asking University of Chicago law students whether they would favor a policy that saves twenty people with a median age of forty or one that saves thirty people with a median age of sixty-five. By a majority of about two-to-one (fifty-three to twenty-five), the former policy was favored. But as in the context of harms to future 141 Frederick, supra note. 142 The point is stressed in Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Is Libertarian Paternalism An Oxymoron?, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2003). 143 Frederick, supra note, at 43. 144 Id. at 44. 145 Id. at 45. Frederick asked subjects to choose between two programs. The first would become more effective over time, saving 100 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 300 lives in the decade after that. The second would become less effective over time, saving 300 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 100 lives in the decade after that. Most people preferred the first program, apparently suggesting that future lives are valued more highly. Id. 146 The absence of robust, well-ordered preferences is a pervasive theme in behavioral economics. See Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2003). generations, highly variable responses should be expected in accordance with the nature of the question. It is doubtful that people have stable, well-considered judgments on the issue. 
judgments on survey questions of this sort should not be determinative for purposes of policy or law. Suppose, for example, that a relevant population concluded that it would prefer to save one hundred white lives to one hundred African-American lives—or that it would prefer to abandon cost-benefit analysis altogether, finding both VSL and VSLY morally unacceptable. What kind of standing would those judgments have? Or suppose that existing generations concluded that a current life is worth fifty lives in 2080. Why would that conclusion count for purposes of policy? What matters is not the fact of those judgments, but their legitimacy and their sense. If we care about WTP, it is only because WTP is a proxy for welfare, and because welfare deserves (some) moral standing as such. But eliciting people’s judgments, on future generations or VSL vs. VSLY, has no such justification. 
To be sure, those judgments deserve consideration and respect if they are reflective. And it is always possible to ask: Who will assess the legitimacy and sense of citizens’ judgments? This is a reasonable question, and it is certainly possible to doubt the legitimacy and sense of the assessor. But ours is a deliberative democracy, one that does not make policy on the basis of opinion polls or snapshots of people’s opinions.147 Difficult normative questions of this kind might be informed by surveys, but they cannot be answered by them. 
If focussing on life-years is appropriate, then it might be tempting to suggest that officials should be concerned with quality-adjusted life-years, or QALYs. The central idea behind QALYs is that regulators should be concerned with maximizing the aggregate health of the community.148 To calculate QALYs, regulators come up with a scale that ranges from zero, for death, to one, for perfect health. Adverse health effects are ranked in terms of severity, with serious harms (say, a devastating but nonfatal heart attack) ranked lower than less serious ones (say, low-level respiratory problems). Some government agencies have attempted to assess regulations by calculating the QALYs that they save.149 From the public health perspective, it is easy to see the appeal of QALYs. If a choice must be made, a doctor might reasonably decide, for example, that she will perform a difficult operation on someone who is thirty rather than someone who is eighty. And if the public health community has to allocate scarce resources, an inquiry into QALYs seems like a sensible place to start. 
If government should calculate VSLY, should it also calculate the value of QALYs, and then VQALYs, and proceed accordingly? I cannot answer that complex 147 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1996). 148 See Adam Wagstaff, QALYs and the Equity-Efficiency Trade-Off, 10 J Health Econ 21 (1991). 149 See Appendix. question here. But we can see that any response must come to terms with questions of both welfare and equity. At first glance, an effort to increase the number of QALYs has many advantages in terms of welfare; in fact it seems directly connected to the welfare goal. But in some contexts, the use of QALYs would raise serious questions of equity. Suppose, for example, that regulators are considering two kinds of interventions, Intervention A and Intervention B, designed to assist two different groups of people. The first group consists of people with extremely serious disabilities; Intervention A would increase their QALYs. But it would do so only by creating a relatively small increase in their well-being, raising them from extremely serious to merely serious levels of disability. The second group consists of people with moderate levels of disability, and Intervention B would raise them to slight levels of disability, in a way that would result in significantly more QALYs than Intervention A. If QALYs are our guide, Intervention B is clearly preferable, and indeed it is plausible to think that Intervention B would result in a larger welfare gain than Intervention A. 
Is Intervention B to be preferred? This is by no means obvious, and for two different reasons. First, QALYs might not be adequately measuring welfare gains in this context. In the abstract, it is possible that the welfare gains from Intervention A are actually higher even if it produces fewer increases in QALYs. Second, Intervention A is assisting those who are most severely disadvantaged, and people in that category have a claim on social attention even if helping them produces fewer QALYs than imaginable alternatives.150 Those with especially severe preexisting conditions might deserve higher priority on equitable grounds, whatever the QALY calculus might show. Here as elsewhere, the pursuit of welfare, through regulation, should be undertaken in a way that gives distributional weights to those who are least well-off. In this way, the larger philosophical debates about utilitarianism and its limits find analogies in current and coming debates about regulatory policy. 
I do not mean to suggest that these are fundamental objections to the use of QALYs. The problem of severe preexisting conditions does not often arise in the context of regulation; it is more likely to occur in the context of medical interventions, where QALYs have raised special concerns. There are also hard questions about how to monetize QALYs, even if we decide that we should focus on them. Is the WTP approach appropriate here? Should VQALYs be calculated by multiplying each QALY by the beneficiaries’ WTP for them? We could easily imagine a population (one of wealthy senior citizens, for example) that would show a high WTP for a few QALYs. We could also imagine a population (one of poor teenagers, for example) that would show a low WTP for a large number of QALYs. At first glance, QALYs are a far better measure of welfare gains than WTP in such situations. 
But recall once again the particular problems created by forced exchanges: If those who obtain a large number of QALYs are not willing to pay for them, government does them no favors by mandating the purchase. In a case in which people are not willing to pay much for a large number of QALYs, government should probably do a great deal 150 See Erik Nord et al., Incorporating Societal Concerns for Fairness in Numerical Valuations of Health Programmes, 8 Health Economics 25, 26-27 (1999). of subsidizing. My (tentative) analysis of the uses of WTP in the context of statistical lives applies, in its essential form, to the context of QALYs—suggesting that here as elsewhere, WTP is a sensible place to begin, but that there are extremely difficult and unresolved normative and empirical questions here. 
I have suggested that WTP is a plausible starting-place for policy judgments about how to monetize statistical life-years. But I have also indicated that in the face of a problem of information or cognition, the argument for relying on WTP is greatly weakened. It will be useful to explore that possibility. 
The most obvious cases are simple: People lack information about the risks that they face, and hence they show a small WTP to avoid a risk that is statistically large. Or people might have an inflated sense of the likely risk, and show a high WTP to avoid a risk that is miniscule.151 A growing body of literature shows a separate point: At the time of decision, people often mispredict the welfare effects of one or another option.152 For example, assistant professors often exaggerate the effects of a denial of tenure on their well-being a year after the decision.153 In general, people overestimate the adverse consequences of setbacks, to which they are frequently able to adapt.154 In the context of environmental and social changes, an empirical study shows pervasive exaggerations of likely consequences for quality of life.155 It follows that in some contexts, WTP will mispredict the lived consequences of choices. “The evidence of grave deficiencies in taste predictions appears to pose a significant challenge to many applications of the rational-agent model.”156 Some of these deficiencies stem from a failure to appreciate the possibility of adaptation to change; some of them are a product of an exaggerated sense of the effect any single factor on well-being.157 What I am adding here is that WTP will be a poor proxy for welfare in cases in which we have good reason to suppose that underestimation or overestimation are likely. Of course government officials should be reluctant to second-guess citizens, but in some cases, the second-guessing is welljustified. 
Consider an example: A reliable contingent valuation study shows that people are willing to pay far more to prevent a long cancer death than to prevent a sudden unanticipated death, with death from heart disease falling somewhere in the middle.158 As it happens, the median WTP for a sudden unanticipated death is half the median WTP for 151 See Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law, 112 Yale L.J. 61 (2002) 152 See Kahneman, supra note; Loewenstein and Schkade, supra note. 153 See Daniel Gilbert et al., Immune Neglect: A Source of Durability Bias in Affective Forecasting, 75 J Personality and Social Psych 617 (1998). 154 See Loewenstein and Schkade, supra note. 155 See George Loewenstein and Shane Frederick, Predicting Reactions to Environmental Change, in Environment, Ethics, and Behavior 52, 61-67 (Max Bazerman et al. eds. 1997). 156 Kahneman, supra note, at 165. 157 See Loewenstein and Frederick, supra note, at 66. 158 See George Tolley et al., Valuing Health for Policy: An Economic Approach 342 (1994). a cancer death.159 Must these numbers be decisive for purposes of policy, assuming that the contingent valuation study is reliable160? I suggest that they should not be if we have reason to believe that the WTP figures are not accurately measuring welfare. And is it even plausible to think that the “cancer premium” is so high that it actually doubles the cost of death? Is it reasonable to think that a death from cancer is actually twice as bad as a death that is sudden and unanticipated? To be sure, a degree of pain and suffering typically accompanies cancer, but it is not easy to defend the set of (exotic) values that would lead to the conclusion that the relevant pain and suffering is as bad as death itself.161 I believe that WTP is not measuring welfare here, and that the inflated numbers for cancer deaths is a product of an intuitive recoil at the idea of cancer, one that leads to unrealistically high monetary values. 
Perhaps this example can be disputed. If so, consider the fact that according to some studies of WTP, a curable cancer is valued at $2.3 million, more than a third the value of a statistical life.162 Suppose that these studies are reliable and that $2.3 million really does capture people’s WTP for a curable cancer.163 Is it plausible to think that the welfare loss from a curable cancer is more than a third of the welfare loss from death? More likely, the frightening idea of “cancer” is driving people’s judgments, in a way that leads to a WTP that does not accurately measure the welfare loss from a curable cancer. This is an example of a situation in which “decision utility” (anticipated utility at the time of decision) does not match “experience utility” (the actual utility of lived experience).164 There are many other illustrations, as, for example, when people show a high WTP to avoid an injury that is not so terrible in actual experience.165 In short, WTP is sometimes a poor proxy for welfare. Because that issue does not directly bear on the choice between VSL and VSLY, I will not discuss it in detail here. But I do suggest that the point holds out a warning for the use of WTP studies to assess statistical risks, especially in the domain of morbidity. 159 Id. 160 For an affirmative answer, see Revesz, supra note. 161 If one believed that death itself is not terribly important, and that pain and suffering matter a great deal, then a huge cancer premium might well make sense. And undoubtedly some people have this exotic set of values. All I am suggesting is that the people who give the relevant answers in contingent valuation studies are most unlikely to endorse those particular values. 162 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, 90 Georgetown L J 2255 (2002). 163 Note that WTP is often labile and ill-formed, very much dependent on the context of the question. See Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2003). I am putting that possibility to one side for now. The general claim here is that even when WTP is stable and well-formed, it might not capture the welfare that comes from one or another option. For relevant discussion, see Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham, supra note. 164 See Daniel Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q. J Econ 375 (1997). 165 See the discussion in Edward J. McCaffery, Matthew Spitzer, and Daniel Kahneman, Framing the Jury: Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 Va. L. Rev. 1341, 1354-73 (1995) (experimental finding that willingness to pay is systematically lower than willingness to accept for pain and suffering). The most important point here is that the experience of an injury is often less bad, because more adaptation is possible, than people anticipate in advance. See id. 
In this essay, I have suggested that government should focus its attention on statistical life-years, not statistical lives. No regulatory program makes people immortal. The only issue is life extension, and here the length of the extension surely matters. In terms of welfare, a program that saves 10,000 life-years is better than one that saves 1,000 life years, holding all else constant. Behind a veil of ignorance, reasonable people would undoubtedly prefer a program that eliminates a 1/500,000 risk faced at thirty to a program that eliminates the same risk faced at sixty. In welfare terms, a program that saves younger people is unquestionably better than one that saves older people, holding all else constant. 
To be sure, there are ethical constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulatory policy. But as a general rule, there is no injustice in taking account of the difference between the anticipated welfare gain of a program that saves older people and the anticipated welfare gain of a program that saves younger people. Older people were once younger, and if all goes well younger people will become older. In any case a focus on statistical life-years has an important kind of neutrality: It treats everyone’s life-years the same. I have also suggested that the claims that underlie the prohibition on age discrimination do not raise serious moral questions about focussing on life-years. These points suggest that in terms of welfare and equity, it is better to attend to statistical lifeyears than to statistical lives. If either approach discriminates, it is one that relies only on statistical lives, because that approach treats the life-years of older people as worth more than the life-years of younger people. 
But a choice in favor of life-years leaves open questions of monetary valuation. These questions are both normative and empirical in nature. The usual debates about WTP reappear in this context. In any case, we do not have good information about how WTP changes over the life cycle. Older people may or may not be willing to pay less to reduce risks than younger people. Even if older people are willing to pay more to save each remaining statistical life-year, it is likely that older people are willing to pay less than younger people, in the aggregate, to save the number of life-years that remain.166 Without resolving the WTP debate, I have suggested several ways that regulators might incorporate information about life-years in regulatory decisions. At a minimum, I have urged that information on life-years should be compiled, and that it should be made relevant to judgments that are otherwise close or difficult. In this way, regulatory policy would be shifted toward somewhat greater concern for the risks faced by children, and somewhat reduced concern for the risks faced by those who are elderly—thus making it more likely that more people would have a chance to become elderly. 
If the analysis here is correct, it has two more general implications. The first is that WTP is a pragmatic tool and no more. Some economists seem to identify WTP with welfare itself—an absurd claim that, if taken seriously, would produce both blunders and injustices. As we have seen, people’s WTP is sometimes poorly predictive of the welfare 166 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 50-53. effects of one or another option167—a point with general and underexplored implications for regulatory policy. The second involves constraints on the promotion of welfare. While welfare is indeed the basic goal of much regulation, there are constraints on the pursuit of that goal, and these constraints should be specified. Any attempt at specification will be controversial. I have suggested, for example, that when people have had bad luck in the natural lottery, government cannot legitimately use the life-years criterion to disadvantage them further. But however the hardest controversies are resolved, I suggest that the constraints do not apply to most regulatory decisions that focus on statistical lifeyears. Regulators should calculate expected savings in those terms and give the result serious consideration at the point of decision. 167 For a great deal of relevant discussion, see Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds. 1999). 
FDA final seafood HACCP rule (1995). US Food and Drug Administration: Procedures for the Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products; Final Rule. 60 FR 65095, December 18, 1995. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefitcost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
FDA final anti-smoking rule (1996). US Food and Drug Administration, “Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents; Final Rule,” 61 FR 44395, August 28, 1996. Used QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis. 
EPA final ozone and particulate standards for outdoor air quality (1997). ADD citation. Used life years but not QALYs in a sensitivity analysis of benefit-cost analysis. FDA final mammography rule (1997). US Food and Drug Administration: “Quality Mammography Standards; Final Rule.” 62 FR 55851, October 28, 1997. Used a 5-year survival rate approach when measuring benefits, but monetized only lives saved, using the value of a statistical life of $5 million. 
HRSA organ donor final rule (1998). Health Resources and Services Administration: “Procurement and Transplantation Network; Final Rule.” 63 FR 16295, April 2, 1998. Used statistical life years valued at $116,000 per year, but did not use QALYs. FDA final juice labeling rule (1998). Food and Drug Administration: “Food Labeling: Warning and Notice Statement: Labeling of Juice Products; Final Rule.” 63 FR 37029, July 8, 1998. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
FDA proposed consumer trans-fat labeling rule (1999). US Food and Drug Administration: “Food Labeling: Trans Fatty Acids in Nutrition Labeling, Nutrient Content Claims, and Health Claims; Proposed Rule.” 64 FR 62746, November 17, 1999. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. FDA final shell egg safety rule (2000). US Food and Drug Administration: “Food Labeling, Safe Handling Statements, Labeling of Shell Eggs; Refrigeration of Shell Eggs Held for Retail Distribution; Final Rule.” 65 FR 76091, December 5, 2000. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
and Importing of Juice; Final Rule.” 66 FR 6137, January 19, 2001. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. CMS immunization standards final rule with comment (2002). Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, “Conditions of Participation: Immunization Standards for Hospitals, Long-Term Care Facilities, and Home Health Agencies.” 67 FR 61808, October 2, 2002. Used $50,000-$100,000 cost per year of healthy life saved to monetize benefits, assuming lifespan of 84 years. 
Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
Review) or Failure (March 2002) (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) 
Coase Lecture February 2002) 
Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 2003) 2002) 
What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) (July 2002) 
Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 
Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 161 Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for 
Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) 
Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 2002) (November 2002) Economic Analysis (November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of Public Health (December 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short-Term Assets (January 2003) Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An Economic Perspective (February 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Lochnering 
Between 1905 and 1937, the legal culture experienced a genuine revolution. In 1905, the Supreme Court invalidated a maximum hour law for bakers,' concluding that the State of New York could not transform bakers into "wards of the state.",2 In 1923, the Court struck down a minimum wage law for women and children.3 The Court explained: "To the extent that the sum fixed exceeds the fair value of the services rendered, it amounts to a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of a partially indigent person, for whose condition there rests upon him no peculiar responsibility, and therefore, in effect, arbitrarily shifts to his shoulders a burden which, if it belongs to anybody, belongs to society as a whole. ' 4 In the Court's view, the police power was sharply limited, and whatever it included, it did not include the power to require minimum wages or maximum hours.5 Ideas of this sort played an important role in cases striking down not only minimum wage and maximum hour laws, but a number of other measures attempting to protect workers.6 
At the same time, a countermovement was occurring within the legal culture.7 Between 1915 and 1935, many commentators urged that property rights were a product of law, and that government regulation, in the form of maximum hour or minimum wage laws, could not be seen as interference with a voluntary or law-free private domain. In 1923, the Supreme Court emphasized the importance of respecting "fair value." 8 But in 1918, Justice Holmes had produced a responsive and relevant near-haiku: "Property, a 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. 

for factory workers of both sexes. 
worker belonging to a union); Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. I (1915) (invalidating a law banning contracts forbidding workers to join unions). I am not arguing that the invalidated measures were desirable or that they actually protected workers in general or on balance. It is well known, for example, that minimum wage legislation can increase unemployment. 
LAISSEZ FAIRE: ROBERT HALE AND THE FIRST LAW AND ECONOMICS MOVEMENT (1993). creation of law, does not arise from value, although exchangeable-a matter of fact." 9 In this highly compressed sentence, Holmes insisted that property is not produced by value but instead by law-and that this is simply "a matter of fact." By 1935, the attack on laissez-faire, and the insistence on the omnipresence of government regulation, was well-known, to the point where an unsigned student note, dealing with the law of contract, ridiculed the idea that a refusal "to supervise the ethics of the market place" could be justified by "doctrines of laissez-faire."'0 The student author thought the justification implausible for one reason: "[T]he freedom from regulation postulated by laissez-faire adherents is demonstrably non-existent and virtually inconceivable. Bargaining power exists only because of government protection of the property rights bargained, and is properly subject to government control."" 1 
Columbia law professor Robert Hale set forth the most powerful defense of this view, and his eyes were trained directly on Lochner and related decisions.' 2 Hale wrote against the background of the political struggle over government efforts to set minimum wages and to regulate prices, a struggle that he believed was being waged on false premises. His special target was the view that governmental restrictions on market prices should be seen as illegitimate regulatory interference in the private sphere. This, said Hale, was an exceedingly confused way to describe the problem. Regulatory interference was already there: 
The right of ownership in a manufacturing plant is ... a privilege to operate the plant, plus a privilege not to operate it, plus a right to keep others from operating it, plus a power to acquire all the rights of ownership in the products .... This power is a power to release a pressure which the law of property exerts on the liberty of others. If the pressure is great, the owner may be able to compel the others to pay him a big price for their release; if the pressure is slight, he can collect but a small income from his ownership. In either case, he is paid for releasing a pressure exerted by the government-the law. The law has delegated to him a discretionary power over the rights and duties of others.' 3 
Did these ideas play any role in American political life? Consider Franklin Delano Roosevelt's Commonwealth Club Address in 1932, where he emphasized the view, which he attributed to Thomas Jefferson, "that the exercise of the property rights might so interfere with the rights of the individual that the Government, without whose assistancethe property rights could not exist, must intervene, not to destroy individualism, but to protect it. ' ' 14 In first accepting the Democratic nomination, Roosevelt made a similar point. He complained that some leaders refer to "economic laws-sacred, inviolable, unchangeable"; to this he responded that "we must lay hold of the fact that economic laws are not made by nature. They are made by human boefionugrss.""' 1i5n aCdovnoscidateirngassowceialll Rseocousreitvyellte'sgiselmatpiohna.s'i6s on "this man-made world 
1937 death-blow to the Lochner era, the Court wrote, The exploitation of a class of workers who are in an unequal position with respect to bargaining power and are thus relatively defenseless against the denial of a living wage ... casts a direct burden for their support upon the community. What these workers lose in wages the taxpayers are called hpon to pay. The bare cost of living must be met. We may take judicial notice of the unparalleled demands for relief which arose during the recent period of depression and still continue to an alarming extent despite the degree of economic recovery which has been achieved .... The community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers. 17 
Or consider the Court's decision just one year later in Erie Railroad Company v. Tompkins,' 8 recognizing that the common law should be seen, not as a set of timeless or natural truths, but as the emanation of the will of some sovereign. In many ways, the attack on the system of laissez-faire, and the claim that the common law was a humanly constructed social order, came to prominence in the late 1930s. 
Lochner's Legacy' 9 was a mildly revised version of a public lecture. 2° It offered a seven-page discussion of Lochner and its demise, about half of which was devoted to the Lochner decision itself. The goal of the lecture was to suggest that Lochnering could be seen, not merely in "judicial activism," but in all decisions taking the status quo, or the common law, as the baseline for deciding whether government had engaged in some constitutionally troublesome intervention into existing affairs. Following the 1935 student commentator, I urged that a "failure to impose a minimum wage is not nonintervention at all but simply another form of action-a decision to rely on traditional market mechanisms, within the common law framework, as the basis for regulation.' I claimed that Lochnering, understood in this way, could be found in many places, including the constitutional assaults on campaign finance law and affirmative action, as well as certain uses of the state action doctrine, and certain understandings of sex discrimination. 22 I also claimed that we should not "Lochner preferences"that is, we should not see existing preferences as if they spring from the sky and never have anything to do with legal arrangements.23 
To say the least, Lochner's Legacy was not a work of legal history. I attempted to stay true to the period-hence, among other things, the heavily qualified nature of the seven-page discussion 2 4 but in a way that could not come close to doing real justice to it. In these circumstances, David Bernstein's article is an extremely valuable addition.2 5 Bernstein examines the Court's performance with far more care than I did; he greatly illuminates the era, and he offers reasons to question my basic claims. I am grateful to Bernstein not only because he adds so much to our understanding of the period, but also because of the generosity, care, and scrupulousness with which he states, and rejects, the argument of Lochner'sLegacy. 
Most of Bernstein's own claims seem to me convincing. He is right to say that the Supreme Court allowed state governments to alter the rules of the common law, perhaps above all in Holden v. Hardy2,6 upholding a maximum hour law for miners, but also in cases abolishing the contributory negligence defense and the fellow servant rule.2 7 He is correct to observe that the Lochner Court allowed governments to go well beyond the system of laissezfaire.28 Again Holden v. Hardy is an example, but in other cases the Court allowed states to protect women and children and to reduce workplace injuries, among other things. 29 Bernstein emphasizes, reasonably, that the 
n.30 (emphasizing that changes in the common law were permitted); id. (emphasizing that a commitment to the common law was coextensive with a widely held normative theory about the proper role of government); id. at 880 n.40 (emphasizing the complexity of the framework governing the legitimate uses of the police power). 
Court protected civil liberties in cases that did not involve economic liberties at all, creating the origins of the modem right to privacy. 30 He also objects to my reading of the Lochner opinion, and urges that in West Coast Hotel, the Court did not, in fact, emphasize that the common law is a regulatory system-one that also embeds government action. To Bernstein, West Coast Hotel was very far from a recognition of Hale's views, or Roosevelt's. 
In all of these ways, Bernstein adds to existing learning about the Lochner period. But his picture seems to me incomplete, above all because it does not adequately specify the Court's understanding of the police power. I believe that there is a close connection between that understanding and the Court's use of common law baselines to question legislation. Compare two claims: not allow legislaturesto departfrom it. Process Clause, it usually did so because it saw the Constitutionas forbiddingdeparturesfrom the common law unless those departures could be justified as falling under certain specific "heads" of the policepower. 
To the extent that Bernstein rejects claim (1), he is on firm ground. But I believe that claim (2) is correct, and that it helps to explain what Lochnering was, and is, all about. Here Lochner itself is the strongest evidence. The heart of the opinion is a lengthy discussion of how the maximum hour law cannot be justified as a "labor law" or a "health law. 3 1 In the Court's view, it cannot be justified as a labor law because bakers have full legal capacity. 32 By itself, this is an extraordinary and even amazing holding, one with large implications, because it forbids government from using the idea of "labor law" to attempt to protect a wide range of workers from adverse outcomes in the labor market. 33 The Court also held that the maximum hour law could not be defended as a "health law," because it could not be shown that bakers' health was peculiarly vulnerable from long hours of work.34 As the Court itself stressed, this ruling also had significant implications, forbidding maximum-hour legislation in innumerable domains. 


Bernstein insists that we should not overread the Court's suspicion "that there was some other motive dominating the legislature than the purpose to subserve the public health or welfare." 35 Let us grant him the point. The larger claim remains. In Lochner, the Court held that the police power did not permit the state to invoke paternalistic or redistributive goals to engage in legislation of the kind that is now believed to be legitimate in democracies all over the world. And when the Adkins Court complained of a "compulsory exaction," I believe that it was specifying the foundation for the Court's view of what made those uses of the police power off-limits. In my view, the key to many of the invalidationsin the Lochner period-and the invalidations are what remain of interest-lies in the relationship between the limited understanding of the police power and the notion of what employers "owned" or "had" as a matter of constitutional right. 
West CoastHotel raises many complexities, and Bernstein is right to say that the Court did not produce the opinion that would have been written by Robert Hale or Franklin Delano Roosevelt (though in the latter case it came fairly close). The Court's opinion has many strands. But the Court did emphasize the situation of workers "who are in an unequal position with respect to bargaining power and are thus relatively defenceless against the denial of a living wage." 36 The Court did contend that it was perfectly legitimate to require "the payment of a minimum wage fairly fixed in order to meet the very necessities of existence. 3 7 The Court did insist that the "community is not bound to provide what is in effect a subsidy for unconscionable employers. 3 8 Is it entirely coincidental that just one year later, the Court, quoting Justice Holmes, rejected the idea that there is "a transcendental body of law outside of any particular State" 39-and thus insisted that federal courts must follow state common law, rather than jettisoning it in favor of their version of "federal general common law"? 40 If we see West Coast Hotel as symbolizing the end of an era, we would do well to place it in a particular context, one in which anonymous student writers could contend that "the freedom from regulation postulated by laissez-faire adherents is demonstrably non-existent and virtually inconceivable, ' '4 1and in which the nation's leader could insist "that the exercise of the property rights might so interfere with the rights of the individual that the Government, statement? 
legislation or suggesting that such legislation is the best way of helping low-wage workers. 
Brown & Yellow Taxicab Co., 276 U.S. 518, 533 (1927)) (Holmes, J., dissenting)). nwoitthtooudtewsthrooyseinadsisvisitdaunacleis mth,e bpurtotpoerptryotreicgthtist."c4o2uld not exist, must intervene, 
Bernstein is certainly correct to say that the Lochner Court did not wield the idea of the night-watchman state as a kind of all-purpose check on government action. Holmes overstated; the Lochner Court did not try to enact Mr. Herbert Spencer's Social Statics. But I am not sure what Bernstein thinks was wrong with the Lochner decision, or even what he thinks the era was all about. When all the dust settles, I continue to believe that it will not be possible to understand Lochner without close attention to the simultaneous attack on the common law and laissez-faire-an attack that found its way into the White House itself.43 Lochnering is not just one thing. But Lochner's legacy can be found in the many domains in which people continue to neglect the large presence of government, and law, in areas that are in fact pervaded by them. 

(forthcoming Basic Books 2004). 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Moral Heuristics" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 180, 2003). 
Moral Heuristics 
Cass R. Sunstein 
March 2003 Preliminary draft 3/8/03 All rights reserved 
With respect to questions of fact, people use heuristics—mental short-cuts, or rules of thumb, that generally work well, but that also lead to systematic errors. People use moral heuristics too—moral short-cuts, or rules of thumb, that lead to mistaken and even absurd moral judgments. These judgments are highly relevant to law and politics. Examples are given from a number of domains, with an emphasis on appropriate punishment. Moral framing effects are discussed as well. 
Consider two positions voiced by many people in the American media in 2003: to continue to be a fan even if the team is now terrible. It is disloyal to cease being a fan merely because the team keeps losing. “Once you’re a fan, you’re a fan for life.” its moral obligations. The United States liberated France from Hitler’s Germany, and if the United States favored military action to topple Saddam Hussein, France was under a moral obligation to support the United States. 
Both of these claims are absurd. A sports team is not a person or a friend, but a collection of strangers, whose personnel changes over time. There is nothing immoral about following and liking a team in one year, but ignoring or disliking that same team a few years later. You don’t have a moral obligation to continue to support a sports team. To be sure, France owes the United States a debt of gratitude and more. And if America’s position is right, France should agree with America. But France was not obliged to accept the American position on war with Iraq, certainly not if it believed that such a war would be unjust or against the interests of all those concerned. Of course there are vigorous arguments on behalf of collective responsibilities and group-level attachments. But even if we accept those arguments, and believe in collective responsibilities, we are most unlikely to be able to accept these claims about the moral obligations of sports fans and France. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Eric Posner and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments on a previous draft. 
What is interesting about these claims is not their absurdity, but the fact that both of them have a structure, one that makes them humanly recognizable rather than arbitrary or unintelligible. In both cases, people are overgeneralizing from a moral intuition that works well in daily life.1 In the case of the sports team, the moral intuition involves relationships between friends. It is morally wrong to be a “fair weather friend”; you shouldn’t abandon a friend who has fallen on hard times. If the relationship between fans and teams is analogous to the relationship between friends, then it is also morally wrong to be a “fair weather fan.” In the case of France, friendship is also the operative analogy. If people save your life, you should be loyal to them; you shouldn’t stab your benefactors in the back when they’re at risk. Both claims take sound moral intuitions, useful for most of life’s situations, and generalize them to superficially similar contexts in which those intuitions lose their foundations. In both cases, people are using moral heuristics—moral short-cuts, or rules of thumb, that work well most of the time, but that also systematically misfire. 
My goal in this essay is to suggest that moral heuristics play a pervasive role in moral, political, and legal judgments, and that they produce serious mistakes. Often such heuristics represent generalizations from a range of problems for which they are indeed well-suited. Usually such heuristics work well. The problem comes when the generalizations are wrenched out of context and treated as freestanding or universal principles, applicable to situations in which their justifications no longer operate. Because the generalizations are treated as freestanding or universal, their application seems obvious, and those who reject them appear morally obtuse, possibly even monstrous. I want to urge that the appearance is misleading. And by drawing attention to moral heuristics, I hope to give a possible answer to the puzzling question about why people make persistent moral errors. Often, I suggest, the answer lies not in self-interest, stupidity, or venality, but in the use of heuristics that misfire. 
In making these claims, I draw on existing psychological work on heuristics and biases, pioneered by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky.2 That works deals not with moral questions, but with issues of fact. The basic claim here is that in answering hard factual questions, those who lack accurate information use simple rules of thumb. How many words, on a particular page, will have “ing” as the last three letters? How many words, on a particular page, will have the “n” as the second-to-last letter? Most people think that a significant number of words will end in “ing,” and that a smaller number of words will have “n” as the second-to-last letter—even though a moment’s reflection shows that this cannot possibly be true. People err because they use an identifiable 1 On overgeneralization, see Jonathan Baron, Nonconsequentialist Decisions, 17 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 (1994); I have learned a great deal from Baron’s analysis and from Baron’s work in general. See Jonathan Baron, Judgment Misguided: Intuition and Error in Public Decision Making (1998). 2 The key papers can be found in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky eds., 1982); a more recent collection is Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds. 2002) . The heuristics-and-biases literature should be distinguished from the literature on prospect theory, which involves the nature of people’s utility functions under conditions of risk, not mental shortcuts under conditions of uncertainty. See Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Choices, Values, and Frames (2001). heuristic—the availability heuristic—to answer difficult questions about probability. When people use this heuristic, they answer a question of probability by asking whether examples come readily to mind.3 How likely is a flood, an airplane crash, a traffic jam, a terrorist attack, or a disaster at a nuclear power plant? Lacking statistical knowledge, people try to think of illustrations. Thus, “a class whose instances are easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable.”4 For people without statistical knowledge, it is far from irrational to use the availability heuristic; the problem is that this heuristic can lead to serious errors of fact, in the form of excessive fear of small risks and neglect of large ones. 
Or consider the representativeness heuristic.5 The most famous example involves the likely career of a hypothetical woman named Linda, described as follows: “Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice and also participated in antinuclear demonstrations.” People were asked to rank, in order of probability, eight possible futures for Linda. Six of these were fillers (psychiatric social worker, elementary school teacher); the two crucial ones were “bank teller” and “bank teller and active in the feminist movement.” Most people said that Linda was less likely to be a bank teller than to be a bank teller and active in the feminist movement. This is an obvious logical mistake, a conjunction error, in which characteristics A and B are thought to be more likely than characteristic A alone. The error stems from the representativeness heuristic: Linda’s description seems to match “bank teller and active in the feminist movement” far better than “bank teller.” In an illuminating reflection on the example, Stephen Jay Gould observed that “I know [the right answer], yet a little homunculus in my head continues to jump up and down, shouting at me—‘but she can’t just be a bank teller; read the description.’”6 
A detailed literature has developed over the vices and virtues of the heuristics, some of them “fast and frugal,” that play a role in both life and law.7 But the relevant literature does not investigate the possibility that people might rely on simple rules of thumb, for purposes of assessing moral and political issues, that often work well but that often misfire. In fact the central point seems obvious. Much of everyday morality consists of simple rules that generally make sense but that fail in certain cases. It is wrong to lie or steal, but if a lie or a theft would save a human life, lying or stealing is probably obligatory. Not all promises should be kept. It is wrong to try to get out of a longstanding social commitment at the last minute, but if your child is in the hospital, you are morally required to do exactly that. And if good heuristics misfire in the factual domain, they will inevitably do so in the domains of morality and law as well. 3 See Tversky and Kahneman, supra note 2, at 3, 11-14. 4 Id. at 11. 5 See id.; Barbara Mellers et al., Do Frequency Representations Eliminate Conjunction Effects?, 12 Psych. Sci. 269 (2001). 6 Stephen Jay Gould, Bully for Brontosaurus: Reflections in Natural History 469 (1991) 7 See supra note; Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999). 
I believe that an understanding of moral heuristics casts light on a number of widely held but ultimately implausible and sometimes even absurd intuitions—intuitions that belong in the same category as those involving baseball fans and France. These intuitions play a large role in both politics and law. An understanding of moral heuristics simultaneously raises doubts about certain methods of inquiry in moral and political philosophy, methods that depend on eliciting moral intuitions about exotic cases that people almost never face in daily life. Those intuitions, I suggest, are peculiarly unreliable when they are wrenched out the contexts in which they make sense. For example, people might be asked to consider whether they would kill an innocent person in order to save twenty people who would otherwise be killed.8 These questions, abstracted from real life, often produce firm moral judgments that are then treated, in the analysis, as important “data” for testing moral and political theories and for figuring out what really should be done.9 
I believe that there is a serious problem with this way of proceeding. Indeed, philosophers who proceed in this way seem to me inadvertently to be following the research agenda used by Kahneman and Tversky: Design a case, never actually encountered, in which intuitions, however firm, are likely to go wrong. Because Kahneman and Tversky were dealing with facts, they could demonstrate that the intuitions led to errors. Unfortunately, that cannot be demonstrated here. In the moral domain, it is hard to come up with unambiguous cases where the error is both highly intuitive and on reflection uncontroversial—where people can easily be embarrassed about their own intuitions (and despite the embarrassment, hear the continued squawking of their own version of Gould’s homunculus). But I think that the sports fan and France cases belong in just this domain and that other moral intuitions, of far greater practical importance, can be similarly understood. My minimal suggestions are that moral heuristics exist—and that it is odd to treat the resulting moral intuitions as fixed points for analysis, rather than as unreliable and at least potentially erroneous. 
If we take seriously the possibility that moral claims operate as heuristics, we might be able to imagine some very ambitious claims. Some of the largest moral theories might be characterized, and ultimately rejected, in this way. Consider the view that much of everyday morality, nominally concerned with fairness, should be seen as a set of heuristics for the real issue, which is how to promote utility.10 Armed with psychological findings about the use of heuristics, utilitarians might be tempted to claim that ordinary moral commitments are a set of mental shortcuts that generally work well, but that also 8 Bernard Williams, A Critique of Utilitarianism, in Bernard Williams and J.C Smart, Utilitarianism: For and Against (1973). 9 See id; F. M. Kamm, Responsibility and Collaboration, 28 Phil & Pub. Aff. 169 (1999); Judith Jarvis Thompson, Rights, Restitution, and Risk: Essays in Moral Theory (1986). 10 See Jonathan Baron, Judgment Misguided: Intuition and Error in Public Decision Making (1998). Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell, Fairness Versus Welfare (2002), is in the same vein. produce severe and systematic errors. Suppose people are committed to retributivism; this is their preferred theory of punishment. Might they be making a cognitive error? (Is Kantianism a series of cognitive errors?) 
But easy victories are unlikely here. Indeed, those who reject utilitarianism might easily turn the tables. They might contend that the rules recommended by utilitarians are consistent, much of the time, with what morality requires -- but also that utilitarianism, taken seriously, produces bad mistakes in some cases. And indeed, many debates between utilitarians and their critics involve claims, by one or another side, that the opposing view leads to results, in particular cases, that are inconsistent with widespread intuitions and should be rejected for that reason. These large debates are unlikely to be tractable, simply because utilitarians and deontologists are most likely to be unconvinced by the suggestion that their defining commitments are mere heuristics. Here there is a large difference between moral heuristics and the heuristics uncovered in the relevant psychological work, where the facts, or simple logic, provide a good test whether people have erred. If people tend to think that more words, on a given page, end with the letters “ing” than have “n” in the next-to-last position, something has clearly gone wrong. If people think that some person Linda is more likely to be a “a bank teller who is active in the feminist movement” than a “feminist bankteller,” there is an evident problem. In the cases that concern me here, factual blunders and simple logic do not provide such a simple test. 
But in some particular cases, we might be able to make some progress by entertaining the hypothesis that some widely accepted rules of morality are heuristics. Consider several possibilities. 
People’s intuitions about punishment seem quite disconnected with the consequences of punishment, in a way that suggests that a moral heuristic may well be at work. Suppose, for example, that a corporation has engaged in serious wrongdoing. People are likely to want to punish the corporation as if it were a person.11 They are unlikely to inquire into the possibility that the consequences of serious punishment (say, a stiff fine) will not be to “hurt” corporate wrongdoers, but instead to decrease wages, increase prices, or produce lost jobs. Punishment judgments are rooted in a simple heuristic, to the effect that penalties should be a proportional response to the outrageousness of the act. In thinking about punishment, people use an outrage heuristic.12 According to this heuristic, people’s punishment judgments are a product of their outrage. This heuristic produces sensible results in most circumstances, but in some cases, it seems to me to lead to systematic errors. 11 For evidence to this effect, see Daniel Kahneman et al., Shared Outrage and Erratic Awards: The Psychology of Punitive Damages, J. Risk & Uncertainty (1998); Cass R. Sunstein et al., Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide (2002). 12 See Daniel Kahneman and Shane Frederick, Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 49, 63-63 (2002). 
Consider, for example, an intriguing study of people’s judgments about penalties in cases involving harms from vaccines and birth control pills.13 In one case, subjects were told that the result of a higher penalty would be to make companies try harder to make safer products. In an adjacent case, subjects were told that the consequence of a higher penalty would be to make the company more likely to stop making the product, with the result that less safe products would be on the market. Most subjects, including a group of judges, gave the same penalties in both cases. Can this outcome be defended in principle? I doubt that it can. I think that it is far more sensible to think that people are operating under a heuristic, requiring punishment that is proportional to outrageousness, and should not be based on consequential considerations. As a general rule, of course, it is plausible to think that penalties should be proportional to the outrageousness of the act. But it is fanatical to insist on this principle whether or not the consequence would be to make human beings safer and healthier. Those who insist on proportional punishments might disagree, but it might be worthwhile for them to consider the possibility that they have been tricked by a heuristic. 
If this claim seems too adventurous, consider a similar test of punishment judgments, which asked subjects, including judges and legislators, to choose penalties for dumping hazardous waste.14 In one case, the penalty would make companies try harder to avoid waste. In another, the penalty would lead companies to cease making a beneficial product. Most people did not penalize companies differently in the two cases. Most strikingly, people preferred to require companies to clean up their own waste, even if the waste did not threaten anyone, instead of spending the same amount to clean up far more dangerous waste produced by another, now-defunct company. How could this preference make sense? Why should a company be asked to engage in a course of action that costs the same but that does much less good? I believe that people are using a heuristic, essentially requiring people to correct their own wrongs, even in a case in which that heuristic leads to palpably inferior results. 
To say the least, people do not like to be betrayed. A betrayal of trust is likely to produce a great deal of outrage. If a babysitter neglects a child, or if a security guard steals from his employer, people will be angrier than if the identical acts are performed by someone in whom trust has not been reposed. So far, perhaps, so good. And it should not be surprising that people will favor greater punishment for betrayals than for otherwise identical crimes.15 Perhaps the disparity can be justified on the ground that the 13 Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, Intuitions About Penalties and Compensation in the Context of Tort Law, 7 J Risk and Uncertainty 17 (1993) 14 Jonathan Baron et al., Attitudes Toward Managing Hazardous Waste, 13 Risk Analysis 183 (1993). 15 See Jonathan J. Koehler and Andrew D. Gershoff, Betrayal Aversion: When Agents of Protection Become Agents of Harm 89 Organizational Beh and Human Dec Processes (2002) (forthcoming) (relying on five empirical studies to find that acts of betrayal elicited stronger desired punishments than other bad acts). 15 Id at 40 (finding that “when faced with a choice among pairs of safety devices… most people preferred inferior options (in terms of risk exposure) to options that included a slim (0.01%) risk of betrayal”). betrayal of trust is an independent harm, one that warrants greater deterrence and retribution—a point that draws strength from the fact that trust, once lost, is not easily regained. A family robbed by its babysitter is more seriously injured than a family who has been robbed by a thief. The loss of money is compounded and possibly dwarfed by the violation of a trusting relationship. The consequence of the violation might also be more serious. Will the family ever feel entirely comfortable with babysitters? It is bad to have an unfaithful spouse, but it is even worse if the infidelity occurred with your best friend. 
In this light it is possible to understand why betrayals produce special moral opprobrium and (where the law has been violated) increased punishment. But consider a finding that is much harder to explain: People are especially averse to risks of death that come from products (like airbags) designed to promote safety. The aversion is so great that people have been found to prefer a chance of dying, as a result of accidents from a crash, to a significantly lower chance of dying in a crash as a result of a malfunctioning airbag.16 In other words, people’s aversion to betrayals is so great that they will increase their own risks rather than subject themselves to a (small) hazard that comes from a device that is supposed to increase safety. Indeed, “most people are willing to double their chance of dying to avoid incurring a very small chance of dying via betrayal.”17 
What explains this seemingly bizarre and self-destructive preference? I suggest that a heuristic is at work: Punish betrayals of trust. The heuristic generally works well. But it misfires crazily in some cases, as when those who deploy it end up increasing the risks they themselves face. An airbag is not a security guard or a babysitter, endangering those whom they have been hired to protect. It is a product, to be chosen if and only if it decreases aggregate risks. If an airbag makes people safer on balance, it should be used, even if in a tiny percentage of cases it will create a risk that would not otherwise exist. To reject airbags on grounds of betrayal is not entirely rational—not entirely rational but understandable, the sort of mistake to which heuristics often lead human beings. People’s unwillingness to subject themselves to betrayal risks, in circumstances in which products are involved and they are increasing their likelihood of death, is the moral cousin to the use of the representativeness heuristic in the Linda case. 
An automobile company is deciding whether to take certain safety precautions for its cars. In deciding whether to do so, it conducts a cost-benefit analysis, in which it concludes that certain precautions are not justified—because, say, they would cost $100 million and save only four lives, and because the company has a “ceiling” of $10 million per lives saved (a ceiling that is, by the way, significantly higher than the amount the Environmental Protection Agency uses for a statistical life). How will ordinary people react to this decision? The answer is that they will not react favorably.18 In fact they tend to punish companies that base their decisions on cost-benefit analysis, even if a high 16 Id. 17 Id. 18 See W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, 52 Stan L Rev 547, 558 (2000) valuation is placed on human life. By contrast, they do not much punish companies that are willing to impose a “risk” on people.19 What underlies these moral judgments? 
A careful look raises the possibility that when people disapprove of trading money for risks, they are generalizing from a set of moral principles that are generally sound, and even useful, but that work poorly in some cases. Consider the following moral principle: Do not knowingly cause a human death. People disapprove of companies that fail to improve safety when they are fully aware that deaths will result—whereas people do not disapprove of those who fail to improve safety while appearing not to know, for certain, that deaths will ensue. When people object to risky action taken after cost-benefit analysis, it seems to be partly because that very analysis puts the number of expected deaths squarely “on screen.”20 Companies that fail to do such analysis, but that are aware that a “risk” exists, do not make clear, to themselves or to anyone else, that they caused deaths with full knowledge that this was what they were going to do. People disapprove, above all, of companies that cause death knowingly. 
I suggest, then, that a moral heuristic is at work, one that imposes moral condemnation on those who knowingly engage in acts that will result in human deaths. And of course this heuristic does a great deal of good.21 The problem is that it is not always unacceptable to cause death knowingly, at least if the deaths are relatively few and an unintended byproduct of generally desirable activity. When government allows new highways to be built, it knows that people will die on those highways; when government allows new power plants to be built, it knows that some people will die from the resulting pollution; when companies produce tobacco products, and when government does not ban those products, hundreds of thousands of people will die; the same is true for alcohol. Much of what is done, by both industry and government, is likely to result in one or more deaths. Of course it would make sense, in most or all of these domains, to take extra steps to reduce risks. But that proposition does not support the implausible claim that we should disapprove, from the moral point of view, of any action taken when deaths are foreseeable. 
I do believe that it is impossible to vindicate, in principle, the widespread social antipathy to cost-benefit balancing. But to adapt Stephen Jay Gould’s claim about the representativeness heuristic, “a little homunculus in my head continues to jump up and down, shouting at me” that corporate cost-benefit analysis, trading dollars for a known number of deaths, is morally unacceptable. The voice of the homunculus, I am suggesting, is not reflective, but instead a product of a crude but quite tenacious moral heuristic. 19 See id. See also See Philip Tetlock, Coping With Tradeoffs, in Elements of Reason: Cognition, Choice, and the Bounds of Rationality 239, Arthur Lupia et al. eds. ( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000) 20 It is also the case that explicit trading of money for lives is strongly disfavored, see Tetlock, supra note. I am hypothesizing that some of this effect, and possibly a great deal of it, comes from the fact that someone has knowingly engaged in action that will result in deaths. 21 It is even possible that the heuristic leads to better results, on balance, than a more refined approach that attempts to distinguish among different situations. See the discussion below. 
To say the least, there has been much discussion of whether and why the distinction between acts and omissions might matter for morality, law, and policy. In one case, for example, a patient might ask a doctor not to provide life-sustaining equipment, thus ensuring the patient’s death. In another case, a patient might ask a doctor to inject a substance that will immediately end the patient’s life. Many people seem to have a strong moral intuition that the failure to provide life-sustaining equipment, and even the withdrawal of such equipment, is acceptable and legitimate -- but that the injection is morally abhorrent. And indeed American constitutional law reflects judgments to this effect.22 But what is the morally relevant difference? 
It is worth considering the possibility that the action-omission distinction operates as a heuristic for the more complex and difficult assessment of the moral issues at stake. From the moral point of view, harmful acts are generally worse than harmful omissions, in terms of both the state of mind of the wrongdoer and the likely consequences of the wrong. A murderer is typically more malicious than a bystander who refuses to come to the aid of someone who is drowning; the murderer wants his victim to die, whereas the bystander need have no such desire. In addition, a murderer typically guarantees death, whereas many bystanders do no such thing. But in terms of either the wrongdoer’s state of mind or the consequences, harmful acts are not always worse than harmful omissions. The moral puzzles arise when life, or a clever interlocutor, comes up with a case in which there is no morally relevant distinction between acts and omissions, but when moral intuitions (and the homunculus) strongly suggest that there must be such a difference. In such cases, we might hypothesize that moral intuitions reflect an overgeneralization of principles that usually make sense—but that fail to make sense in the particular case.23 Those principles condemn actions but permit omissions, a difference that is often plausible in light of relevant factors but that, in hard cases, cannot be defended. I believe that the persistent acceptance of withdrawal of life-saving equipment, alongside persistent doubts about euthanasia, is a demonstration of the point. 
Consider in this regard the dispute over two well-known problems in moral philosophy.24 The first, called the trolley problem, asks people to suppose that a runaway trolley is headed for five people, who will be killed if the trolley continues on its current course. The question is whether you would throw a switch that would move the trolley onto another set of tracks, killing one person rather than five. Most people would throw the switch. The second, called the footbridge problem, is the same as that just given, but with one difference: the only way to save the five is to throw a stranger, now on a footbridge that spans the tracks, into the path of the trolley, killing that stranger but preventing the trolley from reaching the others. Most people will not kill the stranger. But what is the difference between the two cases, if any? A great deal of philosophical work has been done on this question, much of it trying to suggest that our firm intuitions can 22 See Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 US 702, 724–25 (1997). 23 See Jonathan Baron, Nonconsequentialist Decisions, in 17 Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1 (1994). 24 See Thomson, supra note, at 94-116. indeed be defended in principle.25 Let me suggest a simpler answer. As a matter of principle, there is no difference between the two cases. People’s different reactions are based on moral heuristics that condemn the throwing of the stranger but support the throwing of the switch. These heuristics generally point in the right direction. But they misfire in drawing a distinction between the two cleverly devised cases. What makes the cases difficult is that they are not distinguishable in principle, but moral heuristics, rooted in quite different situations, categorize them as very different. Hence people struggle heroically to rescue our intuitions and to establish that the two cases are genuinely different in principle. But they aren’t. In this sense, the action-omission distinction leads to errors. 
Is there anything to be said to those who believe that their moral judgments, distinguishing the trolley and footbridge problems, are entirely reflective, and reflect no heuristic at all? Consider a suggestive experiment, designed to see how the human brain responds to the two problems.26 The authors do not attempt to answer the moral questions in principle, but they find “that there are systematic variations in the engagement of emotions in moral judgment,”27 and that brain areas associated with emotion are far more active in contemplating the footbridge problem than in contemplating the trolley problem.28 Of course this experiment is not decisive; there may be good moral reasons why certain brain areas are activated by one problem and not by the other. Perhaps the brain is closely attuned to morally irrelevant difference. But as in the case of fear, where an identifiable region of the brain makes helpfully immediate but not entirely reliable judgments,29 and where other, also identifiable regions can supply correctives, so too, I believe, in the context of morality, politics, and law. 
Now turn to a final example from the domain of punishment. On the economic account, the state’s goal, when imposing penalties for misconduct, is to ensure optimal deterrence.30 To increase deterrence, the law might increase the severity of punishment, or instead increase the likelihood of punishment. A government that lacks substantial enforcement resources might impose high penalties, thinking that it will produce the right deterrent “signal” in light of the fact that many people will escape punishment altogether. A government that has sufficient resources might impose a lower penalty, but enforce the law against all or almost all violators. These ideas lead to a simple theory in the context of punitive damages for wrongdoing: The purpose of such damages is to make up for the shortfall in enforcement. If injured people are 100% likely to receive compensation, there is no need for punitive damages. If injured people are 50% likely to receive compensation, those who bring suit should receive a punitive award that is twice the 25 See Thomson, supra note. 26 See Joshua Greene et al., An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment, 293 Science 2105 (2001). 27 Id. at 2106. 28 Id. 29 See Joseph Ledoux, The Emotional Brain (1998). 30 A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869, 870–76 (1998). amount of the compensatory award. The simple exercise in multiplication will ensure optimal deterrence. 
But there is a large question whether people accept this account, and if not, why not. (For the moment, let us point to one side the question whether they should accept it in principle.) Experiments suggest that people reject optimal deterrence and that they do not believe that the probability of detection is relevant to punishment. The reason is that they use the outrage heuristic.31 I participated in two experiments designed to cast light on this question.32 In the first, we gave people cases of wrongdoing, arguably calling for punitive damages, and also provided people with explicit information about the probability of detection. Different people saw the same case, with only one difference: varying probability of detection. People were asked about the amount of punitive damages that they would choose to award. Our goal was to see if people would impose higher punishments when the probability of detection was low. In the second experiment, we asked people to evaluate judicial and executive decisions to reduce penalties when the probability of detection was high, and to increase penalties when the probability of detection was low. We wanted people to say whether they approved or disapproved of varying the penalty with the probability of detection. 
Our findings were simple and straightforward. The first experiment found that varying the probability of detection had no effect on punitive awards. Even when people’s attention was explicitly directed to the probability of detection, people were indifferent to it. People’s decisions about appropriate punishment were unaffected by seeing a high or low probability of detection. The second experiment found that strong majorities of respondents rejected judicial decisions to reduce penalties because of high probability of detection -- and also rejected executive decisions to increase penalties because of low probability of detection. In other words, people did not approve of an approach to punishment that would make the level of punishment vary with the probability of detection. What apparently concerned them was the extent of the wrongdoing and the right degree of moral outrage—not optimal deterrence. 
Of the various problems I have discussed, the rejection of optimal deterrence is the most difficult for my claim that people rely on moral heuristics that generally work well but that systematically misfire. The rejection is difficult for my claim because many people have principled reasons for rejecting that account of punishment (and I personally do not believe in it, at least not as a complete theory of punishment). Most people are intuitive retributivists of one or another kind, thinking that companies should be punished in proportion to their wrongdoing. In their view, it is absurd to improve severe punishment on a company merely because the probability of detection was low—unless it could be shown that the company was especially sneaky or stealthy (and hence that its conduct was especially outrageous). In the same vein, it might seem odd to be unusually lenient to a company whose wrongdoing would inevitably be detected and punished. 31 See Kahneman and Frederick, supra note. 32 See Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade & Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence?, 29 J. Legal Stud. 237 (2000). 
To say the least, I do not mean to offer a final judgment on retributivism here. But it seems implausible to suggest that the aggregate level of misconduct is entirely irrelevant to punishment, or to ignore the fact that a system that refuses to imposes enhanced punishment on hard-to-detect wrongdoing will end up with a great deal of wrongdoing. Even if retribution is an important or dominant part of a good system of punishment, consequences matter as well. Surely steps should be taken, other things being equal, to deter acknowledged wrongdoing, and to impose extra deterrence in cases where it is needed. People’s unwillingness to take any account of the probability of detection suggests that a moral heuristic is at work, one that leads to real errors. 
Some of these examples will seem more controversial than others. But taken as a while, they seem to me to raise serious doubts about the wide range of work that approaches moral and political dilemmas by attempting to uncover moral intuitions about exotic cases of the kind never or rarely encountered in ordinary life. Should you shoot an innocent person if that is the only way to save twenty innocent people?33 What is the appropriate moral evaluation of a case in which a woman accidentally puts cleaning fluid in her coffee, and her husband, wanting her dead, does not provide the antidote, which he happens to have handy34? 
I believe that the underlying moral intuitions ordinarily work well, but that when they are wrenched out of familiar contexts, their reliability, for purposes of moral and legal analysis, is unclear. Consider the following intuition: Do not kill an innocent person, even if this is necessary to save others. (I put to one side the context of war.) In all likelihood, a society does much better if most people have this intuition, if only because judgments about necessity are likely to be unreliable and self-serving. But in a hypothetical case, in which it really is necessary to kill an innocent person to save twenty others, our intuitions might well turn to be unclear and contested -- and if our intuitions about the hypothetical case turn out to be very firm (do not kill innocent people, ever!), they might not deserve to be so firm, simply because they have been wrenched out of the real world context, which is where they need to be to make sense. 
In short, I believe that some legal and philosophical analysis, based on exotic moral dilemmas, is replicating the early work of Kahneman and Tversky: uncovering situations in which intuitions, normally quite sensible, turn out to misfire. The irony is that while Kahneman and Tversky meant to devise cases that would demonstrate the misfiring, some philosophers devise cases with the thought that the intuitions are reliable and should form the building blocks for sound moral judgments. An understanding of how heuristics works suggests reason to doubt the reliability of those intuitions, even when they are very firm. 33 Cf. Williams, supra note. 34 See Thomson, supra note, at 31. 
Now it is possible that the firmness of the underlying intuitions is actually desirable. Perhaps social life is better, not worse, because of the large number of people who treat heuristics as moral rules and who believe (for example) that innocent people should never be killed. If the heuristic is treated as a freestanding principle, perhaps some mistakes will be made, but only in exotic and rare cases, and perhaps people who accept the principle will avoid the temptation to depart from it when the justification appears sufficient but really isn’t. In other words, a firm rule might misfire in some cases, but it might be better than a more fine-grained approach, which, in practice, would misfire even more. (Those who believe that you should always tell the truth may do and be much better, all things considered, than those who believe that truth should be told only on the basis of case-specific, all-things-considered judgments in its favor. Indeed, those who stick with their sports teams, out of a misplaced sense of moral obligation, may well be more loyal friends than those who feel no such sense.) My suggestion is not that the moral heuristics, in their most rigid forms, are socially worse than the reasonable alternatives. It is hard to resolve that question in the abstract. I am claiming only that such heuristics lead to significant errors and a great deal of confusion. 
In cognitive psychology and behavioral economics, the study of heuristics has been part and parcel of a research program that has involved framing effects as well. Are there moral framing effects? If the answer is affirmative, we would have further reason to believe in moral heuristics, because the two are a product of related cognitive processes. 
For a simple example of framing, consider the question whether to undergo a risky medical procedure. When people are told, “Of those who have this procedure, 90 percent are alive after five years,” they are far more likely to agree to the procedure than when they are told, “Of those who have this procedure, 10 percent are dead after five years.”35 Experience might be expected to solve this problem, but doctors too are vulnerable to this framing effect.36 Here the question does not involve moral and political issues. But a similar effect has been demonstrated in the important context of obligations to future generations,37 a much-disputed question of morality, politics, and law.38 A regulatory system that attempts to track people’s preferences would try to measure intergenerational time preferences, that is, to elicit people’s judgments about how to trade off the protection of current lives and future lives.39 In any case, an important question, asked in many debates about the issue, involves the nature of people’s moral judgments on that issue. And indeed, an influential set of studies finds that people believe that it is morally appropriate to prefer few lives in the current generation to many lives of those in 35 See Donald Redelmeier, Paul Rozin, & Daniel Kahneman, Understanding Patients' Decisions, 270 JAMA 72, 73 (1993). 36 Id. 37 See Shane Frederick, Measuring Intergenerational Time Preference: Are Future Lives Valued Less?, 26 J. Risk and Uncertainty 1 (2003). 38 Richard Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Col L Rev 941 (1999); Comment, Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory CostBenefit Analysis, 65 U Chi L Rev 1333 (1998). 39 See Revesz, supra note. future generations.40 From a series of surveys, Maureen Cropper and her coauthors suggest that people are indifferent between savings one life today and saving 45 lives in 100 years.41 They make this suggestion on the basis of questions asking people whether they would choose a program that saves “100 lives now” or a program that saves a substantially larger number “100 years from now.”42 
But it turns out that other ways of framing the same problem yield radically different results.43 For example, most people consider “equally bad” a single death from pollution next year and a single death from pollution in 100 years44 -- implying no preference for members of the current generation. In a similar finding of no strong preference for the current generation, people are equally divided between two programs: one that will save 55 lives now and 105 more lives in twenty years; and one that will save 100 lives now and 50 lives 25 years from now.45 It is even possible to frame the question in such a way as to find that future lives are valued more, not less, highly than current lives.46 In short, people’s moral judgments about obligations to future generations are very much a product of framing effects. Undoubtedly the same effects can be found in many other domains. 
These are speculative remarks on some complex subjects. If the use of heuristics is harder to demonstrate in the domain of morality than in the domain of facts, it is largely because we are able to agree, in the relevant cases, about what constitutes factual error, and often less able to agree about what constitutes moral error. But it is overwhelmingly likely that rules of thumb, generally sensible but also likely to go wrong, play a role not merely in factual judgments, but in the domains of morality, politics, and law as well. 
Readers with comments should address them to: 40 See Maureen Cropper et al., Rates of Time Preference for Saving Lives, 82 Am. Econ. Rev. 469 (1992); Maureen Cropper et al., Preferences for Life Saving Programs: How the Public Discounts Time and Age, 8 J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1994). 41 Id. 42 Id. 43 Frederick, supra note. 44 Id. at 43. 45 Id. at 44. 46 Id. at 45. Frederick asked subjects to choose between two programs. The first would become more effective over time, saving 100 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 300 lives in the decade after that. The second would become less effective over time, saving 300 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 100 lives in the decade after that. Most people preferred the first program, apparently suggesting that future lives are valued more highly. Id. 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992) Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993) Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994) Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics 
Cass R. Sunstein, William Meadow & Anthony Bell, "Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000?" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 1 JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 195 
(2D SERIES) 
Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor Between 1985 and 2000? William L. Meadow, MD, PhD, Anthony Bell, MD, and Cass R. Sunstein, JD Department of Pediatrics and Law School, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois We determined the frequency of antenatal corticosteroid use for mothers with threatened premature delivery in 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000. We next compared published data to the surveyed recollections of 302 obstetricians who were practicing during these years. Two points emerged. First, published reports reveal that the use of antenatal corticosteroids increased steadily, from 8% in 1985 to 20% in 1990, 52% in 1995, and 75% in 2000 (P < .001). Second, “expert” opinions derived from the recollections of practicing obstetricians consistently overestimated the actual use of antenatal corticosteroids during the year in question—31% versus 8% for 1985, 56% versus 20% for 1990, 78% versus 52% for 1995, and 92% versus 72% for 2000 (all Ps < .001). The use of antenatal corticosteroids by obstetricians in the past 15 years reveals a phenomenon that is widely recognized elsewhere—retrospective memories are often wrong, and when they are wrong they are not randomly wrong. Rather, recollections are systematically skewed toward an outcome that, in hindsight, is considered desirable (the “Monday morning quarterback” phenomenon). We offer a simple proposal. In determining the “standard of medical care,” the legal system should rely on statistical data about doctors’ performance rather than the recollections of experts about doctors’ performance. The fallible memories of isolated experts are a crude second-best, far inferior to the data that they approximate. Widespread adoption of this view by professional physician organizations would dramatically increase the rationality of expert testimony in medical malpractice tort law. 2003;102:356 – 62. © 2003 by The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.) to an obstetric service in the early stages of labor at 28 weeks’ gestation. At the time of admission, her fetus was estimated to weigh 0.9 kg (2 lb). The likelihood of survival for an infant born at that gestation in the early 1990s was approximately 80%. However, the likelihood that the infant would exhibit respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) of prematurity after birth was also approximately 80%. There had been reports in the medical literature for more than a decade that administration of antenatal corticosteroids might reduce the incidence and severity of RDS in infants after birth. However, the indications and side effects of administering antenatal corticosteroids to mothers were not well understood. 
Some obstetricians used antenatal corticosteroids routinely in the early 1990s. Most did not. This woman’s obstetrician did not. 
The woman delivered the infant at 28 weeks’ gestation, and it weighed 0.9 kg (2 lb). The infant was sick with RDS but did not die. It suffered long-term permanent morbidity related to the RDS. The obstetrician was sued for malpractice—specifically, for failing to administer antenatal corticosteroids to the mother before delivery. 
At trial, the plaintiff’s expert claimed that in the early 1990s it was the “standard of care” to administer antenatal corticosteroids, and that a failure to have administered them to this mother constituted medical negligence. This claim was based on the expert’s experience and training in the field. A defense expert argued that only a minority of obstetricians were using antenatal corticosteroids in the early 1990s, and consequently the standard of care, which he took to be the use of “ordinary care in similar circumstances,” did not require antenatal corticosteroids in this case. The defense expert buttressed his opinion by pointing to a large body of medical literature. Published articles described the experience of more than 30,000 women in the early 1990s who delivered comparably premature infants. The overall percentage receiving antenatal corticosteroids was 20%. 
How should a juror decide which of these arguments is more persuasive? More precisely, how much weight should be given to statistical descriptions of medical practice versus anecdotal recollection of an expert’s individual experience? 
In most jurisdictions in the United States, jurors are instructed that a doctor must “use the skill and care that is ordinarily used by reasonably well-qualified doctors in similar cases. . . . A failure to do so is a form of negligence called malpractice.”1,2 Moreover, except in unusually obvious circumstances (such as operating on the 
0029-7844/03/$30.00 doi:10.1016/S0029-7844(03)00510-6 wrong limb), lay jurors are not expected to understand what level of care physicians ordinarily provide and consequently are informed by the testimony of medical expert witnesses. Expert witnesses, in turn, are expected to describe the relevant standards of medical care by reflecting on their own professional experience.2 
A problem immediately arises, although it is not usually recognized as such. No additional instructions are offered regarding the mechanism by which the expert is supposed to convert experience, knowledge, and training into an opinion. One might assume that the expert is being asked to recall what he or she and his or her reasonably well-qualified colleagues usually did in similar circumstances and testify accordingly. This seems obvious. However, there is much more to say. To begin with, a great deal of literature over several decades in many related areas of memory research suggests that anecdotal recollection of past experience is flawed.3,4 Moreover, anecdotal recall is not randomly wrong— rather, it tends to be skewed in the direction that in hindsight would have been preferred. That is, once an outcome is known to have occurred, the predominant reaction is “I knew it all along.” This is often called the “Monday morning quarterback” phenomenon.5,6 
Experts are not immune to such memory flaws. Even professional golfers misremember. In an extensive survey, golfers on average claimed that the percentage of 6-foot putts they made was 75%, but actual observation put the number significantly lower, at 55%.7 As another example, when emergency room physicians were asked how long it took them to diagnose and begin antibiotic treatment for children with suspected meningitis, they recalled 46 minutes. Actual observation found the number to be significantly longer, at 120 minutes.8 
These examples are not elicited to demonstrate that professional golfers or emergency room physicians are deliberately untruthful. Rather, selective skewed recall appears to be part of us all. We would all rewrite parts of history if we could, and in our minds, we cannot help doing it. 
We have explored the Monday morning quarterback phenomenon in the context of administration of antenatal corticosteroids to women in preterm labor in the United States over the past 15 years. To do so, we first determined the actual use of antenatal corticosteroids at 5-year intervals between 1985 and 2000, as documented in reports from tens of thousands of patients in the medical literature. We then sampled the recollections of several hundred potential “expert witnesses”: obstetricians who had been in clinical practice during the period in question. We compared the published data to the recollections of the obstetric specialists. 
corticosteroid use, we searched MEDLINE and PubMed for the MeSH key word “antenatal corticosteroids.” We then found and read each article that pertained to the incidence of antenatal corticosteroid use in human infants in 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000 Poole WK, Carlo W, Vohr BR, Ehrenksang RA, Scott BJ, McDonald SA. Repeat courses of antenatal steroids: Risks and benefits [abstract]. Pediatr Res 2001;49:287A) (Narendran V, Donovan EF, Hoath SB, Warner BB, Steichen JJ, Jobe AH. Comparison between early bubble CPAP and conventional CPAP in reducing the incidence of chronic lung disease [abstract]. Pediatr Res 2002;51:337A) Health (NIH) conference on the use of antenatal corticosteroids convened in 1994 produced many articles that dealt directly and indirectly with antenatal corticosteroid use and contained numerous references to earlier studies. After 1994, several publications directly assessed the impact of the NIH consensus statement on increasing the use of antenatal corticosteroids. Finally, to assess recent antenatal corticosteroid use could not rely on published literature, as much remains in press or under review. Consequently, we reviewed abstracts from pediatric academic societies and the Society of Maternal/Fetal Medicine. 
We restricted our database to mothers for whom antenatal corticosteroids might appropriately have been prescribed. Consequently, we reviewed publications with one of two possible inclusion criteria: 1) prematurity or low birth weight—typically, very low birth weight (VLBW) infants (birth weight less than 1500 g)—where data were reported from population-based neonatal intensive care unit outcome studies, or 2) RDS—typically, mechanically ventilated infants—where data were derived from studies of the efficacy of surfactant administration. “Expert Opinions” About Antenatal Corticosteroid Use From 1985 Through 2000 We had no way of determining which obstetricians had ever served as expert witnesses, nor were we interested in sampling just that subset. Rather, we were interested in demonstrating the phenomenon of hindsight bias for the field as a whole. Consequently, we obtained a list of all registered obstetricians in the United States from Ross Laboratories. The obstetricians were identified by city and state. We sent out two mailings of 500 surveys each to ten randomly selected obstetricians in each of the 50 states. We received 153 responses from the first survey and 149 responses from the second survey. 
The survey questionnaire described a hypothetic case of a woman presenting in early labor at approximately 28 weeks’ gestation. The obstetricians were asked two questions regarding the use of antenatal corticosteroids for this woman: 1) What percentage of obstetricians do you think were using antenatal corticosteroids in such cases in 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000? 2) Was it your personal practice to administer antenatal corticosteroids in such cases in 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000? 
Two separate mailings were sent to obstetricians between July 2000 and June 2001. Responses regarding antenatal corticosteroid use from the first mailing were compared with those from the second mailing using both two-way analysis of variance, with year as the withingroup variable and mailing as the across-group variable, and comparison of proportions test, with correction for multiple comparisons. No significant differences were found comparing results from the first and second mailings. Consequently, data from the two mailings were combined. 
Responses from the obstetricians regarding antenatal corticosteroids were then contrasted with data derived from the medical literature using two-way analysis of variance, z scores derived from the comparison of proportions test, and 2 analysis.25 Meta-analysis of the multiple published descriptions of antenatal corticosteroid use during each period was performed using the number of patients involved, not the number of hospitals or publications. For all tests, an level of P .01 was required to assume statistical significance. 
Table 1 shows antenatal corticosteroid use in 1985, 1990, 1995, and 2000, as determined from case reports of 92,169 infants in the medical literature. Figure 1 contrasts the use of antenatal corticosteroids as reported in the medical literature with the compiled recollections of 302 “expert” obstetrician respondents to our questionnaire. Two points are readily apparent. First, published reports revealed that the use of antenatal corticosteroids increased steadily, from 8% in 1985 to 20% in 1990, 52% in 1995, and 75% in 2000 (P .001). Second, expert opinions derived from the recollections of practicing obstetricians consistently overestimated the actual use of antenatal corticosteroids during every year in question: 31% versus 8% for 1985, 56% versus 20% for 1990, 78% versus 52% for 1995, and 92% versus 72% for 2000 (all Ps .001). 
colleagues’ use of antenatal corticosteroids from 1985 to 2000, the obstetrician respondents consistently ranked their personal use higher than their estimates of the average behavior at the time: 68% versus 3 88% versus 56% in 1990, 99% versus 78% in 1995, and 100% versus 92% in 2000 (all Ps .01). 
We demonstrate a phenomenon that is widely recognized elsewhere: Retrospective memories are often wrong, and when they are wrong they are not randomly wrong. Rather, recollections are systematically skewed toward an outcome that, in hindsight, is considered desirable. 
Over the past 15 years it has become widely accepted that antenatal corticosteroid administration to women in preterm labor significantly reduces complications in prematurely delivered infants.9 –12 Antenatal corticosteroid use has risen roughly ten-fold, from 8% to 75% for prematurely delivered infants during this period. Consequently, viewed retrospectively from the vantage point of 2001, antenatal corticosteroid use for women in preterm labor at 28 weeks’ gestation has always been desirable. As we hypothesized, the recollections of 302 obstetricians surveyed in 2001 about the use of antenatal corticosteroids for preterm labor in the past 15 years were wrong and predictably skewed. Obstetricians recalled antenatal corticosteroid use to have been greater than it demonstrably was at each 5-year interval between 1985 and 2000. 
To the extent that obstetricians like the ones in our survey might serve as expert witnesses in antenatal corticosteroid cases, testifying about ordinary care in similar circumstances based upon their recollection of their own personal experience, they are likely to be wrong. What do such discrepancies between recollections of expert practitioners and objective documentation of medical practice imply for expert testimony in cases of alleged medical negligence? 
A substantial body of evidence on the psychology of decision making documents systematic biases in the anecdotal recall of experience. People are excessively optimistic about what can happen or has happened; at the same time, they are overconfident about the accuracy of their memories.26–28 Medical experts are not immune from this phenomenon.3,8,29–31 Moreover, and perhaps most importantly from the standpoint of malpractice testimony, people reliably suffer from hindsight bias. Once an outcome is known to have occurred, the predominant reaction is “I knew it all along.”3,5,29–31 Excessive optimism and skewed recall about past practices appear to be human nature. This point raises some serious problems for adjudication of negligence allegations. 
A central purpose of medical malpractice law is to protect the general public by ensuring that physicians provide reasonable care. Reasonable care is determined, at least in part, by asking about ordinary practice. If descriptions of ordinary practice are important to the judicial process, why should jurors and judges rely on the fallible and anecdotedriven recollection of an individual expert’s experience, especially if we know that this recollection is likely to be wrong? Instead, why not inform jurors and judges of the verified and reverifiable collective experience of dozens, hundreds, or even thousands of cases reported by comparably expert physicians? Citations of practice distributions derived from published medical literature could provide a necessary buffer for jurors specifically and the public more generally against the inevitable possibility that an individual expert’s memory is faulty. 
Several methodological concerns must be addressed directly. Most reflect difficulties traditionally associated with meta-analysis of the efficacy of medical procedures. Comparisons across and within studies of different size may be difficult to describe succinctly. How is one to balance a small study from a single center with a large study from multiple centers? As an example from the antenatal corticosteroid analysis, in 1990 14% of 11,077 infants reported from 446 centers in the Exosurf Neonatal Treatment Investigational New Drug Program received antenatal corticosteroids,12 compared with 20% of 480 infants reported from a single center by Teberg et al.13 Should we consider the number of studies or the number of patients within studies? Further, single publications that report data from multiple centers often describe a wide spectrum of behavior around a mean value. As an example, the use of antenatal corticosteroids among the 30 reporting centers of the Vermont-Oxford Trials Network in 1990 ranged from 0% to 58%.18 Finally, inclusion criteria may differ across studies. Consider in the context of antenatal corticosteroids whether a hypothetic published article included or excluded mothers with premature rupture of membranes, pregnancies above 32 gestational weeks, pregnancies below 26 gestational weeks, or twins. Each of these conditions has, at times, been argued to be a contraindication for administration of antenatal corticosteroids.9 –11 
There are two related questions here, one narrow and one broad. Narrowly, how can we deal with published data in the context of the standard of care for antenatal corticosteroids? More generally, given the recognition that published studies will always have overlapping but nonidentical inclusion criteria and that they will inevitably invoke an interval of uncertainty around every point estimate, how can statistical analysis ever determine the standard of care for a single case? 
In the specific instance of antenatal corticosteroids, one might proceed as follows: Our survey was deliberately designed to ask obstetricians about behavior in a single “idealized” case, analogous to the opinion an expert witness would be asked to provide in a single case of alleged negligence. Published data are, inevitably, more messy. Even when antenatal corticosteroid use is intended in all cases, we must assume there will be some “slippage,” such as mothers who for one reason or another did not receive antenatal corticosteroids even though the doctors intended them to do so. Consequently, the actual use of antenatal corticosteroids will always be a bit lower than the intended use. How can we account for this slippage in our data-based formulation of standard medical care? 
We might start by assuming that by the year 2000 almost all obstetricians wanted to use antenatal corticosteroids in idealized cases of women threatening preterm delivery. We then can look to see how close the obstetricians came to that ideal and note that the answer is “quite close.” In 2000, approximately 75% of 30,000 mothers who delivered VLBW infants received antenatal corticosteroids (cf Figure 1 and Table 1). This, then, can be taken as a “ceiling” against which other comparisons can be measured. As an example, in 1990, 20% of all VLBW infants actually received antenatal corticosteroids, compared with a theoretic ceiling of 75% who might have received antenatal corticosteroids. Consequently, the “adjusted” antenatal corticosteroid use in idealized circumstances in 1990 was approximately 20 of 75 (27%). Even after adjustment for slippage, this value is significantly lower than the 56% that our obstetricians recalled for antenatal corticosteroid use in 1990. For every time interval studied, even after adjusting published reports of antenatal corticosteroid use to account for the potential of nonideal cases, “expert recollection” still significantly overestimated adjusted antenatal corticosteroid use. 
There is a larger claim here. Meta-analysis has become widely accepted in modern medicine. Indeed, it has become essential to the growth of evidence-based medical care in obstetrics and elsewhere. However, metaanalysis is complicated. One possible response to these complexities might be to argue that statistical analysis is just too hard for judges, lawyers, and juries to understand. If this is true, then attempts to import data into the courtroom are doomed. In such a postmodern legal world, the scientific method would be abandoned and only anecdotal narrative would survive. 
There is another response, which we favor. We welcome methodological complexities and encourage their elucidation enthusiastically. With this view, the more light shone upon the meaning of data and the difficulties of importing it the better, precisely because accuracy is what is most important. Whatever difficulties might arise in importing statistical methodology into the courtroom, these problems pale against the alternative: relying on the memories of individual experts, where none of the methodological rigor required for scientific analysis is applied, or even acknowledged, and where the recollections are almost certain to be inaccurate. 
Is standard medical care always the standard of medical care? That is, are physicians obliged to administer the care that is “ordinarily provided in the same or similar circumstances,”1 or are physicians obliged to conform to a more aspirational standard, “the care that should be provided in such circumstances”? In other words, does customary practice determine negligence? 
There is a dispute about the weight to be given to ordinary practice in medical negligence cases. In some jurisdictions, custom defines reasonable conduct.32– 40 However, in other jurisdictions, both federal41 and state,42– 45 a more aspirational standard is applied (not what physicians ordinarily do, but what a reasonable physician should have done), and customary medical treatment is not decisive on the exercise of standard care. 
In these latter jurisdictions, do statistical compilations of normative practice become irrelevant to expert testimony regarding the standard of care? 
The answer is “No.” Even when ordinary practice is not controlling, it is always relevant, and when it is relevant, juries and judges should learn what it actually is. Moreover, in their attempts to influence judge and jury, experts ought to distinguish exhortation from normative description. As an example, consider expert testimony in the context of an allegation concerning whether use of antenatal corticosteroids for a woman in preterm labor in the early 1990s was part of the ordinary standard of care. One can envision an expert obstetric witness saying that one should have given antenatal corticosteroids to this woman or even that he or she would have given antenatal corticosteroids (although, intriguingly, our data suggest that even these memories are flawed). However, under no circumstances could an expert accurately claim that administration of antenatal corticosteroids in the early 1990s conformed to ordinary care in similar circumstances. That point is sufficient for our purposes here. If legal authorities want to depart from the standard of ordinary care, they should do so with an accurate rather than fanciful understanding of what ordinary care is (cf Meadow46,47). 
There can be no doubt that experts know a great deal about topics on which ordinary people lack information. 
But experts, no less than other people, are subject to predictable memory biases. As a specific example, we have shown that a majority of obstetricians “recalled” antenatal corticosteroid use to be common in the early 1990s, but the best available data suggest that only a small minority of obstetricians were actually using antenatal corticosteroids during this time. 
We offer a simple proposal. In determining the standard of medical care, the legal system should rely, whenever it can and far more than it now does, on statistical data about doctors’ performance rather than the opinions of experts about doctors’ performance. The fallible memories of isolated experts would be seen as a kind of crude second-best, far inferior to the data that they approximate. Widespread adoption of this view by professional physician organizations, supplemented by anticipatory publication of practice distributions for potentially problematic clinical scenarios, would dramatically increase the sense and rationality of expert testimony in medical malpractice tort law. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short-Term Assets (January 2003) Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An Economic Perspective (February 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 2003) William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. http://www.jstor.org 
Terrorism and Probability 
Neglect CASSR.SUNSTEIN csunstei@uchicago.edu KarNl.LlewellDyinstS.ervicPer,ofo,fJurisprudLeanwcSechooDl,epartmoefnPtoliticSaclience, UniversoiftCyhicagLoawSchoo1l,111East60thStreeCth,icagIoL,60637U, SA Whenstronegmotioanrseinvolvepde,oplteendtofocuosnthebadnesosftheoutcomrea,thetrhanonthe probabiltihtyattheoutcomweilolccurT.heresulti"npgrobabilnietgylecht"elptsoexplaienxcessirveactions tolow-probabriilsitkoysfcatastropTheer.rorisshtoswa workinkgnowledogfeprobabilniteyglecptr,oducing publifcearthamtighgtreatelyxceetdhediscountheadrmA.sa resulotfprobabilniteyglecpte,oploefteanre farmorceoncernaebdouttheriskosfterroritshmanabousttatisticlaalrlygerrisktshatthecyonfroinotrdinary lifeI.ntheconteoxftterroriasnmdanalogoruisskts,helegaslystefmrequenrtelsypontdosprobabilniteyglect, resultiinngregulatitohnamtighbteunjustifoireedvencounterproduBcuttipvueb.lifcearisitselafcosta,nd itisassociatwedithmanoythecrostsi,nthefor mof"rippeleffectpsr"oducbedyfearA. sa normatmivaetter, governmsehnotulrdeduceevenunjustiffieeadrif,thebenefoitftsheresponcsaenbeshowtnooutweitghhecosts. JELClassificatioKnO:D,8 Terroristsshowa workingknowledgeof threenoteworthpyointsaboutfear.Of these, thefirstwoare well-knownT.he thirdpointis less well-understooadn,dit willbe my principaelmphasihsereB.ecausethethreepointsarerelatedt,heyshouldbeidentifieadtthe outset. 
The firsptointis thatin thefaceofignorancep,eopleassessprobabilitietshroughthe useofvariousheuristicms, ostnotablytheavailabilityheuristicin,accordancewithwhich probabilitiys measuredby askingwhethera readilyavailableexamplecomesto mind (TverskyandKahneman1,974).Intheaftermatohfa terroriasctt,andfora periodthereafter, thatactis likelytobebothavailableandsalienta,ndthustomakepeoplethinkthatanother suchact is likely,whetheror notit is in fact.One or twoterrorisitncidentwsillhave a significanimtpacton boththoughatnd behaviorw,ithexaggeratedriskperceptionas likelyresultofthesubstantiaplublicitygivento suchincidentsI.n thesewaysterrorist actsareno differenftromfloods,earthquakesa,ndothercatastrophesa,ll ofwhichhave immediateeffectosnbehavior(Slovic,2000). Forimperfectilnyformeadgentsu,seofthe availabilithyeuristimc ayormaynotbeconsistenwtithBayesianlearningb;utitcanproduce significantelxyaggeratejdudgmentosfprobableharm. 
Thesecondpointisthatpeopleshowa disproportionafteearofrisksthatseemunfamiliar andhardtocontro(lSlovic,2000). A newriskis likelytoreceivefarmoreattentiotnhan is warrantebdythesheernumbersA. largedisparitybetweenpublicreactiontsooldrisks andpublicreactionsto newriskscharacterizebsothindividuajludgmentandlaw itself, whichregulatesnewhazardsfarmoreaggressivelythanold ones (Huber,1983).Hence itis to be expectedthatan actofterrorismwillcause largechangesinprivateandpublic behaviore,venifthemagnitudoeftheriskdoes notjustifythosechanges,andeven ifstatisticalleyquivalentrisksoccasionlittleor no concernA.ndifa riskappearshard to controlp,eoplewillbe especiallyconcernedaboutit,possiblyeventerrifie(dSlovic, 2000).Thepurposeandeffecotfterrorisamretomakepeoplefearthatthey"cannotbesafe anywhereF."orthisreason,isolatedactsofterroris min,volvingasmallsubsetofthepopulationc,ancausefarmoreseriousdislocationtshanarewarrantebdythediscountevdalueof therisk. 
Thethirdproblema,ndmyprincipacllaimhere,is thatpeoplearepronetowhatI shall 
I willoffera gooddeal ofevidenceofprobabilitnyeglects,uggestinignparticulatrhat substantiavlariationisnprobabilitdyo notgreatlyaffecpteople'sjudgmentsa,tleastwhen 
Thereareprescriptivaendnormativiessuesas well.In thefaceofprobabilitnyeglect, governmenistunlikelytobe successfuilfitattempttsoreducefearbyemphasizintghelow likelihoodofanotherterroriasttackI.tmightdo betterifitchangesthesubjectorinstead stressestheaffirmatisvoecialvaluesassociatedwithrunningtherisk(bysuggestingf,or examplet,hatcontinuinwgithordinarlyifeisa patriotiacct).Themostimportanntormative issueis straightforwaIrfdp:robabilitnyeglectleadsthepublictobe excessivelyconcerned aboutterrorism-relartiesdkss,houldgovernmenretspondA?tfirsgtlance,theanswerwould appeartobenegativeo;rdinarilpyrivataendpublicresourceshouldnotbedevotedtosmall problemse,venifan ignoranptublicis demandingaction.Butthenegativeansweris too simple.Fear,whetherationaolrnot,is itselfa cost,anditis likelytoleadtoa rangeof othercosts,intheformofcountlesrsippleeffectsin,cludingareluctancteoflyortoappear inpublicplaces.Ifgovernmenistabletoreducetheleveloffearproducedbyprobability neglecti,tshoulddo so,atleastifthecostsoutweighthebenefits. 
2.7. Somedistinctions Probabilitnyeglecta,sI understanitdhere,shouldbedistinguishefdromthreoetherphenomena,all ofthemquitewell-knowanndalsobearingonthedemandforlawintheaftermath ofa terroriasttackI. havealreadymentionetdheavailabilityheuristicu,sedstrategically bymanyactorsi,ncludingterrorist(Ks uranandSunstein1,999).Indeed"availabilityentrepreneurtsa"keadvantageoftheavailabilityheuristibcyproducingorpublicizingparticularrisk-relatedvents(id.). Terroristasregoodexamplesofavailabilityentrepreneurs, oftenproducinfgearthatgreatlyoutrunstatisticarlealityB. ecauseofsocialinteractions, knowledgoefterroriisntcidentsspreadsrapidlythroughthepopulationp,roducingsocial cascadesthatgreatlyaggravatfeear(id.).Itisalsowellknownthatpeopleareinsensitivteo variationisnlowprobabilitieIsn. onestudyK,unreuthearndhiscoauthorfsoundthatpeople'sperceptionosfriskinesdsidnotvaryamongrisksof1in100,000,1in1milliona,nd1in 10million(KunreutheNro,vemskya,ndKahneman2,001).Theyalsofoundlittledifference inperceptionosfriskinesfsorrisksrangingfrom1in650,to1in6300,to1in68,000.Thisis a strikinfgormofprobabilitnyeglectB. utinsensitivittoyvariationasmonglowprobabilities is differenftromthemoreextremfeormofinsensitivittyhatI willbe emphasizinhgere. 
Prospectheorycanalsobe takentoshowa formofprobabilitnyeglect(Kahnemanand Tversky1,979).Forpresenpturposesw,hatis mostimportanistthatprospectheoryoffers an explanationforsimultaneougsamblingandinsuranceW.ithrespecttolow-probability risksa,ndthoseassociatedwithterrorismclearlycountas such,thekeyfindinigsthatmost peopleprefera certainloss ofX to a gamblewithan expectedvalueless thanX, ifthe gambleinvolveas smallprobabilitoyfcatastropheF.romthestandpoinotfexpectedutility theoryp,rospectheorypredictsan overreactiotno a smallprobabilityofbad outcomes. Andifthataspectofprospectheor yis emphasizedi,tmaybe possibletounderstansdome aspectsoffederarliskregulationw,hichshowanexaggeraterdesponsetolow-probability catastrophe(NsollandKrier,1990). 
Thesameunderstandinhgelpsilluminatoefficiarlesponsetsoterrorismas well.Prospect theorysuggeststhatpeoplewillseekregulationa,s a formofinsurancet,oprevenhtarms thataregravebutthatarehighlyunlikelytooccur;andthispointhelpsexplainthedemand forprotectioangainstsmallrisksofcatastrophiacttacksB.ut in makingthisdescriptive claim,prospectheorydoesnotsetoutanyspecialroleforemotionsa,nditdoesnotpredict thatpeoplewillreactin anyspecialwaytoemotionallygrippingrisks.On thecontrary, prospectheorypredicttshesamereactiontorisksthatproducestrongemotionarleactions andtostatisticalleyquivalenrtisksthatdo notproducesuchreactionsP. rospectheoryis bothmorespecializedand moregeneralthanthephenomenonto whichI seekto draw attentiohnere. 2.2. A demonstration To seehowprobabilitnyeglectoperatesc,onsidera studyofpeople'swillingnestsopayto avoidelectricshocks(RottenstreiacnhdHsee,2001).Thecentrapl urposeofthestudywas ofcentrailmportancheereattemptetdoseewhethevraryingtheprobabilitoyfharmwould mattermore,or less,in settingtshattriggerstrongemotionsthanin settingtshatseem relativeleymotion-freIne.the"strongemotions"ettingp,articipantwsereaskedtoimagine thattheywouldparticipatienanexperimenintvolvinsgomechanceofa "shortp,ainfulb,ut notdangeroueslectricshock."Intherelativeleymotion-frseeettingp,articipantwseretold thattheexperimenetntailedsomechanceofa $20 penaltyP.articipantwsereaskedtosay howmuchtheywouldbe willingtopaytoavoidparticipatiningtherelevanetxperiment. Someparticipanwtseretoldthattherewasa 1% chanceofreceivintghebadoutcome(either the$20 lossortheelectricshock);othersweretoldthatthechancewas99%. 
Thecentrarlesultwas thatvariationisnprobabilitayffectedthosefacingtherelatively emotion-frienejuryt,he$20 penaltyf,armorethantheyaffectedpeoplefacingthemore emotionallyevocativeoutcomeofan electricshock.Forthecashpenaltyt,hedifference betweenthemedianpaymenftora 1% chanceandthemedianpaymenftora 99% chance was predictablylargeand indeedconsistenwtiththestandardmodel:$1 to avoida 1% chance,and $18 to avoida 99% chance.Fortheelectricshock,bycontrastt,hedifferenceinprobabilitmyadelittledifferencteomedianwillingnestsopay:$7 toavoida 1% chance,and$10 toavoida 99% chance!Hencesubjects'responsestoaffect-poohrarms werehighlysensitivteodifferenciensprobabilityw,hereasforaffect-richharmsr,esponses wereremarkablfylatacrossthetwoprobabilitcyonditions. 
Theconclusionisthatmanypeoplewillpaya significanamtountoavoida smallprobabilityofa hazardthatis affectively-lad-eanndthatwhenstrongemotionasreinvolvedt,he amounthattheywillpaywillnotvarygreatlywithchangesinprobabilityIn. thecontext ofterrorismth, eimplicationis clear.Therisksassociatedwithterrorisattacksarehighly likelytotriggesrtrongemotionsi,npartbecauseofthesheervividnesosfthebadoutcome andtheassociatedlevelsofoutragaendfearI.tfollowsthatevenifthelikelihoodofanattack isextremellyow,peoplewillbe willingtopaya greatdealtoavoidit.Oncepeople'sminds arefocusedontherisk,theirwillingnestsopaywillbe relativeliympervioutsosignificant changesin probabilit yIn. October2002,thesignificanatndoftenexpensiveprecautions takenagainstpossiblesniperattacksb,ycitizensoftheWashingtonD,C area,attestothe phenomenoonfprobabilitnyeglectinthefaceofvividadverseoutcomes. 2.3. Emotionasndarsenic To investigatteheroleofprobabilityandemotionsin responsesto risk,I conductedan experimenatskingeighty-thrUeeniversitoyfChicagolawstudenttsodescribetheirmaximumwillingnestsopaytoreducelevelsofarsenicindrinkinwgaterT.hequestionshada highdegreeofrealismT.heywerebasedonactualchoicesconfrontintgheEnvironmental ProtectionAgency,involvingcostand benefiitnformatiownithintheballparkof actual figureussedbytheagencyitself(Sunstein2,002). 
Participantwsererandomlysortedintofourgroupsr,epresentintghefourconditionisn theexperimenItn.thefirsctonditionp,eoplewereaskedtostatetheirmaximumwillingness topaytoeliminatae cancerriskofonein 1,000,000I.nthesecondconditionp,eoplewere askedtostatetheirmaximumwillingnestsopaytoeliminataecancerriskofonein100,000. In thethirdconditionp,eoplewereaskedthesamequestionas inthefirstb,utthecancer wasdescribedinvividtermsa,s "verygruesomeandintenselypainfula,s thecancereats awayat theinternaolrgansofthebody."In thefourthconditionp,eoplewereaskedthe samequestionas inthesecond,butthecancerwas describedinthesametermsas inthe thirdconditionI.n eachconditionp,articipantwsereaskedtocheckofftheirwillingness topayamongthefollowingoptions$:0, $25, $50, $100,$200,$400,and$800 ormore. Noticethatthedescriptioonfthecanceri,nthe"highlyemotionalc"onditionsw,asintended toaddlittleinformatiocno,nsistinsgimplyofa descriptioonfmanycancerdeathst,hough admittedlsyomeparticipantms ightwellhavethoughtthatthesewereespeciallyhorrific deaths. 
Thecentrahl ypothesiwsasthattheprobabilitvyariationws ouldmattelressinthehighly emotionaclonditiontshaninthelessemotionaclonditionsM.orespecificallyit,waspredictedthatdifferenceins probabilitwyouldmakerelativelylittledifferencinethehighly emotionaclondition-s andthatsuchdifferencewsouldhavemoreimportancientheless emotionaclonditionsT.hispredictionwas meanttodescribea substantiadleparturferom expectedutilitytheoryw,hichpredicttshatanordinaryri,sk-averspeersonshouldbewilling topaymorethan10Xtoeliminatae riskthatis tentimesmorelikelythana riskthatheis willingtopayX toeliminat(eCorso,Hammitta,ndGraham2,001). It was also expected thattheten-foldifferencineprobabilitiesbetween1/100,000and 1/1,000,00-0would not,ineitherconditiong,enerataeten-foldifferencine willingnestsopay.Theresultcsan be foundinTable1. 
Thegraphthatfollowsthetableshowsthattheemotionadlescriptiopnroducesa higher willingnestsopayandalso thattheslopeoftheemotionadlescriptiolnineis somewhat flattetrhantheslopeoftheunemotionadlescriptiolnine.Thelatterdifferencisenothuge, buttheratioofthehighprobabilitaynswersi,nrelationtothelowprobabilitaynswersi,s 1.8fortheemotionadlescriptioannd2.7 fortheunemotionadlescription. 
ItfollowsthattheresultfsorthefirshtypothesiasreinthepredicteddirectionW.2 ithan unemotiondalescriptionin,creasintgheprobabilitbyya factorof10produceda statistically significanintcreaseinmeanWTP,from$71.25to194.44,¿(38)= 2.3,p = .03.Inthehighly emotionaclonditiont,heincreaseinprobabilitpyroduceda smallerelativiencreaseinWTP, from$132.95to$241.30,whichapproachesbutdidnotreachtraditiona.0l5 significance level,i(43) = 1.7,/?= .10.Thus,whileincreasintgheprobabilitbyya factoorf10increased WTPinbothemotionconditionsin,termosfpercentagiencreasest,heeffecwtasmorethan twiceas largeinthelessemotionaclonditio n(a 173%increaseinmeanWTP) thaninthe emotionaclondition(an81% increase)B.ecauseofthesmallsamplet,hedifferenbcetween 
Unemotional Emotional Probability description description 1/1,000,000 71.25(25) 
Deaths. theseincreasesisnotstatisticallsyignificanbtu,ttheresultisnonetheleshsighlysuggestive, especiallybecauseofitsconsistencwyithothersimilarfinding(sdiscussedbelow).3 
ThesecondhypothesiwsasalsosupportedT.heincreaseinprobabilitdyidproducea significanotveralldifferencinemeanWTP,from$103.57to$220.73,F(l, 79) = 7.3,p < .01. Consistenwtithotherworkonprobabilitnyeglecth,oweverv,aryingtheprobabilithyada relativelwyeakeffecotnWTP.Thetenfolidncreaseintheriskproducedbarelymorethana doublingofmeanWTP(a 113%increase).I4tisnoteworthtyhatinthisexperimentth,erelativelysophisticatepdarticipanitnsthestudyshowedfarmoresensitivittyoprobabilitiynformationthaninthestudiesd,escribedabove,byKunreutheNro,vemskya,ndKahnemanb,ut evenso,thesusceptibilitwyasfarlessthanconvention(anl ormativet)heorywouldpredict. 
Fromthisexperimentth,ereis oneotherpotentiallnyoteworthryesultB.yitselfm,aking thedescriptionofthecancermoreemotionaalppearedto havean effecton meanWTP, raisingitfrom$129.61to$188.33,althoughduetothesmallsamplesize,thedifferencdeid notreachsignificancFe,( 1,79) = 1.6,p = .20.5ThegraphshowstheextenotftheeffectIf. thisresultholdsupina largersample,thedollarmagnitudoeftheeffecotfa minorchange in descriptionis likelyto be surprisinglyarge.Indeed,theeffectofmerelymakingthe descriptioonftheoutcomemoreemotionawlasabouthalfas largeas a tenfoldincreasein actualrisk.Forpresentpurposesh,owevert,hemajorpointis thatwhenthequestionwas designedtotriggeerspeciallystrongemotionsv,ariationisnprobabilithyadlittleeffecotn WTP,lessofaneffecthanwhenthequestionwasphrasedinlessemotionatlermsT. hisis thekindofprobabilitnyeglectthatI amemphasizinhgere. 
Thisstudyhas twoimplicationfsorthepublicreactiontoterrorisattacksI.t suggests, firstt,hatsimplybecausesuchattacksarousestrongemotionst,heyarelikelyto trigger moreintensefear,and a largerbehaviorarlesponset,hando statisticalliydenticarlisks. Here,as intheexperimentth,erewillbe a kindof"emotionpremium.I"tsuggestss,econd, thatprobabilitnyeglectwillplaya roleinthepublicreactiontoterrorisman,dthatmany peoplewill focus,muchof thetime,on thebadnessoftheoutcome,ratherthanon its likelihood. 
Probabilitnyeglectw, henstronegmotionasreinvolvedh,asbeenfoundinmanyotherstudies (Loewensteinetal., 2001). Considerf,orexample,experimentdsesignedtotestlevelsof anxietyinanticipatioonfa painfuellectricshockofvaryingintensityto, be administered aftera "countdowpneriod"ofa statedlengthI.n thesestudiest,hestatedintensitoyfthe shockhada significaneftfecotnphysiologicarleactionsB.uttheprobabilitoyftheshockhad noeffect".Evidentlyth,emerethoughotfreceivingashockwasenoughtoarousesubjects, andthepreciselikelihoodofbeingshockedhadlittleimpactontheirarousallevel"(id.)A relatedstudyaskedpeopletoprovidetheirmaximumbuyingpricesforriskyinvestments, whichcontaineddifferenstatedprobabilitieosflossesandgainsofdifferenmtagnitudes (id.).Happilyforthestandartdheorym, aximumbuyingpriceswereaffectebdythesizeof lossesandgainsandalsobyprobabilitie(sN.otethatformostpeople,thisexperimendtid notinvolveanaffect-ricehnvironmenBt.u)t- andthisis thekeypoin-t reportefdeelings ofworrywerenotmuchaffectebdyprobabilitlyevels.In thisstudyt,henp,robabilitdyid affecbtehaviorb,utitdidnotaffectemotionsT. hepointhasindependenitmportancfeor theissueofterroris mto,whichI willreturnW: orryandanxietyareindividuallosses,even iftheydo notultimatelayffecbtehavior. 
Severalstudieshaveattemptetdo comparehowpeoplerespondto differenceins the probabilitoyfharmwithhowpeoplerespondtodifferencienstheemotionasssociatedwith certainrisks(SandmanW,einsteina,ndHallman,1998;Sandmanetal., 1994).Hereitis hypothesizetdhatcertainlow-probabilirtyiskss,uchas thoseassociatedwithnuclearwaste radiationp,roduceoutragew,hereasotherlow-probabilitryisks,suchas thoseassociated withradonexposured,o not.Ofcourseterrorisatctscanbe seenas themostextremexampleofrisksthatproduceoutrageA. centraflindinigs consistenwt iththatstressedhere: a largedifferencine statisticasleriousneshsadno effectinthe"highoutrage"condition, withpeoplerespondintghesamewaytoa riskof1in 100,000as toa riskof1in1,000,000 (SandmanW,einsteinan,dHallman,1998).Evenwhenthestatisticarliskwasidenticailnthe highoutrag(enuclearwaste)andlowoutrage(radon)cases,peopleinthenuclearwastecase reporteadmuchgreaterperceivedthreaatnda muchhigherintentiotnoacttoreducethat threa(tid.).Indeed,"theeffecotfoutragewaspracticallays largeas theeffecotfa 4000-fold differencineriskbetweenthehigh-risakndlow-riskconditions("id.).Efforttsocommunicatethemeaningofdifferenciensrisklevels,byshowingcomparisontsonormarlisklevels, reducedtheeffecotfoutrageb;utevenafterthoseeffortosu,tragehadnearlythesameeffect as a 2000-foldincreaseinrisk(id.).A greatdealofinformatioanppearstobe necessaryto counteracttheeffectosfstrongemotion-s showingthatpeoplearenotimpervioutsosuch informatiobnu,tthatwhenemotionasreinvolveda,greatdealofcarefuwlorkhastobedone. 
Itshouldnotbe surprisinign,thislightt,hatvisualizationorimagerymatterasgreatdeal topeople'sreactiontsorisks(Slovic,Monahan,andMacGregor2,000). Whenan image ofa badoutcomeis easilyaccessible,peoplewillbecomegreatlyconcernedabouta risk, holdingprobabilitcyonstan(tLoewensteinetal.,2001).Considerthefactthatwhenpeople areaskedhowmuchtheywillpayforflighitnsurancfeorlossesresultinfgrom"terrorism," theywillpaymorethaniftheyareaskedhowmuchtheywillpayforflighitnsurancferom all causes(Johnsonetal., 1993).Anevidentexplanationforthispeculiarresultis thatthe word"terrorismev"okesvividimagesofdisastert,huscrowdingoutprobabilitjyudgments. Notealso thatwhenpeoplediscussa low-probabilitryisk,theirconcernrisesevenifthe discussionconsistsmostlyofapparentltyrustwortahsysurancetshatthelikelihoodofharm reallyis infìnitesm(aAllkahamaindSlovic,1994).Onereasonisthatthediscussionmakes iteasiertovisualizetheriskandhencetofearit. 
Probabilitnyeglectshouldbe sharplydistinguishefdromuseoftheavailabilithyeuristic, whichleadspeoplenottoneglecttheissueofprobabilityb,uttoanswerthequestionof probabilitbyysubstitutinaghardquestion(whatisthestatisticarlisk?)withaneasyquestion (do salientexamplesreadilycometomind?)T.hecentraplointhereisnotthatvisualization makesan eventseemmoreprobable(thoughthisis also oftentrueandhighlyrelevanto theimpactofterrorismb)u,tthatvisualizationif,accompaniedbyorproductivoefstrong emotionsm,akestheissueofprobabilitlyess relevantor evenirrelevan(tM.anypeople whoarefearfuolfadmittedllyow-probabilitryisks,suchas thoseassociatedwithflying in airplanesr,eportthattheyvisualizetheworst-casoeutcomeanddo notgiveadequate attentionto theissue of likelihoodw,hichtheyacknowledgeto be low.) In theoryt,he distinctiobnetweenuse oftheavailabilityheuristiacndprobabilitnyeglectshouldnotbe obscureI.npracticeo,fcoursei,twilloftenbehardtoknowwhethetrheavailabilithyeuristic orprobabilitnyeglectis influencinbgehavior. 
Themostsensibleconclusionis thatwithrespecttorisksofinjuryorharmv,ividimages andconcretepicturesofdisastercan "crowdout"otherkindsofthoughtsin,cludingthe cruciatlhoughtthatheprobabilitoyfdisasterisreallysmall.Withrespecttohope,thosewho operategamblingcasinosandstatelotterieasrewell-awaroeftheunderlyinmgechanisms. Theyplayonpeople'semotionisntheparticulasrensethattheyconjureuppalpablepictures ofvictoryandeasylivingt,husencouraginpgeopletoneglectthequestionofprobability. Withrespecttorisks,insurancceompaniese,xtremenvironmentgarloupsa,ndterrorists do exactlythesame.The pointexplains"whysocietalconcernsabouthazardssuchas nuclearpowerandexposuretoextremelsymallamountsoftoxicchemicalsfailtorecede inresponsetoinformatioanbouttheverysmallprobabilitieosfthefearedconsequences fromsuchhazards"(Slovicetal.,2002).Thesamepointexplainswhyactsofterroriscman createfearthatgreatlyoutruntshediscountedprobabilitoyfharm. 
OfcoursethephenomenoonfprobabilitnyeglecthasitslimitationMs.anypeopleattend toissuesofprobabiliteyvenwhenemotionasrerunninhgighT.hereisconsiderablheeterogeneityinthedata,withnumeroussubjectsattendintgoprobabiliteyvenwhentheharmis describe dingraphictermsI.tisunclearif"debiasing"ispossible(see SandmanW,einstein, andHallman,1998,forsuggestivdeiscussion)I.fpeoplearemadealerttoprobabilitnyeglect,willtheybe lesslikelytoneglectprobabilityIn?anycase markeptressureasrelikely todiminishtheextenotfprobabilitnyeglectI.fthecostsofneglectinpgrobabilitayreplaced "onscreen,t"henpeoplewillbemorelikelytoattendtothequestionofprobabilit(yMargolis, 1993).Inthislightitisbothmildlycounterintuitainvedquitereasonablef,orexamplet,opredictthatpeoplewouldbe willingtopayless,intermosfdollarsandwaitingtimet,oreduce low-probabilitryisksofa terroriasttackonanairlineiftheyarefrequenttravellerTs.hose whotraveilnfrequentslhyouldbe willingtopaymore,simplybecausetheywillfacelower costs.A preliminarsytudyfindesxactlythiseffec(tHarringto2n0,02).Myprincipasluggestionisthatbothprivatbeehaviorandthedemandfora legalresponsewillbemoreimpervious tovariationisnprobabilittyhanthestandardtheorywillpredictT.he departurferomthe normativteheoryshouldbe seen,toa greaterorlesserdegree,intheresponsesofpublic officialss,omeofwhomuseprobabilitnyeglectstrategicaltlyopromotteheirowninterests. Ifprobabilitnyeglectcharacterizeinsdividuajludgmenutndercertaincircumstancegs,overnmenatndlaw arelikelytobe neglectinpgrobabilituynderthosesamecircumstances. Ifpeopleshowunusuallystrongreactionsto low-probabilitcyatastrophesa,democratic governme nistlikelytoactaccordingly. 
ConsidertheproblemofprobabilitnyeglectoutsideofthecontextofterrorismIn. the environmentaarlea,therehasbeenanintensedebateaboutwhethetrheNationalEnvironmentaPlolicyActrequiresagenciestodiscusstheworst-cassecenarioin environmental impactstatementEsn.vironmentgarloupsoughttoensurediscussionofthatscenarioT.hey didso inparttostimulatpeublicconcernw,iththeknowledgethattheworstcase might wellhavea greatdealofsalience,evenifitis highlyunlikelyF.oritspart,thegovernment originallryequireddiscussionoftheworstcase,butchangedinitsmind,withtheapparent understandinthgatpeoplearetoolikelytooverreactH. encethecurrenatpproachu,pheld bytheSupremeCourt,6requiresconsideratioonflow-probabiliteyventsb,utonlyifthey arenotentirelryemoteandspeculative. 
At firsgtlancethecurrenatpproacha,ndtheSupremeCourt'sdecision,seementirely reasonableI.fthereis onlya minisculechancethattheworstcase willcometofruitio nit, neednotbe discussedinenvironmentiaml pactstatementfs,ortheprincipaelffectofthe discussionwouldbe toactivatefearw,hichis byhypothesiusnwarrantebdythefactsB.ut theriesanimportanqutalificatioWn.hileprobabilitnyeglectmakesworst-casaenalysiseasy tocriticizes,uchanalysismightbe defendedifregulatorasreoperatingunderconditions ofuncertaintryatherthanrisk.Underconditionosf uncertaintpyr,obabilitiecsannotbe assignedatall,andinsuchcasesitis reasonabletofollowthemaximinprinciple(choose theoptionthathastheleast-badworstoutcomes;ee Elster,1983).Ifwe aredealingwith uncertainrtyathetrhanrisk,worst-casaenalysiscanbedefendedonthesestandargdrounds, simplybecauseit identifietsheapproachthatshouldbe favoredby thoseapplyingthe maximinprincipleW.hatI am suggestingis thatin thecontextof terroris mand other emotionalllyadenhazardsp,eopleneglectprobabiliteyvenwhentheevidencesuggesttshat itis quitelow(Rothchild2,001). 
A gooddealoflegislationandregulatiocnanbe explainedpartlybyreferencteoprobabilityneglectwhenemotionasrerunninhgigh.Considera fewexamples: • Intheaftermatohfnewsreporatboutemotionallgyrippinagdversehealtheffectasllegedly causedbyabandonedhazardouswasteinLoveCanal,thegovernmenrtespondedwithan aggressivperogramforcleaningupabandonedhazardouwsastecites,withouetxamining theprobabilittyhatillnesswouldactuallyoccur.Infactlittlewasaccomplishedbyearly efforttso assurepeopleof thelow probabilityof harm(Kuranand Sunstein,1999). Whenthelocalhealthdepartmenptublicizedcontrolledstudiesshowinglittleevidence ofadverseeffectst,hepublicitydidnotdampenconcernb, ecausethenumber"shadno meaning"(Gibbs,1998).In factthenumberseemedtoaggravatfeear:"One woman, divorcedandwiththreesickchildrenl,ookedat thepiece ofpaperwithnumberasnd startedcryinghysterically'N: o wondermychildrenaresick.AmI goingtodie?What's " goingtohappentomychildren?'(id.).Questionosfthissortcontributteodtheenactment ofnewlegislationtocontroalbandonedhazardouswastesites,legislationthatdidnot embodycarefuclonsideratioonftheprobabilitoyfsignificanhtealthorenvironmental benefit(sKuranandSunstein1,999).Evennow,lawandpolicyareaffectebdyinterest grouppressureasndpublicalarm;thegovernmendtoesnottakeenoughaccountofthe probabilityof significanhtarmin makingclean-updecisions(Hamiltonand Viscusi, 1998). • Duringa highlypublicizedcampaigndesignedto showa connectionbetweenAlar,a pesticidea,ndcancerinchildrent,hepublicdemandforactionwasnotmuchaffectebdy theEPA'scautionarnyotesaboutthelowprobabilitoyfgettintghatdisease(Wildavsky, 1995). The mereidea thatchildrenmightdie,as a resultof appleconsumptionh,ad a significanetffecton behaviorw,ithprobabilistiicnformatiosneemingnotto reduce people'sfears. • Inthefallof2001,vividimagesofsharkattackscreateda publicoutcryaboutnewrisks foroceanswimmersT.hiswas so notwithstanditnhgeexceedinglylowprobabilitoyfa sharkattacka,ndtheabsenceofanyreliableevidenceofan increaseinsharkattacksin • Fora varietyofreasonsj,urybehavioris notlikelytobe greatlyaffectebdyassurance thattheriskwas unlikelytocometofruitionev,eniftheissueofprobabilitiys legally relevan(tFosterB,ernsteina,ndHuber,1993).Incasesinvolvinlgow-probabilirtiysksof emotionallgyrippinhgarmsi,tshouldbe relativeleyasytoconvincejurorstoofferhigh damageawardsL.itigatortsherefordeowelltotrytoengagejurors'emotionbsypointing totheworstcase.Thereisa strongimplicatiohnereforthelawofnegligenceE:venifthe lawasksthejurytobalancethebenefitosfthedefendanta'sctionagainstthecosts,the juryislikelytodisregartdheissueofprobabilitiyfitsattentioinsfocussedonanoutcome thattriggersstrongemotion(sid.).Alongthesamelines,anunderstandinofgprobability neglecthelpsexplainthefindingin,bothexperimentaanl dreal-worldsettingst,hatjuries do notrespondfavorabltyoa demonstratiotnhatthedefendanpterformeadcost-benefit analysisbeforeproceedinge,veniftheanalysisplacesa highvalueonhumanlife(Viscusi, 2000).Thereasonis thatjurorswillbe focussingonthebadnessoftheoutcomen,otthe low(ex ante)probabilittyhatitwouldhaveoccurred. 
Withrespecttoterroris mco,nsiderinparticulatrheanthrasxcareofOctober2,001,which wasbasedonexceedinglyfewincidentsO.nlyfourpeoplediedoftheinfectiono;nlyabout a dozenothersfellill. The probabilitoyfbeinginfectedwas exceedingl ylow.Nonetheless,fearproliferatewd,ithpeoplefocussingtheirattentioonntheoutcomerathetrhanthe low probabilitoyf theharm.The governmenrtespondedaccordinglyin,vestingmassive resourceisnensuringagainstanthraxinfectionPs.rivateinstitutionresactedthesameway, weretinyT.o saythisis nottosuggestthatextensivperecautionwsereclearlyunjustified inthiscase.Privateandpublicinstitutionfascedanunknownprobabilitoyfa majorhealth problemB.utitis hardtodenythatthepublicfearwas disproportionattoeitscause,and thatthelevelofresponsewasdisproportionattoeo.Theextraordinaryippleeffectasttest totheintensitoyfthatfear.In thecontextoftheterrorisattacksofSeptember11,2001, ofcourse,publicfearledtoprivateandpubliccoststhatwereordersofmagnitudheigher thanthecostsof theattacksthemselve(sSunstein2,002a), and thatare bestexplained inpartbyreferencteo probabilitnyeglectT.he samemightbe said abouttheextraordinarypublicfearproducedbythesniperattacksin theWashingtonD,.C. areain October 2002; theextentofthefearis hardto understanwdithoutan appreciationofprobability neglect. 
Forlaw andpolicy,thehardestquestionsmightwellbe prescriptivaendnormativoenes: How shouldlaw and governmenrtespondto a quasi-rationaplublicpanic,based on an intenseemotionarleactionto a low-probabilitryiskof terrroriasttack?Let us assume, realisticalliyfperhapsoptimisticalltyh,atfortheforeseeablfeuturet,heriskwillbe quite low,farlowera,s a statisticaml attert,hanrisksthatpeoplewillinglyacceptinmanydomains (Rothschild2,001). 
Whenpeoplearegreatlyalarmedabouta low-probabilithyazard,cangovernmenotfficialseffectivelpyrovideassuranceanddampenconcern?Thisis farfromclear.Theonly clearpointis thatgovernmenist unlikelyto be entirelysuccessfuilfit simplyemphasizesthelowprobabilittyhattheriskwilloccur.Ifofficialwsanttoreducefear,thebest approachmaywellbe simple:Alterthepublic'sfocus.I havenotedthatdiscussionsof low-probabilitryiskstendto heightenpublicconcerne,venifthosediscussionsconsist largelyofreassuranceP.erhapsthemosteffectivweayofreducingfearofa low-probability riskis simplytodiscusssomethineglse andtolettimedo therest.(Recallinthisregard PresidenBtush'seffortin,theaftermatohftheterrorisattacksof9/11,nottoemphasize thatthestatisticarliskswerelow,buttotreatflyinags a kindofpatriotiacct,onethatwould preventterroristfsromobtainingvictory.O) fcourse,mediaattentiocnan undermintehis approach. 
Withrespecttoregulatorpyolicyi,nstitutionsaalfeguardmsightwellbe thebestwayof ensurinaggainsttheharmfuclonsequenceosfprobabilitnyeglectT. heOfficoefInformation andRegulatoryAffairsw,ithintheOfficeofManagemenatndBudget,monitorasgency actionto ensurethatit is directedagainstsignificanptroblemsA. generalrequirement ofcost-benefbitalancingshouldprovidea checkon regulationtshatcannotbe grounded inobjectivefac-t andalso as an impetustopreventativmeeasuresthatthepublicmight notseek.Ifgovernmenwtantstoprotecittselfagainsthysteriaa,nalyticrequiremenatnsd institutioncahleckswillprovidea start(Sunstein2,002a). 
Nowturntonormativiessuesandsupposethatpeoplearegreatlyconcernedabouta risk thathasa smallorevenminisculeprobabilitoyfoccurrin-g anthraxinthemail,a sniper attackatgasstationso,rterrorisomnairplanesI.fgovernme nistconfidentthatitknowsthe factsa,ndifpeoplearefarmoreconcernedthanthefactswarrants,houldthegovernment respondv,ia regulationt,o theirconcerns?Or shoulditignorethem,on thegroundthat theconcernsareirrationalC?onsidertheindividuaalnalogyfirstE.venifpeople'sfearis itselfirrationailt,mightwellbe rationalforpeopleto takeaccountofthatfearin their behaviorI.f I am afraidto flyI, mightdeclinetodo so, on thegroundthatmyfearwill maketheexperiencqeuitedreadfu(lnotonlywhileflyinbgutwhileanticipatinigt).Atthe sametime,thefearitselfmightbe irrationaal,ndI mightevenrecognizethatfact.Ifthe fearexists,butifI cannoteliminateit,themostrationadlecisionmightbe notto flyI.n certainperiodsinthelastdecade,somepeoplehavedeclinedtotravetloIsrael,notbecause theybelievethattherisksare statisticalllyarge,butbecausetheyanticipatetheirown (lessthanrationala)nxietya,ndbecausetheyseek,rationallyto, avoidananxiety-pervaded experience. 
So tooatthesociallevel.Suppose,forexample,thatpeopleareafraidofexistin glevels ofarsenicindrinkinwgaterandthattheydemandstepstoensurethatarsenicingestionwill notbehazardousS.upposetoothattherisksfromexistinglevelsofarsenicareinfinitesmal. Is itso clearthatgovernmenshtouldrefusetodo whatpeoplewantittodo?Thefearisby hypothesirseal.Ifpeoplearefearfutlhattheirdrinkinwgateris "notsafe,"theyare,simply forthatreasonalone,experiencinagsignificanlotss.In manydomainsw,idespreadfearis notmerelya lossinitself(one forwhosereductionpeoplewouldbe willingtopay),but alsoleadstoanarrayofadditionaplroblemsI.nthecontexotfarsenici,tmightleadpeople tobuybottledwatere,veniftheresultisnottoproduceanyincreaseinsafetyIn.thecontext ofterrorismfe,aris likelytomakepeoplereluctanttoengageincertainactivitiess,uchas flyingon airplanesandappearingin publicplaces.Theresultincgostscan be extremely high.It is plausibleto suggestthatgovernmensthouldattemptto reducefearj,ustas it attempttsoproduceothergainstopeople'swell-being. 
Theobviousqualificatioins thatifgovernmenistabletoinformandeducatepeople,it shoulddo thatrathetrhanregulateT. o theextenthatinexpensivpeolicieshavesubstantial reassurancvealue,governmenshtouldadoptthosepolicies;itshouldnotimposecostlyregulatorycontrolsB.utwhetheirnformatioandeducationwillworkis anempiricaqluestion onwhichclearevidenceisabsente,speciallyinthepresenceofprobabilitnyeglectP. erhaps governmenwtillnot,in somecontextsb,e able toassurepeoplethattheprobabilitoyfa terrorisattackis verylowandoughtnottoaffectbehaviorI.finformatioandeducation do notwork,governmenshtouldrespondj,ustas individualdso,tofearsthatarenotfully rationalb,utrealandbyhypothesidsifficutltoeradicateR. ecallthatfearis a realsocialcost andthatitis likelytoleadtoothersocialcosts.If,forexamplep,eopleareafraidtoflyt,he economywillsuffeirnmultiplweays;so tooifpeopleareafraidtosendortoreceivemail. Thereductionofevenbaselessfearis a socialgood. 
Even ifitis clearthatgovernmensthouldrespondm,anyquestionsremainH.ow and howmuchshouldgovernmenrtespond?The answermustdependon theextentandcost of thefearand theeffectand cost of theresponse.If peopleare extremelyfearfula, substantiarlesponseis ofcourseeasiertojustifyi;fthecostofan effectivreesponseis veryhigh,a refusalto respondmightwell makesense.Withthispoint,theanalysisof appropriataectionbecomessimilarto theanalysisofrisksin manyothersettingsW.e need to knowhow muchgood,and how muchharm,wouldbe doneby theactionin questionA. specialdifficulthyereconsistsin theproblemofquantifyinagndmonetizing fearanditsconsequencesa, problemthathasyettobe seriouslyengagedintherelevant literature. In thisEssay,mycentralclaimhas beenthattheprobabilityofharmwillbe neglected whenpeople'semotionasreactivatedP.robabilitnyeglectisespeciallylikelyinthecontext ofterroris mIf.a terrorisattackis easyto visualize,large-scalechangesin thoughatnd behavioarretobeexpectede,venifthestatisticraliskislowerthanthatassociatedwithmany activitietshatdonotproducepublicconcernT. hepointhelpsexplainpublicoverreactiotno highlypublicizedl,ow-probabilirtiysksi,ncludintghoseposedbysniperattacksa,bandoned hazardouswastedumpsa,ndanthrax. 
It followsthatifa privateor publicactoris seekingto producepublicattentiotno a neglecterdiski,tisbesttoprovidevivid,evenvisualimagesoftheworsthatmighhtappen. Italso followsthatgovernmenrtegulationa,ffecteads itis bythepublicdemandforlaw, is likelytoneglectprobabilittyoo.Atfirsgtlance,thegovernmensthouldnotcapitulatief thepublicis demonstratinpgrobabilitnyeglectandshowingan excessiveresponsetothe riskofterrorismTh.ebestresponseis informatioandeducationB.utpublicfearis itself a problemandsometimeas quiteseriousone.Ifthatfearcannotbe alleviatedwithourtisk Appendix Thefollowinpgrovidestheexperimentmalaterialfsorthestudydescribedinpart2.3. 
Assumethatyoulivein an areawhosedrinkinwgatercontains50 partsperbillionof arsenicA.ssumealsothatatthislevelofarsenic,1 in 100,000peoplewhodrinkthiswater overa periodof yearswilldie of cancer.The EnvironmentParlotectionis considering whethetroreducethepermissiblleevelofarsenicindrinkinwgaterfrom50 to5 partsper billionw,hichwouldessentiallyeliminattehecancerrisk.Whatis themostthatyouwould be willingtopay,inincreasesinannualwaterbills,forthisreduction? (1) 0 (2) $25 (3) $50 (4) $100 (5) $200 (6) $400 (7) $800ormore 
Assumethatyoulivein an areawhosedrinkinwgatercontains50 partsperbillionof arsenic.Assumealso thatat thislevelofarsenic,1 in 1,000,000peoplewhodrinkthis waterovera periodofyearswilldieofcancerT.heEnvironmentParlotectioinsconsidering whethetroreducethepermissiblleevelofarsenicindrinkinwgaterfrom50 to5 partsper billion,whichwouldessentiallyeliminattehecancerrisk.Whatisthemostthatyouwould be willingtopay,inincreasesinannualwaterbills,forthisreduction? (3) 0 (4) $25 (3) $50 (4) $100 (5) $200 (6) $400 (7) $800 ormore 
Assumethatyouliveinan areawhosedrinkinwgateris contaminatebdy50 partsper billionofarsenica, knowncarcinogenA. ssumealso thatthislevelofarsenicwillkill1 in 100,000peoplewhodrinkthiswaterovera periodofyears.Assumefinallythatthedeath fromarsenic-inducecdanceris verygruesomeand intenselypainfula,s thecancereats awayatinternaolrgansofthebody.TheEnvironmentParlotectioins considerinwghether toreducethepermissiblleevelofarsenicindrinkinwgaterfrom50 to5 partsperbillion, whichwouldessentiallyeliminatethecancerrisk.Whatis themostthatyouwouldbe willingtopay,inincreasesinannualwaterbills,forthisreduction? (5) 0 (6) $25 (3) $50 (4) $100 (5) $200 (6) $400 (7) $800 ormore 
Assumethatyou live in an area whosedrinkingwateris contaminatebdy 50 parts perbillionof arsenic,a knowncarcinogenA.ssumealso thatthislevelof arsenicwill kill 1 in 1,000,000peoplewhodrinkthiswaterovera periodofyears.Assumefinally thatthedeathfromarsenic-inducecdanceris verygruesomeand intenselypainfula,s thecancereats away at internaolrgansof thebody.The EnvironmentParlotectionis consideringwhetherto reducethepermissiblelevelof arsenicin drinkingwaterfrom 50 to 5 partsper billion,whichwouldessentiallyeliminatethecancerrisk.Whatis themostthatyou wouldbe willingto pay,in increasesin annualwaterbills,forthis reduction? Acknowledgment I am gratefutloJonElsterE,ricPosner,RichardPosner,andW. Kip Viscusiforhelpful Notes RothschMild.(,2001)".TerroriasnmdYou- TheRealOdds,P"olicyMatterAsE, I-BrookiJnogisnCtentefror 
RegulatoSrtyudieasv,ailabaltehttp://www.aei-brookings.org/policy/page.php?id=19#top. RottenstrYei.acnhdC,.Hsee(.2001)".MoneKyi,ssesa,ndElectrSihcockOs:nthAeffectPivsyecholoogfRyisk," 
PsychologSiccaielnc1e2,185-190. 
SandmaPn.N,.D.WeinsteainndW,.KH.allma(n1.998)".CommunicatoiRonedsucReiskUnderestimaantdion 
OverestimatRioisnkD,"ecisioanndPolic3y,93-108. 
SandmaPn.,P.MilleBr,.Johnsoand,N.D.Weinste(i1n9.94)".AgencCyommunicaCtioomn,munOituytrage, andPeceptioofnRiskT: hreSeimulatiEoxnperimenRtiss,kA"nalys1i3s,589-602. 
SlovicP,.(2000)T. hePerceptoiofRniskL.ondonEa:rthscPaunblications. 
SlovicP,.,M.FinucanEe.,Peterasn,dD.MacGreg(o2r0.02)".TheAffeHcteuristiIcn.T".GilovicDh.,Griffin, andD.Kahnem(aends.)H, euristaincsdBiasesT: hePsycholoogfIyntuitJivuedgm,epnpt.397-420. SlovicP,.,J.Monahaann,dD. MacGreg(o2r0.00)".ViolenRceiskAssessmeantdRiskCommunicaTtihoen: EffeocftUsinAgctuaClasesP,rovidiInngstructiaonndEs,mployiPnrgobabilvits.yFrequenFcoyrmatLsa,w" andHumaBnehavi2or4,271-296. 
SunsteiCn.,(2002a)R. iskandReasonS:afetLya,wa,ndtheEnviron m.Ceanmt bridCgaem:bridUgneiversity 
Press. 
SunsteiCn.(,2002b").ProbabilNiteyglecEtm:otionWso,rsCtasesa,ndLaw,Y"aleLawJourn1a1l26,1-107. TverskAy.a,ndD.Kahnem(a1n9.74)".JudgmUenndteUrncertainHteyu:ristaincsdBiasesS,"cienc1e851,1241131. 
ViscusWi,.Kip(.2000)".CorporRatieskAnalysAisR:eckleAssct?S"tanfoLradwRevie5w2,547-597. WildavskAy.(1,995)B. utIsItTrueA?CitizenG'suidteoEnvironmeHnetaalltahndSafetIyssuesC.ambridge, MA:HarvarUdniversPitryess. 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 196 (2D SERIES) What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
Cass R. Sunstein 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
The Supreme Court’s decision in Lawrence v. Texas is best seen as a cousin to Griswold v. Connecticut, invalidating a ban on the use of contraception within marriage, and Reed v. Reed, invalidating a preference for men over women in the administration of estates. In both cases, the Court struck down an anachronistic law palpably out of step with existing public convictions. Lawrence should be understood in the same terms, as rooted in a distinctly American-style doctrine of desuetude. The central principle is that at least if certain interests are involved, criminal statutes may not be invoked against citizens when the underlying moral judgments have become anachronistic, as demonstrated by a pattern of nonenforcement. A key problem here is procedural; it involves an absence of fair notice and arbitrary exercise of discretion. This understanding of the decision has implications for the many imaginable constitutional challenges to other laws involving sex and sexual orientation. After Lawrence, states are certainly prohibited from banning fornication; they are almost certainly forbidden to ban use of sexual devices. Bans on prostitution, incest, and adultery stand on firmer grounds, though even here responsible challenges can be imagined. After Lawrence, the Constitution almost certainly forbids public discrimination against those who have engaged in homosexual conduct, at least outside of certain specialized contexts (most notably the military). The hardest cases involve the failure to recognize same-sex marriages. The ban on same-sex marriages cannot be said to be an anachronism, even though it is not easy, in principle, to reject the law struck down in Lawrence while permitting states to deny gays and lesbians the right to marry. One general lesson, underlined by Lawrence, is that political and social change is usually a precondition for changed interpretation of the Constitution. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Mary Anne Case, Carolyn Frantz, Richard A. Posner, Geoffrey Stone, and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments; special thanks to Case, Frantz, and Vermeule for discussions. I am also grateful to Sarah A. Sulkowski for superb research assistance. 
In 1900, Mr. Dooley famously said that “[n]o matter whether th’ constitution follows th’ flag or not, th’ supreme court follows th ‘ilection returns.”1 The Court doesn’t really do that. But members of the Supreme Court live in society, and they are inevitably influenced by what society appears to think.2 My principal suggestion here is that the Court’s remarkable decision in Lawrence v. Texas3 is best seen as a successor to Griswold v. Connecticut45: judicial invalidation of a law that had become hopelessly out of touch with existing social convictions. So understood, Lawrence, like Griswold, reflects an American variation on the old English idea of desuetude. Put too simply, the basic idea is that when constitutionally important interests are at stake, due process principles requiring fair notice, and banning arbitrary action, are violated when criminal prosecution is brought on the basis of moral judgments lacking public support, as exemplified by exceedingly rare enforcement activity.6 
In Griswold, it will be recalled, the Court invalidated a Connecticut law forbidding married people to use contraceptives—a law that was ludicrously inconsistent with public convictions in Connecticut and throughout the nation.7 Griswold was decided in the midst of a substantial national rethinking of issues of sex and morality. Whatever the outcome of that rethinking, it was clear, by 1965, that reasonable people would no longer support bans on the use of contraceptives within marriage. In this respect, Griswold was quite similar to Reed v. Reed.8 There the Court struck down an Idaho statute giving a preference to men over women in the administration of estates of decedents who had died intestate—a law that was unquestionably a holdover from views about sex roles that were widely regarded as obsolete. Reed was decided in the midst of a substantial rethinking of gender roles; whatever the outcome of that rethinking, it was clear, by 1971, that a flat presumption in favor of men over women in employment would no longer be acceptable in principle.9 Lawrence belongs in the same family. In the area of 
2 Robert Dahl made this argument nearly a half-century ago, before much of the work of the Warren Court. Notwithstanding the passage of decades, his argument stands up well. See Robert Dahl, Decision-Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as a National Policy-Maker, 6 Journal of Public Law 279 (1957). 3 123 S. Ct. 2472 (2003). 4 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 5 404 U.S. 71 (1971). 6 I specify this brief statement below. 7 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 8 404 U.S. 71 (1971). 9 The Court has shown special sensitivity to changing public convictions in the death penalty context. Furman v. Georgia, 408 US 238 (1972), invalidated certain capital sentences, in a complex set of opinions that seemed to presage the end of capital punishment in the United States. At least in retrospect, Furman is best seen as a kind of “remand” to state legislatures, asking for a new assessment of whether capital punishment was consistent with contemporary values. The result of the “remand” was a new affirmation of public support for capital punishment, to which the Court subsequently deferred, see Gregg v. Georgia, 428 US 153 (1976). In Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584 (1977), and Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782, 789-793 (1982), the Court relied heavily on contemporary practices in striking down death sentences for rape and for a defendant who did not take or intend to take life.More recently, the Court ruled that the Constitution forbids application to capital punishment to the mentally retarded, see Atkins v. Virginia, 536 US 304 (2002); in so ruling, the Court relied heavily on what it saw as changing social values. In a theme echoed in Lawrence, the Court wrote, A claim that punishment is excessive is judged not by the standards that prevailed in 1685 when Lord Jeffreys presided over the ‘Bloody Assizes’ or when the Bill of Rights was sexual orientation, America is in the midst of a civil rights revolution -- one that has moved, in an extraordinarily short time, toward delegitimating prejudice against and hatred for homosexuals. Lawrence was made possible by that revolution, of which it is now a part. 
In making this argument, my principal goal is not to evaluate Lawrence, but instead to obtain an understanding of its scope and of its relationship to other apparently dramatic decisions in the Court’s past. But even if my argument is correct, it must be acknowledged that the Court’s remarkably opaque opinion has three principal strands.10 Each of those strands supports a different understanding of the Court’s holding and the principle that supports it. prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it intrudes on private sexual conduct that does not harm third parties. On this view, the Court has endorsed a quite general principle: Without a compelling justification, the state cannot interfere with consensual sexual behavior, at least if that behavior is noncommercial. On this view, consensual sexual behavior counts as a fundamental right for purposes of the due process clause. The state is forbidden to intrude into the domain of consensual sexual behavior unless it can show that its intrusion is the least restrictive means of achieving a compelling state interest—a showing that will be impossible to make, at least most of the time. Court to have held, not that sexual behavior counts as a fundamental right requiring compelling justification, but that the criminal prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it is not supported by a legitimate state interest. The principle here is that the government cannot interfere with consensual sexual behavior if it is attempting to do so for only moral reasons, unaccompanied by a risk of actual harm. The implications of this reading are not so different from those of the first; both are Millian in nature.11 But the two readings are nonetheless different, because the second depends not on the fundamental nature of the right to engage in sexual activity, but instead on the absence of even plausibly legitimate grounds for interfering with that right in the context of consensual sodomy. On this reading, adopted, but rather by those that currently prevail.” Id. at 311. In a key passage, the Court suggested: “It is not so much the number of these States [abolishing the death penalty for the mentally retarded] that is significant, but the consistency of the direction of change. Given the well-known fact that anticrime legislation is far more popular than legislation providing protections for persons guilty of violent crime, the large number of States prohibiting the execution of mentally retarded persons (and the complete absence of States passing legislation reinstating the power to conduct such executions) provides powerful evidence that today our society views mentally retarded offenders as categorically less culpable than the average criminal.” Id. at 315. Note also that the Court emphasized that even in states that authorized the death penalty to those with mental retardation, few were actually willing to impose that punishment, an idea with clear links to the rationale in Lawrence. 10 In this respect, the decision is akin to Plyler v. Doe, 457 US 202 (1982), in which the Court struck down a law requiring children of illegal aliens to pay for public education; there too the Court’s opinion was an amalgam of considerations, without a clear doctrinal foundation. 11 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (Currin V. Shields ed., Liberal Arts Press 1956) (1859). Lawrence is rooted in a form of “rational basis” review, one that dooms a great deal of legislation. 
Desuetude, American-style. A narrower reading of Lawrence, my emphasis here, would take the following form: The criminal prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it intrudes on private sexual conduct without having a strong or even legitimate moral grounding in existing public commitments. If this is the Court’s holding, it is undergirded by a more general principle: Without a strong justification, the state cannot bring the criminal law to bear on consensual sexual behavior if enforcement of the relevant law can no longer claim to have strong moral support in the enforcing state or the nation as a whole. This aspect of the opinion is rooted in the old idea of desuetude. It suggests that, at least in some circumstances, involving certain kinds of interests, a criminal law cannot be enforced if it has lost public support. 
It should be clear that while all three principles are potentially broad, the first and the second are the most far-reaching. And there is actually a fourth understanding of the opinion, one that cannot be characterized as the Court’s holding, but one that is perhaps a subtext: and lesbians and thus offend the Constitution’s equality principle. The underlying principle is that as a general rule, there is no legitimate basis for treating homosexuals differently than heterosexuals. On this view, Lawrence is really a case about the social subordination of gays and lesbians, whatever the rhetoric about sexual freedom in general. Lawrence’s words sound in due process, but much of its music involves equal protection. 
Each of the four ideas can be found in Lawrence, a claim that I hope to establish here. But I want to draw special attention to the third, which is, I believe, central to the Court’s own analysis, and a key to the development of substantive due process over the past decades. In fact something like a desuetude principle is part and parcel of the Lawrence Court’s treatment of the state’s interest, showing why that interest counts as illegitimate, and also of the Court’s explanation of why the case cannot be distinguished from Griswold and its successors. When the Court asserts the absence of a “legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of an individual,”12 it is best understood to be saying that the moral claim that underlies the intrusion has become hopelessly anachronistic. And the anachronistic nature of that moral claim has everything to do with the Court’s rejection, not of moral claims in general, but of the particular moral claim that underlies criminal prohibitions on same-sex sodomy. 
Lawrence might be read broadly as an effort to enact some version of John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty13, requiring respect for individual choices (at least with respect to sex) unless there is some kind of harm to others. But it is reasonable to understand the Court’s 12 123 S. Ct. at 2484. 13 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (Currin V. Shields ed., Liberal Arts Press 1956) (1859). decision more narrowly, as a ruling that forbids invocation of generally unenforced criminal law on the basis of a moral justification that has become anachronistic -- at least when a constitutionally important interest is involved and when the absence of significant enforcement activity can be explained only by reference to the anachronistic nature of the relevant moral justification. This reading also helps clarify what made the decision possible and its future fate. If I am correct, Lawrence was possible not because the Court reached, all on its own, an ambitious and novel view of the nature of constitutional liberty, or because it attempted to read a controversial view of autonomy into the due process clause. The decision was possible only because of the ludicrously poor fit between the sodomy prohibition and the society in which the justices live. And if I am correct, Lawrence will have broad implications only if and to the extent that those broad implications receive general public support. For example, the Supreme Court may or may not read Lawrence to require state to recognize gay and lesbian marriages. But if it does so, it will be following public opinion, not leading it. Political and social change was a precondition for Lawrence, whose future reach will depend on the nature and extent of that change. 
While I will spend most of my time on the Court’s due process ruling, my own view is that the proper course in Lawrence was sketched by Justice O’Connor in her concurring opinion.14 Rather than invalidating the Texas statute on grounds of substantive due process, the Court should have invoked the equal protection clause to strike down, as irrational, the state’s decision to ban homosexual sodomy but not heterosexual sodomy. This approach would have been more cautious than the Court’s own. It would have had the large advantage of making it unnecessary to overrule any precedent.15 At the same time, an equal protection ruling would have recognized the fact, established by the Court’s opinions, that the equal protection clause does not build on longstanding traditions, but instead rejects them insofar as they attempt to devalue or humiliate certain social groups.16 The problem in Lawrence is not adequately understood without reference to the social subordination of gays and lesbians, not least through the use of the criminal law. Hence Justice O’Connor’s approach suggests, lightly to be sure, the plausibility of rationale (4) above, a rationale that seems to me essentially correct. And if states are required to punish heterosexual sodomy if they are attempting to punish homosexual sodomy, I believe that it is quite implausible to think that any form of sodomy would be subject to criminal prosecution; political safeguards are far too strong to permit significant numbers of arrests and prosecutions of heterosexuals for engaging in conduct that is quite widespread. 14 123 S. Ct. at 2485 (O’Connor, J., concurring). 15 I do not engage here the debate over whether principles of stare decisis required the Court to refuse to overrule Bowers v. Hardwick. My only suggestion is that the Court should not have overruled that decision when it was unnecessary to do so in order to decide Lawrence. A possible objection to the equal protection approach, one that I also cannot engage here, is that this approach is actually broader than that taken by the majority, above all because it would seem to require states to recognize same-sex marriages. It is true that an equal protection ruling would raise questions about bans on such marriages. But as we shall see, a due process ruling has the same effect. 16 See, e.g., City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432 (1985); Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996). 
For all these reasons, invalidation on equal protection grounds would have been preferable to the substantive due process route. But if the due process clause is to be invoked, the idea of desuetude provides a method for understanding, disciplining, and narrowing what the Court did. This reading of Lawrence prevents the opinion from being a simple invocation of “liberty”; it also helps explain what made the Lawrence decision possible from a generally conservative Supreme Court. Best of all, it has considerable independent appeal.17 
This Article comes in four parts. The first explores the Court’s dilemma in Lawrence—the state of pre-Lawrence law, the available options, and the difficulties with those options. The second discusses Lawrence itself, emphasizing the various strands to which I have referred. The third discusses possible readings of the decision and tries to unpack them. Here I draw attention to the more narrow reading of the opinion, suggesting that if understood in a way that emphasizes the anachronistic and almost never enforced nature of the Texas statute, the Lawrence decision can claim a strong foundation in both democratic values and the rule of law. The fourth explores the implications of the Lawrence decision for constitutional attacks on laws regulating sexual relationships, constitutional attacks on government discrimination against gays and lesbians, and constitutional attacks on laws refusing to recognize same-sex marriages. 
The facts of Lawrence were exceedingly simple. Police officers in Houston, Texas responded to a private report of a weapons disturbance in a private residence. They entered the residence, owned by John Geddes Lawrence. On entering, they did not see any weapons. But they did see Lawrence, engaging in a sexual act with Tyron Garner. Lawrence and Garner were arrested, held in custody, and convicted of the crime of “deviate sexual intercourse, namely anal sex, with a member of the same sex (man).”18 They were each fined $200.19 Deviate sexual intercourse is defined to include “any contact between any part of the genitals of one person and the mouth or anus of another person” or “the penetration of the genitals or the anus of another person with an object.”20 The Texas law was challenged on equal protection and due process grounds.21 
The Lawrence Court had three options. It could have invalidated the Texas statute on equal protection grounds. It could have invalidated that law on due process grounds. Or it could have upheld the law against both challenges. As we will see, the Court faced a serious difficulty in Lawrence: a majority believed, in my view correctly, that the Texas statute had to be invalidated -- but any rationale for invalidation would inevitably raise serious doubts about practices, including the ban on same-sex marriages, that the majority did not want to question. For the majority, a central problem was to develop a rationale 17 See Guido Calabresi, Foreword: Antidiscrimination and Constitutional Accountability (What the BorkBrennan Debate Ignores), 105 Harv. L. 80 (1991); Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). 18 123 S. Ct. at 2475-76. 19 41 S.W.3d at 349. 20 Id. at 2476 (citing Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 21.01(1)). 21 Id. that would strike down the Texas statute without producing an unintended revolution in the law. Let us investigate the Court’s options in light of preexisting law. A. Equal Protection 
strike down the Texas law under decisions calling for “heightened scrutiny” of laws that discriminate against traditionally disadvantaged groups. The paradigm examples of such groups are, of course, African-Americans and women.22 Perhaps laws discriminating against gays and lesbians should be subject to similarly skeptical judicial scrutiny.23 To say the least, the Court has not laid down a clear test for deciding when such scrutiny will be applied; instead it has pointed to a series of considerations, including a history of discrimination, a circumstance of immutability, and political powerlessness.24 Probably the best way of making sense of the doctrine is to say that heightened scrutiny is applied when the relevant discrimination is peculiarly likely to reflect prejudice and hostility rather than legitimate interests. In the context of race, for example, the problem is not that skin color is immutable, but that discrimination against African-Americans is usually based on illicit considerations; heightened scrutiny is a way of testing whether other, public-spirited justifications can actually be brought forward in defense of the relevant law. Discrimination against homosexuals can be understood in analogous terms. Suppose, for example, that a school forbids homosexuals from becoming teachers,25 or that a police department refuses to hire gays them.26 If heightened scrutiny were applied, a ban on same-sex sodomy would be extremely difficult to defend. 
As a matter of precedent, the problem is that the Court has never suggested that gays and lesbians are entitled to heightened scrutiny. In fact it has been extremely reluctant to expand the class of groups so entitled—ruling, for example, that rational basis review applies to discrimination against handicapped people27 and elderly people.28 These are not decisive problems, to be sure; a ruling that required heightened scrutiny is not foreclosed by existing decisions. But such a ruling would certainly be an innovation. 
An alternative route to heightened scrutiny would be to contend that discrimination against homosexuals is a kind of discrimination on the basis of sex.29 Here it might be suggested that if a law punishes same-sex sodomy, it is punishing people who would not be punished if their gender were different. But this view raises a number of 22 See, e.g., United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515 (1996); Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967). 23 See David Richards, Sexual Preference as a Suspect (Religious) Classification, 55 Ohio St. L.J. 491 (1994); Cass R. Sunstein, Homosexuality and the Constitution, 70 Ind. L.J. 1, 8 (1994). 24 See, e.g., Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 US 677 (1973) (plurality opinion). 25 Glover v. Williamsburg Local School District Board of Education, 20 F.Supp.2d 1160 (U.S. District Court, S.D.Ohio, 1998). 26 See, e.g., Childers v. Dallas Police Department, 513 F.Supp. 134 (U.S. District Court, N.D. Texas, 1981) 27 City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 432 (1985). 28 Massachusetts v. Murgia, 427 U.S. 307 (1981). 29 See Andrew Koppelman, Why Discrimination Against Lesbians and Gay Men Is Sex Discrimination, 69 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 197 (1994). complexities.30 It would also seem to have broad implications, essentially treating all discrimination against gays and lesbians as indistinguishable from, because literally identical to, discrimination against women.31 
always upheld under the equal protection clause.32 But three cases provided a plausible backdrop for the plaintiffs’ challenge in Lawrence. Taken together, the three cases suggest that a bare “desire to harm a politically unpopular group”33 is constitutionally unacceptable. Texas’ prohibition of homosexual sodomy, not affecting heterosexual sodomy, could be challenged as reflecting such a bare desire. 
The problem in United States Department of Agriculture v. Moreno arose from Congress’ decision to exclude from the food stamp program any household containing an individual who was unrelated to any other member of the household. 34 Thus the statute required that any household receiving food stamps must consist solely of “related” individuals.35 The Court invalidated the statute. The Court noted that the legislative history suggested a congressional desire to exclude "hippies" and "hippie communes."36 To this the Court said: "[I]f the constitutional conception of 'equal protection of the laws' means anything, it must at the very least mean that a bare congressional desire to harm a politically unpopular group cannot constitute a legitimate governmental interest . . . ."37 This idea was extended in the Cleburne case, in which the plaintiffs challenged a city’s denial of a special use permit for the operation of a group home for the mentally retarded.38 Applying rational basis review, the Court admonished that "mere negative attitudes, or fear, unsubstantiated by factors which are properly cognizable in a zoning proceeding, are not permissible bases for"39 unequal treatment. Thus the Court concluded that the discriminatory action under review was based "on an irrational prejudice."40 And in Romer v. Evans, the Court struck down a Colorado law forbidding localities from including gays and lesbians within the protection of laws prohibiting discrimination.41 The Court held that the law violated rational basis review because it was based not on a legitimate public purpose but on a form of “animus”—with the apparent suggestion that statutes rooted in “animus” represent core offenses of the equal protection guarantee. The Court said that the law stands (and falls) as "a status-based classification of persons undertaken for its own sake."42 
An equal protection ruling in Lawrence, based on these cases, would have had a great deal of appeal. It would have made it unnecessary for the Court to reconsider Bowers v. Hardwick43. It would have built carefully on Romer v. Evans. In these ways, such a ruling would have been narrow, converting the Moreno-Cleburne-Romer trilogy into the Moreno-Cleburne-Romer-Lawrence quartet. On the other hand, it is not clear that such a ruling would have had more limited consequences than a due process ruling. An invalidation of the line between homosexual and heterosexual sodomy would have raised questions about a host of other discriminatory practices. Is the state permitted not to recognize gay marriages? To discriminate against homosexuals in its employment practices? If the Court wanted to cabin the reach of its ruling, and not to create anything like a revolution in the law, these were important (and difficult) questions to answer. 
The modern story of substantive due process begins in 1965, when the Court invalidated a Connecticut law forbidding the use of contraceptives by married people.44 After that decision, the Court decided a set of cases protecting certain decisions involving sex, reproduction, the family, and other areas that appeared to be intimate and private.45 The cases turned out to be quite unruly, and there was no clear line between what was protected and what was not.46 
A possible view would be that since Bowers, or at least since Washington v. Glucksberg,47 the Court has said something like this: “Thus far, but no further!” Since 1985, the Court has been extremely reluctant to use the idea of substantive due process to strike down legislation, and before Lawrence, the Court seemed unwilling to add to the list even if the logic of the prior cases suggested that it ought to do so.48 On this view, the Court’s refusal to overrule Roe v. Wade49 reflects not approval of that decision, and much less a willingness to extend its logic, but a kind of temporal dividing line between permissible and prohibited uses of substantive due process.50 In other words, the continuing validity of Roe suggests not that the Court will try to follow the logic of the privacy cases, but that the Court will refuse to overrule its precedents while also failing to build on their logic. 
If we sought to bring more principled order to the Court’s decisions, we might invoke the Court’s own words and insist that any asserted right must have a strong foundation in Anglo-American traditions. This was the limiting principle invoked in both Bowers and Glucksberg. In Bowers, the Court, quoting Justice Powell, emphasized the 43 478 U.S. 186 (1986) (holding that there is no fundamental right to engage in homosexual sodomy). 44 Griswold, 381 U.S. 479. 45 See, e.g., Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 438 (1972); Carey v. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 678 (1977); Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). 46 For a general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Right to Die, 106 Yale L.J. 1123 (1997) 47 521 U.S. 702 (1997) (holding that there is no fundamental right to assistance in committing suicide). 48 The most obvious example here is Glucksberg, id. 49 410 U.S. 113. 50 See Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992) (upholding some state restrictions on abortion). need to ask whether the relevant liberties “are ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition.’”51 In Glucksberg, the Court said that “the development of this Court’s substantive-due-process jurisprudence . . . has been…carefully refined by concrete examples involving fundamental rights found to be deeply rooted in our legal tradition.”52 The Court stressed that this historical test tended “to rein in the subjective elements”53 and to avoid “the need for complex balancing of competing interests in every case.”54 The historical approach might have the advantage of disciplining judicial discretion, but it has the disadvantage of fitting extremely poorly with some of the cases. It is not at all clear, for example, that the right to choose abortion has a strong foundation in tradition. Nonetheless, it would hardly be implausible, before Lawrence v. Texas, to argue that henceforth, the line between protected and unprotected interests would turn largely on history. 
The heart of the Court’s opinion in Lawrence began with a dramatic reading of precedent, stating, for the first time in the Court’s history, that the Constitution recognizes a right to make sexual choices free from state control. Putting Griswold together with Eisenstadt, the Court said that “the right to make certain decisions regarding sexual conduct extends beyond the marital relationship.”55 Taken by itself, this statement equivocates between two readings: the state may not punish sexual activity through the particular means of the threatening unwanted pregnancy56; or the state may not punish sexual activity at all. But the Court clearly endorsed the broader reading. In speaking of homosexual activity in particular, the Court said that the government was seeking “to control a personal relationship that, whether or not entitled to formal recognition in the law, is within the liberty of persons to choose without being punished as criminals.”57 Thus the Court suggested that the state could not intrude on sexual liberty “absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution the law protects.”58 Here, then, is the foundation for a reading of Lawrence as rooted in a general principle of sexual autonomy. 51 478 U.S. at 194. 52 521 U.S. at 722. 53 Id. 54 Id. 55 123 S. Ct. at 2477. 56 Thus it would have been possible to read the contraception cases as holding, not that the state may not punish consensual sexual activity, but that it cannot do so through the indirect and discriminatory means of threatening childbirth. The early privacy cases did not involve bans on sexual activity; instead they involved efforts to control such activity by prohibiting the use of contraception. A narrow reading of the cases would suggest that there is no right to immunity from state regulation of sex, but instead a right not to be subject to regulation through the indirect method of risking unwanted pregnancy. See Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy (2002). 57 123 S. Ct. at 2478. 58 Id. 
The Court then turned from its precedents to an investigation of the suggestion in Bowers that prohibitions on same-sex sodomy “have ancient roots.”59 Rejecting that conclusion, the Court emphasized the complexity of American traditions on this count. In a lengthy discussion, the Court undermined the suggestion that there has been an unbroken path of hostility to same-sex sodomy. But the Court freely conceded that there is no history of accepting that practice; it did not contend that traditions affirmatively support a constitutional right to sexual freedom in that domain. On the contrary, and in a dramatic departure from both Bowers and Glucksberg, the Court said that longstanding traditions were not decisive. What were important were current convictions, not old ones. “[W]e think that our laws and traditions in the past half century are of most relevance here.”60 Hence the Court stressed an “emerging recognition that liberty gives substantial protection to adult persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives in matters pertaining to sex.”61 
The emerging recognition could be seen in many places. First, the Model Penal Code did not endorse criminal penalties on consensual sexual activities conducted in private; and several states specifically changed their laws in response to the Model Penal Code.62 Second, fewer than half the states (24) outlawed sodomy even in 1986, and the statutory prohibition went largely unenforced even in those states.63 Third, the practices of Western nations were increasingly opposed to the criminal punishment of homosexual conduct. Britain repealed its law forbidding homosexual conduct in 1967,64 and the European Court of Human Rights concluded that laws banning consensual homosexual conduct are invalid under the European Convention on Human Rights.65 Fourth, only thirteen states now forbid such conduct, and of these just four have laws that discriminate only against homosexual conduct.66 “In those states where sodomy is still proscribed, whether for same-sex or heterosexual conduct, there is a pattern of nonenforcement with respect to consenting adults acting in private.”67 
The Court added that it had issued two decisions casting the holding of Hardwick “into even more doubt.”68 In Casey, the Court had reaffirmed not only Roe but also its commitment to substantive due process, emphasizing “that our laws and traditions afford constitutional protection to personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships, child rearing, and education.”69 Thus the Court read Casey as an endorsement of the ideas underlying Roe, and not simply as a refusal to reject a decision on which the nation had come to rely. And in Romer v. Evans, the Court 59 478 U.S. at 192. 60 123 S. Ct. at 2480. 61 Id. 62 Id. at 2480-81. 63 Id. at 2481 (citing Bowers, 478 U.S. at 192-93). 64 Id. (citing Sexual Offences Act, 1967, c. 60, § 1). 65 Id. (citing Dudgeon v. United Kingdom, 45 Eur. Ct. H.R. (1981)). The use of materials from other nations, for the interpretation of the United States Constitution, raises many complexities, which I cannot explore here. 66 Id. 67 Id. 68 Id. 69 Id. (citing Casey, 505 U.S. at 851). struck down a law “born of animosity toward the class of persons affected.”70 These decisions made Bowers decreasingly plausible. 
The Court acknowledged that the plaintiff’s equal protection challenge, based on Romer, was “tenable.”71 But the Court said that “the instant case requires us to address whether Bowers itself has continuing validity.”72 (This is remarkable because the instant case “required” no such thing; it would have been fully possible to resolve the case without addressing Bowers.) The Court explained that if the Texas statute were invalidated on equal protection grounds, it would remain unclear whether a statute could forbid both same-sex and different-sex sodomy.73 The Court added that when “homosexual conduct is made criminal by the law of the State, that declaration in and of itself is an invitation to subject homosexual persons to discrimination both in the public and in the private spheres.”74 In the Court’s view, the continued validity of Bowers “demeans the lives of homosexual persons.”75 Here the Court emphasized the stigma imposed by the law, coming not only from the fact that the act is a misdemeanor but also because of “all that imports for the dignity of the persons charged.”76 The collateral consequences of the criminal conviction could not be avoided. 
At this point the Court emphasized that Bowers had been eroded not only by Casey and Romer, but also by independent sources. Academics had widely criticized the decision.77 Five different state courts had refused to follow it in interpreting their own state constitutions.78 The European Court of Human Rights, along with other nations, had rejected the Bowers approach, a relevant fact “to the extent that Bowers relied on values we share with a wider civilization.”79 Stare decisis was relevant but not conclusive, for the Bowers decision did not produce detrimental reliance “comparable to some instances where recognized individual rights are involved.”80 The Court concluded that “Bowers was not correct when it was decided, and it is not correct today.”81 
The Court was aware of the potential breadth of its ruling, and it took steps to clarify its scope. “The present case does not involve minors. It does not involve persons who might be injured or coerced or who are situated in relationships where consent might not easily be refused. It does not involve public conduct or prostitution. It does not involve whether the government must give formal recognition to any relationship that homosexual persons seek to enter.”82 What was involved instead was “full and mutual consent” to engage in “sexual practices common to a homosexual lifestyle. . . . The State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime.”83 In a closing word, the Court said that the Texas law “furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual.”84 
I will return to the complexities in the opinion shortly. For the moment, let us explore the views of the three other justices who wrote in Lawrence. 
due process holding and urged the equal protection route. Building on the MorenoCleburne-Romer trilogy, she contended that when a law is based on “a desire to harm a politically unpopular group,” the Court has applied “a more searching form of rational basis review.”85 She added that invalidation, via rational basis review, is more likely when the challenged legislation “inhibits personal relationships.”86 
To be sure, Texas had justified its law as a means of promoting morality, and that kind of justification had been found sufficient in Bowers, which Justice O’Connor did not seek to disturb. But Bowers was decided under the due process clause. Lawrence was different, because it presented the not-yet-decided question “whether, under the Equal Protection Clause, moral disapproval is a legitimate state interest to justify by itself a statute that bans homosexual sodomy, but not heterosexual sodomy.”87 She concluded that it is not. Under rational basis review, moral disapproval is not a sufficient basis for discriminating among groups of persons. “Texas’ invocation of moral disapproval as a legitimate state interest proves nothing more than Texas’ desire to criminalize homosexual sodomy.”88 And because the law is enforced so infrequently, “the law serves more as a statement of dislike and disapproval than as a tool to stop criminal behavior.”89 
Aware of the potentially broad implications of the equal protection argument, Justice O’Connor urged that her analysis would not doom all distinctions between homosexuals and heterosexuals. With her eye firmly on the military and on family law, she said that “Texas cannot assert any legitimate state interest here, such as national security or preserving the traditional institution of marriage.”90 In the latter context, 82 Id. 83 Id. 84 Id. 85 Id. at 2485 (O’Connor, J., concurring). 86 Id. (O’Connor, J., concurring). 87 Id. at 2486 (O’Connor, J., concurring). 88 Id. (O’Connor, J., concurring). 89 Id. (O’Connor, J., concurring). 90 Id. at 2487-88 (O’Connor, J., concurring). “other reasons exist to promote the institution of marriage beyond mere moral disapproval of an excluded group.”91 
order.” Justice Scalia’s argument had three elements. First, he chastised the Court for what he saw as its palpable inconsistency on the issue of stare decisis. Invoking stare decisis, the Court had refused to overrule Roe, a nineteen-year-old ruling, in its Casey decision in 1992.92 The same Court was now willing to overrule Bowers, decided seventeen years previously. Justice Scalia saw no justification for the differential treatment. Second, Justice Scalia urged that the Court’s ruling would have extremely large implications. “State laws against bigamy, same-sex marriage, adult incest, prostitution, masturbation, adultery, fornication, bestiality, and obscenity” can be upheld “only in light of Bowers’ validation of laws based on moral choices. Every single one of these laws is called into question by today’s decision.”93 The Court’s decision therefore entails “a massive disruption of the current social order”94 (something that could not have been said about a decision to overrule Roe). Thus Justice Scalia urged that the Court’s opinion “dismantles the structure of constitutional law that has permitted a distinction to be made between heterosexual and homosexual unions, insofar as formal recognition in marriage is concerned.”95 
Justice Scalia’s third argument involved the proper interpretation of the Constitution in principle. After doubting that the due process clause is a substantive safeguard at all, he urged that as it has developed, the idea of substantive due process has been disciplined by asking whether the relevant rights are “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition.”96 Justice Scalia questioned the idea that there is an “emerging awareness”97 that consensual homosexual activity should be protected; but his more basic objection was that any emerging awareness was irrelevant. “Constitutional entitlements do not spring into existence because some States choose to lessen or eliminate criminal sanctions on certain behavior.”98 Justice Scalia saw the Court as holding that the moral views underlying the Texas statute did not provide a legitimate basis for it. Here his objection was exceedingly simple: “This effectively decrees the end of all morals legislation.”99 With respect to equal protection, Justice Scalia urged that a rational basis was what was required, and that as for due process purposes, “the enforcement of traditional notions of sexual morality” provided the rational basis.100 
opinion emphasizes that as a member of the Texas legislature, he would vote to repeal the 91 Id. at 2488 (O’Connor, J., concurring). 92 Id. (Scalia, J., dissenting) (citing Casey, 505 U.S. at 844). 93 Id. at 2490 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 94 Id. at 2491 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 95 Id. at 2498 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 96 Id. at 2492 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 97 Id. at 2494 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (internal citation omitted). 98 Id. (Scalia, J., dissenting). 99 Id. at 2495 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 100 Id. at 2496 (Scalia, J., dissenting). relevant law. “Punishing someone for expressing his sexual preference through noncommercial consensual conduct with another adult does not appear to be a worthy way to expend valuable law enforcement resources.”101 Invoking Justice Stewart’s concurrence in Griswold, he contended that the law is “uncommonly silly,”102 but that nothing in the Constitution forbids it.103 
I will suggest that Lawrence is best understood as responsive to what the Court saw as an emerging national awareness, reflected in a pattern of nonenforcement, that it is illegitimate to punish people because of homosexual conduct -- and that the decision therefore embodies a kind of American-style desuetude. But to support this suggestion, it will be necessary to unpack the Court’s opaque opinion, which raises a number of puzzles. Let us begin with the simplest. 
Was Lawrence based on rational basis review, or instead on something else? It is astonishing but true that this question is exceedingly difficult to answer. 
If the Court had attempted to write a conventional due process opinion, it would have taken one of two routes. First, the Court might have said that the right to engage in consensual sexual activity qualifies as fundamental, so that the government may not interfere with that right unless it has a compelling justification.104 Second, the Court might have said that whether or not the relevant right qualifies as fundamental, the state cannot interfere with it, simply because it lacks a legitimate reason to justify the interference. But the Court said neither, at least not in plain terms. The Court did not unambiguously identify any “fundamental interest” on the part of the plaintiffs that would support its ruling. In fact it did not use the “fundamental interest” formulation at any point in its analysis. Moreover, the Court did not say that the Texas statute lacked a “rational basis.” In fact it did not use the “rational basis” formulation at any point in its analysis. Much of the opacity of the Court’s opinion stems from its failure to specify what kind of review it was applying to the Texas statute. 
To be sure, the Court did end its opinion with a reference to the absence of any “legitimate interest” on the state’s part.105 Justice Scalia seized on this point to urge that the Court issued a rational basis opinion after all106—a characterization to which the Court (revealingly?) does not specifically object. Thus Justice Scalia contends that much of the Court’s opinion “has no relevance to its actual holding,”107 which was that the statute failed rational basis review. Justice Scalia’s reading cannot be said to be senseless; 101 Id. at 2498 (Thomas, J., dissenting). 102 Id. (Thomas, J., dissenting) (quoting Griswold, 381 U.S. at 527 (Stewart, J., concurring)). 103 Id. (Thomas, J., dissenting). 104 See, e.g., Roe, 410 U.S. 113. 105 123 S. Ct. at 2484. 106 Id. at 2488 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 107 Id. (Scalia, J., dissenting). it is not demonstrably wrong. But I believe that it is incorrect, and that in the end the Court’s opinion treats the relevant right as a fundamental one. Begin with the most relevant part of the Court’s opinion: 
“The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime. Their right to liberty under the Due Process Clause gives them the full right to engage in their conduct without intervention of the government. ‘It is a promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the government may not enter.’ The Texas statute furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual.”108 
The Court immediately follows its reference to “no legitimate state interest”109 with the phrase, “which can justify its intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual.”110 The Court’s emphasis on “respect for their private lives,”111 on “control [of] their destiny”112, and on “personal and private life”113 suggests that the interest involved is not an ordinary one -- and that the Court is demanding something more than a rational basis. The same point is strongly suggested by the Court’s reference, in this paragraph, to Casey114, which of course involved a fundamental right, not a rational basis test. 
But there is a more basic reason for seeing the Court’s opinion as finding the relevant interest to be fundamental. The Court begins with an effort to assimilate the issue in Lawrence to the issues in Griswold, Eisenstadt, Roe, Carey, and Casey -- all of which are now taken, by the Court, to suggest a fundamental right in the domain of sex and reproduction. Hence the Court refers to “the right to make certain decisions regarding sexual conduct,”115 to the individual’s interest in making “certain fundamental decisions affecting her destiny,”116 and to the “emerging awareness that liberty gives substantial protection to adult persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives in matters pertaining to sex.”117 These statements would be unintelligible if Lawrence were based solely on rational basis review. Indeed, much of the Court’s opinion would be dicta. In the end, Lawrence is not plausibly a rational basis decision. 
An alternative reading is that the Court deliberately refused to specify its “tier” of analysis because it was rejecting the idea of tiers altogether. Perhaps the Court was signaling its adoption of a kind of sliding scale, matching the strength of the interest to the demand for state justification, without formally requiring identification of a 108 Id. at 2484 (quoting Casey, 505 U.S. at 847) (internal citation omitted). 109 Id. 110 Id. 111 Id. 112 Id. 113 Id. 114 Id. (citing Casey, 505 U.S. at 847). 115 Id. at 2477. 116 Id. 117 Id. at 2480. fundamental right. And indeed, some of the Court’s decisions do suggest a partial collapse of the traditional tiers approach to judicial review.118 For many years, Justice Marshall complained of the rigidity of the usual tiers, urging a more open-ended form of balancing.119 Justice Marshall’s views appeared to fall on deaf ears. But perhaps Lawrence reflects some appreciation of the difficulties in fitting all cases within the traditional framework. This is not a wholly implausible reading, but it would be quite surprising if the Court meant to adopt a sliding-scale of analysis without saying so. The more natural interpretation is simpler: The Court’s assimilation of the Lawrence problem to that in Griswold and its successors suggests that a fundamental right was involved. 
But why, exactly, does the relevant interest count as a fundamental one? There are two possibilities. The first is that the right to engage in consensual sex counts, simply as a matter of principle, as part of the liberty that the due process clause substantively protects. On this view, in Lawrence the Court accepted, to this extent, John Stuart Mill’s view in On Liberty,120 holding that the government may not interfere with (certain) private choices unless there is harm to others. The second and narrower idea is that this particular kind of sex—homosexual sex between consenting adults—counts as fundamental. It does so because of major changes in social values in the last half-century. On this view, Lawrence finds a fundamental right as a result of existing public convictions, with which the Texas statute cannot be squared, simply because sodomy prosecutions are so hopelessly out of step with them. 
Lawrence could be read in either way. But the second interpretation is far more plausible. A simple autonomy reading would have consequences that the Court did not likely intend. As Justice Scalia suggests, it would raise serious questions about prohibitions on adult incest, prostitution, adultery, fornication, bestiality, and obscenity.121 (I do not mention his suggestion that the Court has questioned laws forbidding masturbation,122 for one reason: There are no laws forbidding masturbation!) Now it might be possible, even under the autonomy reading, to justify most or all of those prohibitions on the ground that they counteract concrete harms, sufficient to support the intrusion on a presumptively protected right. (I return to this question below.) And cases involving commercial activity probably must be analyzed in a way that gives the government more room to maneuver. But it would be remarkable if Lawrence were understood to require a careful inquiry into the adequacy of government justifications for banning (say) adult incest and bestiality. 118 See, e.g., the heightened approach to rational basis review in Romer, 517 U.S. 620, and Cleburne, 473 U.S. 432, and the softened approach to strict scrutiny in Grutter v. Bollinger, 123 S. Ct. 2325 (2003). 119 See Dandridge v. Williams, 397 U.S. 471 (1970) (Marshall, J., dissenting); San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 411 U.S. 1 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 120 See Mill, supra note 11. 121 123 S. Ct. at 2490 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 122 Id. (Scalia, J., dissenting). There are of course laws forbidding public masturbation, but that is a different matter. Nothing in Lawrence suggests that states are banned from regulating sexual conduct that occurs in public view. 
In any case, a simple autonomy reading would make the Court’s apparently pivotal discussion of “emerging awareness” into an irrelevancy. Recall that the Court rejected Bowers in large part by pointing to a range of indications that bans on homosexual sodomy were out of step with existing values.123 Hence two factors were emphasized in the Court’s ruling: only thirteen states prohibited sodomy; and the sodomy laws were rarely enforced, through criminal prosecution, even in those states.124 It does appear that the Court was responding to, and requiring, an evolution in public opinion— something like a broad consensus that the practice at issue should not be punished. 
These points suggest that the Court’s decision was less about sexual autonomy, as a freestanding idea, and closer to a kind of due process variation on the old common law idea of desuetude.125 According to that concept, laws that are hardly ever enforced are said, by courts, to have lapsed, simply because they lack public support.126 The rationale here is that unenforced laws lack support in public convictions, and may not be brought to bear, in an unpredictable and essentially arbitrary way, against private citizens.127 Most American courts do not accept that idea in express terms.128 But long ago, Alexander Bickel invoked the notion of desuetude to help account for Griswold.129 The simple idea is that the ban on use of contraceptives by married people had become hopelessly out of touch with existing convictions—so much so that the ban could rarely if ever be invoked as a basis for actual prosecutions. The public would not accept a situation in which married people were actually convicted of that crime. In those circumstances, the statutory ban was a recipe for arbitrary and even discriminatory action, in a way that does violence to democratic ideals and even the rule of law. It does violence to democratic ideals because a law plainly lacking public support is nonetheless invoked to regulate private conduct. It violates the rule of law because a measure of this kind lacks, in practice, the kind of generality and predictability on which the rule of law depends.130 
If anything, a ban on sodomy is even worse than the Connecticut law struck down in Griswold. Such a ban is used, not for frequent arrests or convictions, but for rare and unpredictable harassment by the police. An advantage of this reading is that it mutes the apparent roots of Lawrence in substantive due process. The idea of desuetude is, in a sense, a procedural one. There is a procedural problem: a lack of fair notice combined with denial of equal treatment, a problem that is inevitable in a system in which criminal prosecutions are rare and episodic. In fact, the idea of desuetude forbids criminal 123 Id. at 2479-2482. 124 Id. at 2481. 125 See, e.g., J.R. Philip, Some Reflections on Desuetude, 43 Juridical Review 260 (1931); Linda Rogers and William Rogers, Desuetude as a Defense, 52 Iowa Law Review 1 (1966). 126 Mortimer Kadish and Sanford Kadish, Discretion to Disobey: A Study of Lawful Departures From Legal Rules 129-31 (1973). 127 Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 502 (1961) (quoting Nashville, C. & St. L.R. Co. v. Browning, 310 U.S. 362, 369 (1940)). 128 For discussion, see Kadish and Kadish, supra note 116, at 127-140; John Chipman Gray, Desuetude of Statutes in the United States, in The Nature and Sources of Law 189-97, 329-34, (2nd ed. 1921); Arthur E. Bonfield, The Abrogation of Penal Statutes by Nonenforcement, 49 Iowa Law Review 389 (1964). 129 See Alexander Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch 155 (1965). 130 See Lon Fuller, The Morality of Law (1962). hopes to promote. To be sure, these points are cautionary notes and no more. But at the very least, they suggest that where the Court is in a position to choose, a desuetude-type ruling, building on widespread convictions, has considerable advantages over a ruling that is based on the Court’s own conception of autonomy. 
criticized from other directions. Perhaps a better alternative is Thayerism: An approach that would uphold any intrusion on liberty unless it lacks even a minimally rational basis.147 This approach might be defended on the ground that a judicial judgment about emerging public convictions is not very reliable, and certainly less so than the evidence provided by actual legislation. If there is a serious risk in judicial effort, why not require people to resort to their political remedies? I believe that the idea of desuetude provides a partial answer. If legislation is infrequently enforced, most citizens can treat it as effectively dead. They have nothing to worry about. At least in clear cases, it seems plausible, and inoffensive to democratic values, to use the Due Process Clause to forbid criminal prosecutions in cases of this kind. Both Griswold and Lawrence are defining examples. 
But perhaps the Court would have done better, in Lawrence, to continue on the path marked out by Bowers and Glucksberg, and hence to uphold any intrusion on liberty unless it runs afoul of Anglo-American traditions. Due process traditionalism might be supported on the ground that federal judges are not especially good at evaluating our practices, and that if a practice has endured there is good reason to support it, if only because many people have endorsed it, or at least not seen fit to change it. Constitutional traditionalism therefore makes decisions simpler at the same time that it makes them less likely to go wrong. If economic terminology is thought to be helpful here, the use of traditions by imperfect human beings might not be perfect, but it is the best way to go because it minimizes both “decision costs,” taken as the burdens of deciding what to do, and “error costs,” taken as the problems introduced by making mistakes. 
A central question is whether tradition-bound judges will make more or fewer errors than judges who depart from traditions and pay a great deal of attention to conventional morality. At least some of those who are skeptical about substantive due process might endorse traditionalism as a possible source of law, but also conclude that it is proper for the Court to strike down statutes that lack support in popular convictions. In other words, the desuetude-type approach of the Lawrence Court might be a supplement to due process traditionalism, rooted in similar concerns. Indeed, a desuetude-type approach has the advantage of underlining the procedural features of procedural due process. As we have seen, a statute like that invalidated in Lawrence fails to provide predictability, and it is a recipe for arbitrary enforcement. The Court’s refusal to permit criminal convictions, under these circumstances, is not radically inconsistent with democratic ideals. In a sense, it helps to vindicate them. 147 See James Bradley Thayer, The Origin and Scope of the American Doctrine of Constitutional Law, 7 Harv. L. Rev. 129 (1893). response is possible, one that would raise questions about the coherence of any approach that draws on the idea of desuetude. For governments, there is a tradeoff between the magnitude and the frequency of punishment. A government might decide to lessen the deterrent signal simply by scaling back enforcement. In the context of conduct that a state would like to deter, but not greatly, the sensible strategy might be to maintain a prohibition but to enforce it rarely. It is easy to imagine a city taking this approach with respect to non-flagrant speeding (driving, say, ten miles over the speed limit), or certain parking offenses (giving tickets rarely in certain places, for example), or certain alcohol or drug offenses (rarely arresting or convicting teenagers for use of alcohol, or infrequently arresting or convicting people for marijuana use). In fact many prohibitions are rarely enforced. Is this situation unconstitutional? Why is a state banned from making this particular tradeoff between severity and probability of sanction? In any case the ex ante deterrent effect of a rarely enforced law, including the sodomy law in Texas, applies equally to all those subject to it. Isn’t this ex ante equality a sufficient response to the objection of unpredictability? 
To answer this objection, it is necessary to narrow the due process ruling in Lawrence. The problem with the sodomy law was not only the fact that it was enforced rarely; infrequent enforcement stemmed from the particular fact that the moral claim that underlay it could no longer claim public support. The same cannot be said in the examples just described; in those cases, there is public ambivalence about arrest and conviction, but not because of a widespread belief that the prohibition is itself outmoded. But Lawrence does not depend on this factor alone. It is also important that the interest at stake is similar, in principle, to those protected by earlier cases. In these circumstances, the state is required to produce, by way of justification, something other than a moral position that no longer fits with public convictions. To be sure, the effect of a rarelyenforced law is similar to that of a lottery, and in that respect there is a degree of ex ante equality. But people are punished ex post, not ex ante, and it is the ex post randomness that supports the Court’s ruling, at least in the light of the particular interest involved. 
Consider a final argument. One purpose of the criminal law is to permit expressive condemnation. For some conduct, the social judgment is in favor of such condemnation but opposed to much in the way of actual prosecution. As examples, consider laws forbidding adultery or the consumption of alcohol by sixteen-year-olds. Rare enforcement reflects a belief that the law, operating in conjunction with social norms, will deter misconduct optimally—and that criminal prosecution would be too heavy-handed, at least in most cases. Does it follow, from Lawrence, that states are forbidding from adopting the strategy of expressive condemnation with rare prosecution? Why isn’t that strategy the most sensible one in some circumstances? The answer is that when certain interests are involved,148 states are indeed forbidden from following that strategy, and the reason has to do with the lack of fair notice and the inevitability of randomness. As I have emphasized, these are the conventional (procedural) concerns of the due process clause. 148 Consumption of liquor does not fall within the category of protected interests; on adultery, see below, 
What are the implications of Lawrence? Because of the opacity of the Court’s opinion, this is not an easy question to answer. In the fullness of time, it is imaginable that Lawrence will be a sport, a decision with no descendents, one in which the Court struck down a law that shocked its conscience but that proved unable to generate further doctrine. But it is no less imaginable that Lawrence will turn out to have broad consequences for regulation of sexual relationships, in a way that vindicates a quite general interest in sexual autonomy. Bowers had stopped a number of potential doctrinal innovations here; Bowers is no longer good law. And it is wholly imaginable that Lawrence will draw into question many forms of discrimination against gays and lesbians. If my basic argument is correct, the eventual path of the law will have a great deal to do with public convictions over time. I am concerned in this section with the logic of the Court’s opinion and with its bearing on issues that the Court did not resolve. A. Sex 
Justice Scalia urged that Lawrence decrees an end to “morals” legislation149, and in the aftermath of the decision, it is natural to wonder about the constitutionality of laws forbidding sexual harassment, prostitution, adultery, fornication, obscenity, polygamy, and incest. Before Lawrence, such laws seemed quite secure. The Court had made clear that substantive due process would be used only to protect rights well-recognized by tradition150; and in any event the privacy cases had originally been defined with close reference to reproduction and its control, not to sex itself.151 But after Lawrence, it would be possible to contend that many statutory restrictions impose unconstitutional barriers to consensual sexual activity. And in each of these cases, it would be possible to urge both that the relevant right is a fundamental one and that the state lacks a legitimate basis for interfering with consensual activity. Let us see how the underlying issues might be assessed. 
Lawrence—consent—is absent. If consensual sex is not involved, there is no fundamental right that would require the state to provide a compelling justification. And for the same reason, the state has a perfectly legitimate, even compelling, reason to impose a restriction. In cases of sexual harassment, coercion of one or another sort is generally involved152, and hence a legal ban is perfectly acceptable. The same is true for many and 149 123 S. Ct. at 2495 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 150 This was the key point in lower court decisions rejecting constitutional challenges to decisions to punish (for example) adultery, see Mercure v. Van Buren Township, 81 F.Supp.2d 814 (E.D. Mich. 2000); Commonwealth v. Stowell, 449 N.E.2d 357 (Mass. 1983); City of Sherman v. Henry, 928 S.W.2d 464 (Tex. 1996); and incest, see Smith v. State, 6 S.W.3d 512 (Tenn. Crim. App. 1999); State v. Buck, 757 P.2d 861 (Or. Ct. App. 1988). 151 See, e.g., Griswold, 381 U.S. 479; Roe, 410 U.S. 113. 152 See, e.g., Franklin v. Gwinnett County Pub. Schs., 503 U.S. 60 (1992). perhaps most cases involving incest, which involve minors unable to give legal consent.153 The interest in preventing coerced sex is sufficient. 
But somewhat harder cases are imaginable even here. Suppose, for example, that under a public university’s sexual harassment policy, a teacher and a graduate student are banned from having a consensual relationship, even though the teacher is not (and will not be) in a supervisory position over the student. Or suppose that the incestuous relations are between adults—first cousins, let us say. If an “as applied” challenge were product, these would be genuinely difficult after Lawrence. If real consent is found in either case, a fundamental right might well be involved. But it would be possible to defend the broad sexual harassment prohibition as a way of reducing risks and introducing clarity for all. And it would be possible to defend the ban on incest among adults as a way of eliminating certain psychological pressures and protecting any children who might result from medical risk.154 In neither case can it be said that the prohibitions run afoul of some emerging national awareness. These are far weaker cases for invalidation than Lawrence, but some of the underlying logic of the case seems to raise doubts in imaginable applications. 
hard to urge that a fundamental right is involved.155 Under Lawrence, commercial sex is to be treated differently.156 The outcome is easy; but the analysis is not. Why the sharp distinction between commercial and noncommercial sex? Why are sexual relations unprotected, or less protected, if dollars are exchanged? Books, after all, are protected, whether they are given away or sold. Part of the analysis here might be that commercial sex should not be treated more protectively than any other kind of commercial interaction, now subject to rational basis review.157 But if sexual relationships have a special constitutional status, this distinction is far from obvious. The more basic claim must be that special constitutional status attaches to sexual intimacy, not to sexual relationships,158 and that intimacy in the relevant sense is not involved when sex is exchanged for cash.159 Hence no fundamental right is involved. To be sure, this argument is not entirely convincing. Many sexual relationships (including many that fall within the category protected by Lawrence) do not involve intimacy (except by definition). But perhaps the Court can be said to be suggesting that noncommercial sex involves intimacy frequently enough to justify protection of the overall class, whereas the opposite is true of sex-for-money. 153 See, e.g., Richardson v. State, 353 S.E.2d 342 (Ga. 1987); Commonwealth v. Arnold, 514 A.2d 890 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1986). 154 See, e.g., In re Tiffany Nicole M., 571 N.W.2d 872 (Wis. Ct. App. 1997); but see In re Termination of Parental Rights to Zachary B., 662 N.W.2d 360 (Wis. Ct. App. 2003). 155 See, e.g., J.B.K., Inc. v. Caron, 600 F.2d 710 (8th Cir. 1979); Morgan v. Detroit, 389 F.Supp. 922 (E.D. Mich. 1975); State v. Allen, 424 A.2d 651 (Conn. Super. Ct. 1980); Blyther v. United States, 577 A.2d 1154 (D.C. 1990). 156 123 S. Ct. at 2484. 157 See, e.g., Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379 U.S. 241 (1964). 158 The case of bestiality should be understood similarly. It would be frivolous to argue that bans on bestiality eliminate the kind of intimate relationship protected by Lawrence. 159 See Commonwealth v. Walter, 446 N.E.2d 707, 710 (Mass. 1983); State v. Price, 446 N.W.2d 813, 818 (Iowa 1976). 
But what justification does the state have for forbidding prostitution? It is probably sufficient here to point to the adverse effects of prostitution on the lives of prostitutes; the risk of exploitation (and worse) is real and serious.160 Nor are moral justifications, pointing to the corrosive effects of prostitution on sexuality and sex equality,161 ruled off-limits by Lawrence. I am not taking a position on the complex and disputed question whether and how prostitution should be outlawed. My suggestion is only that under rational basis review, restrictions on prostitution are easily defensible. The ban on the sale of obscenity should be understood in similar terms162; the use of obscenity raises different issues.163 
problems, post-Lawrence, come in cases challenging restrictions on genuinely consensual and noncommercial practices. Begin with what might seem an intermediate case: bans on sexual devices.164 Following the previous discussion, we should distinguish here between sale on the one hand and use on the other. Perhaps the state could ban the sale itself, urging that it is attempting to regulate a commercial enterprise, and that it is permitted to do so in light of the commercial-noncommercial distinction just made. Even this is not entirely clear.165 And could the state make it a crime for people to use such devices? The right to do so might well fall within the protection of fundamental interests. In any case what is the state’s justification for banning such use? It is easy to imagine an as-applied challenge, in which a married couple attacks a ban on either the sale or the use of sexual devices with reference to Griswold itself.166 The difference is that in Griswold, the ban on use of contraceptives was an effort to prevent non-procreative sex, whereas in the hypothetical case, the state is banning devices that are designed to increase sexual pleasure. But why, exactly, would it seek to do that? Is there something wrong with certain sources of sexual pleasure within constitutionally protected relationships? Perhaps the answer would be affirmative if real harms were involved, as for example through sadomasochistic practices. Almost certainly the state could justify a prohibition on the public display of such devices. But we are not now speaking of these questions. At first 160 See, e.g., People v. Mason, 642 P.2d 8, 12 (Colo. 1982); People v. Johnson, 376 N.E.2d 381, 386 (Ill. App. Ct. 1978). Of course some of the risk stems from the very fact that prostitution is unlawful. 161 See Bell v. United States, 349 U.S. 81, 84 (1955) (Minton, J., dissenting); People v. Warren, 535 N.W.2d 173, 177 (Mich. 1995) (Levin, J., dissenting); State v. Wright, 561 A.2d 659, 662 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1989). 162 See, e.g., Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slayton, 413 U.S. 49, 58-59 (1973). 163 The use can be banned under Miller, by reference to moral objections, though Stanley v. Georgia, US, protects the use of obscenity within the home. A different and in my view better analysis would point to actual harms, see Catharine MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified (1986); Cass R. Sunstein, Pornography and the First Amendment, Duke LJ (1996). 164 See, e.g., Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Pleasureland Museum, Inc. v. Beutter, 288 F.3d 988 (7th Cir. 2002) (remanding for consideration of whether a ban on sexual devices violated a fundamental right to privacy). 165 Recall that the constitutional protection given to the use of contraceptives was extended to the sale of contraceptives. See Carey, supra. If a ban on the sale of contraceptives cannot be justified, it is not clear, after Lawrence, how the state can justify a ban on the sale of sexual devices. Before Lawrence, it might have been said that the privacy cases did not protect sexual activity as such, but merely banned the state from punishing that activity through the indirect and discriminatory means of risking unwanted pregnancy. But Lawrence forbids this narrow reading of the cases. 166 See Williams, id. at 952-53 (suggesting that an as-applied challenge is plausible). glance, individuals have a fundamental interest here, and the state seems to lack a legitimate basis for intruding on that interest. 
If there were laws forbidding masturbation, Lawrence would indeed raise extremely serious questions about them. Fortunately, there are no such laws.167 What about laws forbidding fornication, understood to mean non-adulterous sex outside of marriage?168 Lawrence creates serious doubts, simply because coercion and consent are not present. In any case, there seems to be an emerging social awareness that fornication is not a proper basis for criminal punishment.169 And with respect to consenting adults, it is not easy to produce a legitimate ground for interfering with non-adulterous sex.170 As I have noted, fully consensual incest is a somewhat harder case. In the case of adult brothers and sisters, it might be urged that the goal is to prevent harms to any children who might result, or psychological difficulties that would predictably produce and accompany any such relationships. Certainly the ban on sexual relations within the family cannot be said to be anachronistic. There is no “emerging public awareness” that such relations should be accepted. But imagine, for example, that sex is banned among first cousins, in circumstances in which any harms are highly speculative. Rational basis review would be satisfied. But Lawrence does not apply rational basis review, and in some applications, the ruling would seem to throw legal prohibitions on incest into considerable doubt. 
The most difficult cases involve laws forbidding adultery.171 We could imagine actual adultery prosecutions172; we could also imagine cases in which government takes adverse employment action against those involved in adulterous relationships.173 Here as in other contexts, it would be possible to urge that a consensual relationship is involved, one with which the state may not interfere on purely moral grounds. On the other hand, it is possible to justify prohibitions on adultery by reference to harms to third parties: children, in many cases, and the betrayed spouse, in many more cases. The adultery laws can be seen as an effort to protect the marital relationship, involving persons and interests, including those of children, that are harmed if adultery occurs.174 Marriage can and often is understood as an exchange of commitments, which have individual and social value; and a prohibition on adultery, moral and legal, operates in the service of 167 As I have noted, Lawrence raises no questions about laws forbidding public masturbation. The most plausible objection would be that mere offense is not a legitimate basis for regulating noncoercive sex; and indeed Justice Scalia seems to read the Court’s opinion to have that implication. But the Court’s rejection of the moral basis of the ban on sodomy should not be taken to forbid governments from protecting people from unwanted viewing of other people’s sex lives. 168 See, e.g., Jarrett v. Jarrett, 449 U.S. 927, 929 n. 2 (citing Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 38, § 11-8 (1977)). 169 See, e.g., id.; In re J.M., 575 S.E.2d 441, 444 (Ga. 2003); State v. Saunders, 381 A.2d 333, 339 (N.J. 1977). 170 Admittedly, rational basis review might be satisfied if, for example, the state urged that it was attempting to reduce the risks of unwanted pregnancy and venereal disease. But after Lawrence, rational basis review is unlikely to be applied here. 171 See Marcum v. MacWharter, 308 U.S. 635 (2002). 172 See Commonwealth v. Stowell, 449 N.E.2d 357 (Mass. 1983). 173 See Oliverson v. West Valley City, 875 F.Supp. 1465 (D. Utah 1995); City of Sherman v. Henry, 928 S.W.2d 464 (Tex. 1996). 174 See Oliverson, id., at 1477. those commitments. If rational basis review is involved, prohibitions on adultery should certainly be acceptable—except, perhaps, in cases in which the married couple has agreed to non-exclusivity (in which case criminal prosecution would be especially surprising). 
The difficulty here is that in the context of adultery, criminal prosecutions are extremely unusual, at least as rare as criminal prosecutions for sodomy. There is a good argument that criminal prosecutions, in this context, are inconsistent with emerging social values. This is not because adultery is thought to be morally acceptable; it is not. It is because adultery is not thought to be a proper basis for the use of the criminal law. Perhaps it could be said that Lawrence turned at least in part on the Court’s evident desire to ensure against practices that would “demean[] the lives of homosexual persons.”175 It is not plausible to say that the Court should take special steps to ensure against practices that would “demean the lives of” adulterers. But in the end, it is not so easy to distinguish an adultery prosecution from the sodomy prosecution forbidden in Lawrence.176 
of his sexual orientation? Before Lawrence, the lower courts were divided on the issue.177 The logic of Bowers supported the decisions upholding such discharges, at least against due process challenges. And it was possible to urge that because homosexual activity is not protected by the Constitution, government employees are permitted to discriminate against those who engage in that activity. At first glance, however, Lawrence resolves that question the other way. A public employer is not permitted to discharge an employee because she has exercised a constitutional right (an oversimplification to which I shall return). If an employee has converted to Catholicism, or voted for a Republican, she may not be adversely affected for that reason. So too if an employee has exercised a right protected by the due process clause. A state may not refuse to hire a secretary who has used contraception or had an abortion. Under Lawrence, government may not refuse to hire people who have engaged in same-sex relations. It could perhaps be argued that a criminal punishment is worse than a civil disability, and hence that the prohibition on 175 123 S. Ct. at 2482. 176 Employment discrimination by the state against adulterers raises further complexities. On a standard analysis, protection against criminal prosecution, if it exists, is conclusive on the issue of public employment, forbidding discrimination against people who have engaged in constitutionally protected activity. One exception would apply when the government can invoke distinctive employment-related grounds for the discrimination. A public university’s admissions office need not hire, as director of admissions, people who speak out in favor of race discrimination; perhaps discrimination againstadulterers can, in some contexts, be similarly justified. In any case everything turns on the reason for a due process ruling. If adultery prosecutions were banned on the basis of a rationale tied to the illegitimacy of using the criminal law, perhaps civil disabilities, as through employment discrimination, would be permissible. 177 See DeSantis v. Pacific Tel. & Tel. Co., Inc., 608 F.2d 327 (9th Cir. 1979) (holding that homosexuals are not a protected class under Title VII); Childers v. Dallas Police Dep’t, 513 F.Supp. 134 (N.D. Tex. 1981) (holding that a police department could refuse to hire a gay activist because of doubts about his character). Compare Glover v. Williamsburg Local Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ., 20 F.Supp.2d 1160 (S.D. Ohio 1998) (finding no rational basis for a decision not to renew the contract of a homosexual teacher); Weaver v. Nebo Sch. Dist., 29 F.Supp.2d 1279 (D. Utah 1998) (to the same effect). criminal prosecution does not entail an equivalent prohibition on adverse employment actions. But the cases just described should be sufficient response to that argument. 
Most cases of adverse employment action, prompted by homosexual activity, are easy after Lawrence. But there are some possible responses. One would emphasize the reading I have emphasized here: Lawrence turned not simply on a finding of a fundamental right, but more importantly on the Court’s conclusion that the Texas law was no longer supported by public convictions. If desuetude is involved, then perhaps employment discrimination is permitted even if criminal prosecution is not. This argument is not implausible or incoherent; if we emphasize the idea of desuetude, then a moral judgment might be permissible in the employment context even if it cannot be invoked as a basis for criminal prosecution. But this approach reads Lawrence a bit too finely. The Court is best read to have found a fundamental interest, whatever its reason for doing so; and if so, states may not refuse to hire people who have engaged in the relevant behavior. 
Another response would emphasize that the government sometimes may indeed refuse to hire people for engaging in constitutionally protected activity. The President is permitted to fail to employ, as Secretary of State, someone who has publicly criticized his policies; so too, a public university is allowed not to hire, or even to fire, an admissions officer who has said that women should not go to college, or that it is best for AfricanAmericans to attend vocational school. In such cases, the university can claim, plausibly, that it is not trying to censor anyone, or to punish them for exercising constitutional right, but instead to accomplish the substantive task that it has set for itself.178 Might discrimination against gays and lesbians be similarly justified? This is not entirely unimaginable, but it is hard to see. Unless the state is to capitulate to private prejudice, as it is generally forbidden from doing,179 it cannot easily invoke a distinct, employmentrelated reason to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation. 
It also follows that the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, in the military setting, is under new pressure. It is no longer possible to defend that policy simply by citing Bowers. If the policy is to be upheld, it is because courts should give great deference to military judgments, applying a form of rational basis review to them. I believe that federal courts are not likely to interfere with military judgments here, and that there is good reason for a general posture of deference to such judgments. In principle, however, it is extremely difficult to defend “don’t ask, don’t tell” against constitutional challenge, and this appears to be one of the exceedingly rare settings in which judicial interference with military judgments would be justified.180 
Lawrence, must states recognize such marriages? I have suggested that Lawrence is akin to Griswold; but Griswold led to Roe. Perhaps Lawrence will lead to its own Roe, in the 178 See Pickering v. Board of Educ., 391 US 563 (1968), for the basic framework. 179 See Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 US 429 (1984). 180 For an argument to this effect before Lawrence was decided, see Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy (2002). form of a requirement that states allow gays and lesbians, not less than heterosexuals, to marry. 
The issue is exceedingly complex. At first glance, Lawrence has nothing at all to do with same-sex marriage. It involved sodomy prosecutions, brought under anachronistic laws, and the due process challenge to those prosecutions need not draw into doubt the still-universal practice of defining marriage to involve one man and one woman. In any case, the most natural challenge to laws rejecting such marriages is rooted in the equal protection clause; and Lawrence said nothing about the equal protection clause (perhaps because it sought to avoid the marriage issue). To the extent that the Court was emphasizing an “emerging awareness,” its decision does not touch prohibitions on same-sex marriage—and will not do so unless and until such prohibitions seem as outmoded as bans on homosexual sodomy do today. Existing practice suggests universal opposition to same-sex marriage,181 and polling evidence suggests that most Americans support existing practice.182 
But under existing law, the issue cannot be disposed of so readily. In Loving v. Virginia183 (probably the best-named case in all of constitutional law), the Court struck down a ban on racial intermarriage on two grounds. The first is the familiar equal protection ground, seeing that ban as a form of racial discrimination. But in a separate ruling, the Court also held that the ban violated the due process clause. In the Court’s words, “the freedom to marry has long been recognized as one of the vital personal rights essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by free men.”184 It added that “[m]arriage is one of the ‘basic civil rights of man,’ fundamental to our very existence and survival.”185 The Loving Court’s due process ruling was not free from ambiguity; the problem of racial discrimination played a large role. But subsequent cases confirm that the right to marry counts as fundamental for due process purposes—and is sufficient by itself to take the analysis into the domain of heightened scrutiny. 
In Zablocki v. Redhail, the Court struck down a Wisconsin law forbidding people under child support obligations to remarry unless they had obtained a judicial determination that they had met those obligations and that their children were not likely to become public charges. 186 The Court insisted that “the right to marry is of fundamental importance for all individuals,”187 and that “the decision to marry has been placed on the same level of importance as decisions relating to procreation, childbirth, child rearing, and family relationships.”188 The Court said that it would uphold “reasonable regulations that do not significantly interfere with decisions to enter into the marital relationship.”189 But any direct and substantial interference with the right to marry would be strictly 181 Civil unions are a different matter, but they hardly can claim even strong minority support. 182 See the summary at http://www.bpnews.org/bpnews.asp?ID=16337. 183 388 U.S. 1 (1968). 184 Id. at 12. 185 Id. (quoting Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson, 316 U.S. 535, 541 (1942)). 186 434 U.S. 374 (1978). 187 Id. at 384. 188 Id. at 386. 189 Id. at 386-87 (citing Califano v. Jobst, 434 U.S. 47 (1977)). scrutinized. In a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens underlined the point, urging that the Constitution would cast serious doubt on any “classification which determines who may lawfully enter into the marriage relationship.”190 
In this light a prohibition on same-sex marriage is not so easy to defend in the aftermath of Lawrence. Under the Court’s decisions, a fundamental right does seem to be involved, one with which the state can defend only by pointing to a countervailing interest that is not merely legitimate but also compelling. In the context of same-sex marriage, what might that interest be? What sorts of social harms would follow from recognizing marriages between people of the same sex? It is conventional to argue that the refusal to recognize same-sex marriage is a way of protecting the marital institution itself. But this is very puzzling; how do same-sex marriages threaten the institution of marriage? Or perhaps the state can legitimately reserve the idea of marriage to men and women for expressive reasons. Perhaps the state can urge that it does not want to give the same expressive support to same-sex unions as to opposite-sex unions. But why not? As compared to a ban on same-sex marriages, a prohibition on adultery seems easy to justify. Such a prohibition is likely, in numerous cases, to protect one or even both spouses, and to protect children besides. If, as I have suggested, Lawrence draws prohibitions on adultery into some doubt, it would seem to raise extremely serious questions about prohibitions on same-sex marriage. 
But perhaps criminal punishment is special. Perhaps such punishment is quite different from, and to be assessed more skeptically than, a statute that confers the benefits of marriage to some but not to all. Perhaps Lawrence forbids the state from using the heavy artillery of the criminal law—but without raising questions about civil rights and civil duties. It would not be at all implausible to say that the Lawrence Court was responsive to the assortment of disabilities associated with criminal punishment—a set of disabilities that might be thought unique. But Loving and Zablocki themselves raise questions for this kind of distinction. Neither case involved a criminal prohibition. Both applied careful judicial scrutiny to laws saying that certain people could not enter into the marital relationship. 
Perhaps we could read Loving and Zablocki more narrowly.191 Notwithstanding the Court’s rhetoric, it is quite doubtful that the Court really meant to raise serious questions about all state laws dictating who may enter into a marital relationship. People are not permitted to marry dogs or cats. They are banned from marrying their first cousins or their aunts. They cannot marry two people, or three, or twenty. Must these restrictions be justified by showing that they are the least restrictive means of achieving a compelling state interest? If so, at least some of them would be in serious trouble. Perhaps the ban on incestuous marriages could be defended by pointing to the risk of coercion and the danger to any children who would result. But as we have seen, it is easy to imagine some cases in which any such defense would be weak—as, for example, where the would-be spouses 190 Id. at 404. 191 It would also be possible to deny that the right to marry has a constitutional status—to urge that Loving and Zablocki were really equal protection cases. This view would have some appeal, especially to skeptics about substantive due process; but it does not fit with current law. are both adults and do not plan to have children. Perhaps bans on polygamy could be defended by pointing to the risk of exploitation, especially of the women involved. But we might doubt whether Loving and Zablocki should be read to require a careful judicial inquiry into that question. 
A possible opinion would urge that by deeming the right to marry fundamental, the Court did not mean to suggest that it would strictly scrutinize any law that departed from the traditional idea that a marriage is between (one) woman and (one) man. It meant only to say that when a man and a woman seek to marry, the state must have good reasons for putting significant barriers in their path. This rationale has the advantage of fitting with both Loving and Zablocki. The problem is that it seems somewhat arbitrary and opportunistic. Why, exactly, should a marriage be defined in this way? Why, in any case, should the definition be such as to allow the state not to recognize same-sex marriages? 
It is not at all easy to answer this question. In my view, the only difference between Lawrence and a ban on same-sex marriage is that the sodomy law no longer fits with widespread public convictions, whereas the public does not (yet) support same-sex marriages. If we rely heavily on the desuetude-type passages of the Court’s opinion, then it would be possible to sketch an opinion upholding the ban on same-sex marriages while also invalidating any state law that punishes consensual sodomy. Such an opinion would read Loving and Zablocki in the narrow way just suggested, with reference to slippery slope problems, and conclude that a rational basis is all that is required for a law that restricts the institution of marriage to one woman and one man. This opinion would certainly be plausible. The problem is a general one with any approach that relies on public convictions: they might not be principled. The public might have gone this far, and no further; but there may be no good reason for it not to have gone further. I cannot see a principled distinction, aside from public convictions, between what the Court did in Lawrence and what a court would do in striking down a state’s failure to recognize samesex marriages. 
The discussion thus far has gone briskly over a considerable amount of territory. For those who find tabular summaries useful, consider the following: 
Invalid 
Valid Sexual Harassment X (coercive) Prostitution 
X (commercial) Incest Adultery Fornication Use of sexual devices Polygamy Employment discrimination against gays and lesbians Bans on same-sex marriage X (military) X (for now?) 
X (but perhaps defensible by reference to harms to third parties) X X X (except for military) 
The Lawrence decision is susceptible to two broad readings. The Court’s ruling could easily be seen as a recognition of the constitutionally fundamental character of sexual liberty, disabling the state from controlling the acts of consenting adults without an extremely powerful justification. Alternatively, it could be seen as a rational basis holding with a strong Millian foundation—a holding that invalidates “morals” legislation, requiring harm to third parties whenever government is regulating private sexual conduct. In practice, these two readings would not be terribly far apart; they would use different doctrinal avenues to similar results. 
I have suggested the possibility of a third and narrower reading, one that stresses, as the Court did, that a criminal ban on sodomy is hopelessly out of accord with contemporary convictions. Thus understood, the due process principle of Lawrence asserts a constitutional objection to statutes that are rarely enforced and that interfere with important human interests without anything like a justification in contemporary values. Such statutes are a recipe for unpredictable and discriminatory enforcement practices; they do violence to both democratic values and the rule of law. I have stressed the roots of Lawrence in a narrow, American-style version of the idea of desuetude -- not because the broader readings are entirely implausible, but because the Court would have been extremely unlikely to rule as it did if not for its perception that the Texas law could not claim a plausible foundation in widely shared moral commitments. I believe that an equal protection ruling, of the sort sketched by Justice O’Connor, would have been preferable, not least because it would have emphasized what should be clear to all: The problem in Lawrence had everything to with the social subordination of gays and lesbians. But a due process ruling, understood in the relatively narrow terms outlined here, has considerable appeal. 
What is the reach of Lawrence? Restrictions on sex that is nonconsensual or commercial are surely valid. By contrast, laws forbidding fornication (defined as extramarital but non-adulterous sex) are surely invalid. The Constitution probably forbids government from punishing, either criminally or civilly, those who have used sexual devices. The state is almost certainly banned from discriminating against those who have engaged in homosexual conduct, at least outside of certain specialized contexts (most notably the military). In some applications, bans on incest and adultery could be subject to serious constitutional challenge. 
The hardest cases involve the failure to recognize same-sex marriages. If Lawrence is put together with Loving and Zablocki, it would seem clear that the government would have to produce a compelling justification for refusing to recognize such marriages, and compelling justifications are not easy to find. If we emphasize an equality rationale, the subtext of Lawrence, then bans on same-sex marriages are in serious constitutional trouble. On the other hand, the ban on same-sex marriages cannot, at this point in time, be regarded as an anachronism, or as conspicuously out of touch with emerging social values; and there are strong prudential reasons for the Court to hesitate in this domain. The marriage issue, more than any other, will test the question whether Lawrence is this generation’s Griswold—or the start of something far more ambitious. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior, Sanctions, and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis (November 2002) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) 
Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/ public_law_and_legal_theory Part of the Law Commons Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere. Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein 
Why Does the American Constitution Lack Social and Economic Guarantees? Cass R. Sunstein* 
Why does the American Constitution lack contain social and economic guarantees, which appear in most contemporary constitutions? This essay explores four possible answers: chronological, cultural, institutional, and realist. The chronological explanation emphasizes the fact that in the late eighteenth century, social and economic rights simply were not on the viewscreen for constitution-makers. The point is correct, but as a complete account, the chronological explanation fails for the simple reason that constitutional meaning changes over time. The institutional explanation emphasizes that Americans typically see constitutional rights not as mere goals or aspirations, but as pragmatic instruments for judicial enforcement. The difficulty with the institutional explanation is that social and economic rights can, in fact, be enforced judicially. The cultural explanation sees the absence of social and economic rights as part of the general failure of socialist movements in the United States (“American exceptionalism”). The problem with this explanation is that social and economic rights can in fact coexist with a market economy. The realist explanation places a spotlight on the underappreciated fact that the United States Supreme Court came very close, in the 1960s and 1970s, to recognizing social and economic rights under the Constitution. The Court’s refusal to recognize such rights was largely a result of the presidential election of 1968 and in particular of four critical appointments by President Nixon. This is an important source of “American exceptionalism” in the domain of social and economic rights. Here as elsewhere, there is a possibility of multiple equilibria, and with a small difference or two, the United States might well have had an equilibrium that included social and economic rights. 
“The alms given to a naked man in the street do not fulfill the obligations of the state, which owes to every citizen a certain subsistence, a proper nourishment, convenient clothing, and a kind of life not incompatible with health.” 
Montesquieu “This Republic had its beginning, and grew to its present strength, under the protection of certain inalienable rights—among them the right of free speech, free press, free worship, trial by jury, freedom from unreasonable searches. They were our rights to life and liberty. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. 
As our economy has grown in size and stature, however—as our industrial economy expanded—these political rights proved inadequate to assure us equality in the pursuit of happiness. . . . We have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights under which a new basis of security and prosperity can be established for all—regardless of station, race, or creed, 
The right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries or shops or farms or mines of the Nation; 
The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation; 
The right of every farmer to raise and sell his products at a return which will give him and his family a decent living; 
The right of every businessman, large and small, to trade in an atmosphere of freedom from unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or abroad; 
The right of every family to a decent home; The right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy good health; The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age, sickness, accident, and unemployment; 
The right to a good education. 
I ask Congress to explore the means for implementing this economic bill of rights—for it is definitely the responsibility of the Congress to do so.” Franklin Delano Roosevelt 
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights protects a wide range of social and economic rights. It proclaims, for example, that “Everyone has a right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.” It also provides a “right to equal pay for equal work,” a right “to form and to join trade unions for protection,” and a right to “just and favourable remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social protection.” More broadly still, the Declaration gives “everyone” a “right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.” The Declaration also provides a “right to education” and to “social security.” 
Many modern constitutions follow the Declaration in creating social and economic rights. They guarantee citizens a wide range of social entitlements. Of course this was true for the Soviet Constitution. But many non-communist and post-communist constitutions contain these rights as well. The Romanian Constitution, for example, includes the right to leisure, the right to work, the right to equal pay for equal work, and measures for the protection and safety of workers. The Syrian Constitution proclaims that the “state undertakes to provide work for all citizens.” The Constitution of Norway imposes on the state the responsibility “to create conditions enabling every person capable of work to earn a living by his work.”1 The Bulgarian Constitution offers the right to a holiday, the right to work, the right to labor safety, the right to social security, and the right to free medical care. The Hungarian Constitution proclaims, “People living within the territory of the Republic of Hungary have the right to the highest possible level of physical health.” It also provides that “Everyone who works has the right to emolument that corresponds to the amount and quality of the work performed.” The Constitution of Peru announces, “The worker is entitled to a fair and adequate remuneration enabling him to provide for himself and his family material and spiritual well-being.”2 
Not every modern constitution creates rights of this sort; such rights are entirely absent from a number of contemporary constitutions. Indeed some nations recognize such rights, but in a way that seems to make them goals and not rights at all. The Constitution of Switzerland, for example, says that “the Confederation and the cantons seek to ensure” certain rights, involving social security, necessary health care, and more.3 The Constitution of India offers a range of civil and political rights, and also offers “directive principles of state policy,” saying that the state shall “direct its policy towards securing” certain rights, including an adequate means of livelihood, equal pay for equal work for both men and women, and more.4 This strategy is taken as well in Ireland, Nigeria, and Papua New Guinea. The South African Constitution recognizes a wide range of social and economic rights, but also acknowledges resource constraints, typically obliging the state to “take reasonable legislative and other measures, within its available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of” the relevant right.5 Provisions of this kind are ambiguous, but they have been held to be justiciable, obliging the government not to default in its basic obligation.6 
I am concerned here with a particular puzzle. The constitutions of most nations create social and economic rights, whether or not they are enforceable. But the American Constitution does nothing of the kind. Why is this? What makes the American Constitution so distinctive in this regard? 
I will explore four possible answers here. In the process I hope to cast some light on the effects of constitutions, cultural differences, and social and economic guarantees in 1 Constitution of Norway, Article 110. 2 Constitution of Peru, Article 24. 3 Article 41. 4 Constitution of India, Part IV, art. 39. 5 See, e.g., section 26 (housing). 6 See Grootboom. general. The first explanation is chronological; it points simply to the age of the American Constitution, which is the oldest in force in the world. The second, institutional in nature, emphasizes that social and economic right cannot easily coexist with judicial review, a preoccupation of the American legal culture. The third points to “American exceptionalism” as it is standardly understood: the absence of a significant socialist movement in the United States. The fourth, rooted in legal realism, stresses developments within the United States Supreme Court in the 1960s and 1970s. In the end my major suggestion will be that the fourth explanation is the most interesting and even correct. The Constitution means what the Supreme Court says that it means, and with a modest shift in personnel, the Constitution would have been understood to create social and economic rights of the sort recognized in many modern constitutions, and indeed in the constitutions of some of the American states. 
An additional word before we proceed: To evaluate the four explanations, it is important to distinguish between necessary and sufficient conditions for the recognition of social and economic rights. Judicial interpretation of an ambiguous constitutional provision is a sufficient condition, though not a necessary one. Ratification of an explicit provision is a sufficient condition, though not a necessary one. I am concerned here to explore both the failure of a serious ratification effort and the absence of a judicial interpretation that would recognize social and economic rights. 
This essay is organized as follows. Part II offers some conceptual preliminaries. My goal here is to challenge the claim of a sharp dichotomy between traditional constitutional rights and social and economic rights, by showing that both of these depend on an active government and indeed on the expenditure of taxpayer funds. Part III explores the chronological explanation. Part IV briefly discusses the amendment process and also the New Deal period, in which social and economic guarantees received prominent public attention. Part V examines institutional considerations. Part VI investigates the cultural explanation. Part VII explores developments in the 1960s and 1970s, suggesting that the Court came to close to understanding the Constitution to create social and economic rights, and that with slight differences in personnel, the Court would have done exactly that. Part VIII is a brief conclusion. 
What is distinctive about social and economic rights? What makes them unusual? The conventional answer is that while ordinary rights create “negative” checks on government, preserving a sphere of private immunity, social and economic rights impose “positive” obligations on government, creating a set of private entitlements to government assistance. On this view, negative guarantees are both time-honored and consistent with the (classical) liberal tradition. Positive rights are novel, a creation of the New Deal, social democracy, or perhaps socialism, assimilating to the category of “rights” what would otherwise be seen as pleas for public assistance. In a standard formulation, Roosevelt’s proposed Second Bill of Rights, set out as above, is distinctive “in linking together the negative liberty from government achieved in the old Bill of Rights to the positive liberty through government to be achieved in the new Bill of Rights.”7 
This is indeed a conventional way to see matters, and it has some historical support. Social and economic guarantees, often described as “second generation” rights, did receive recognition long after the traditional liberal rights. But the conventional understanding is a bad way of understanding the relevant categories. Most of the so-called negative rights require government assistance, not governmental abstinence. Those rights cannot exist without public assistance. Consider, for example, the right to private property. As Bentham wrote “property and law are born together and die together. Before the laws there was no property; take away the laws, all property ceases.” In the state of nature, private property cannot exist, at least not in the way that it exists in a free society. In the state of nature, any property “rights” must be protected either through self-help—useful to the strong, not to the weak—or through social norms. This form of protection is far too fragile to support a market economy or indeed the basic independence of citizens. As we know it, private property is both created and protected by law; it requires extensive governmental assistance. 
The same point holds for the other foundation of a market economy, the close sibling of private property: freedom of contract. For that form of freedom to exist, it is extremely important to have reliable enforcement mechanisms in the form of civil courts. The creation of such mechanisms requires action, not abstinence. Nor is the point - the dependence of rights on public assistance—limited to the foundations of a market economy. Take, for example, the right to be free from torture and abuse, perhaps the defining “negative” freedom. Of course it is possible to say this right is a “negative” safeguard against public intrusion into the private domain. But as a practical matter, this right requires a state apparatus willing to ferret out and to punish the relevant rights violations. If the right includes protection against private depredations, it cannot exist simply with government abstinence. If the right is limited to protection against public abuse of power, it can be satisfied by abstinence; but in practice, abstinence from torture and abuse must be guaranteed by a public apparatus that will deter and punish misconduct. Some rights require government to protect against its own rights violations. If we go down the list of conventional private rights, we will see this same point at every turn. 
There is a larger implication, with direct relevance to the question of social and economic rights. All constitutional rights have budgetary implications; all constitutional rights cost money.8 If the government plans to protect private property, it will have to expend resources to ensure against both private and public intrusions. If the government wants to protect people against unreasonable searches and seizures, it will have to expend resources to train, monitor, and discipline the police. If the government wants to protect freedom of speech, it must, at a minimum, take steps to constrain its own agents; and these steps will be costly. It follows that insofar as they are costly, social and economic rights are not unique. 7 Doris Kearns Goodwin, No Ordinary Time 485 (1994). 8 This is the theme of Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (1999). 
Now it is possible that such rights are unusually costly - that to ensure (for example) that everyone has housing, it will be necessary to spend more than must be spent to ensure (for example) that everyone is free from unreasonable searches and seizures. But any such comparisons are empirical and contingent; they cannot be made on an a priori basis. We could imagine a society in which it cost a great deal to protect private property, but not so much to ensure basic subsistence. Of course most societies are not like that; in most societies, the management of a social welfare system is more expensive than the management of a system to protect property rights. This kind of distinction—quantitative rather than qualitative in nature—is probably the central one. 
In explaining the absence of social and economic guarantees from the American Constitution, the most natural point is chronological. The simple claim is that the American Constitution, the oldest existing constitution in the world, was ratified during the last eighteenth century—a time when constitutions were simply not thought to include social and economic guarantees.9 The American framers were building on rights as understood in the British tradition. No one then suggested, or even thought to suggest, that the Bill of Rights should contain a guarantee of this kind. When it was drawn up, the American approach was entirely standard, and hence the absence of social and economic rights is simply a matter of timing. On this view, there was no American exceptionalism, and there is really no puzzle to be solved. When modern constitutions were drawn up, the international understanding was altogether different, and hence it is entirely to be expected that social and economic rights will be found in the constitutions of (for example) Bulgaria, South Africa, Norway, and Russia. Whether a constitution contains secondgeneration rights can be predicted pretty well just by looking at the year of its ratification. With respect to such rights at the constitutional level, American exceptionalism is a myth and an illusion. 
To emphasize the chronological point is emphatically not to suggest that the American framers did not care about poor people. On the contrary, some of their writing suggested a strong commitment to social and economic rights, though not at the constitutional level. James Madison, probably the most influential voice in the founding period, offered the following means of combating “the evil of parties”: “1. By establishing a political equality among all. 2. By withholding unnecessary opportunities from a few, to increase the inequality of property, by an immoderate, and especially an unmerited, accumulation of riches. 3. By the silent operation of laws, which, without violating the rights of property, reduce extreme wealth to a state of mediocrity, and raise extreme indigence toward a state of comfort.”10 Jefferson, not a framer but a strong influence 9 Of course this point itself remains to be explained. But any such explanation would not involve American exceptionalism of any sort, which is my concern here. 10 James Madison, 14 The Papers of James Madison 197-98 (1983). during the founding period, wrote, “I am conscious that an equal division of property is impracticable. But the consequences of this enormous inequality producing so much misery to the bulk of mankind, legislatures cannot invest too many devices for subdividing property, only taking care to let their subdivisions go hand in hand with the natural affections of the human mind. . . . . Another means of silently lessening the inequality of property is to exempt all from taxation below a certain point, and to tax the higher portions of property in geometrical progression as they rise. Whenever there is in any country, uncultivated lands and unemployed poor, it is clear that the laws of property have been so far extended as to violate natural right. The earth is given as a common stock for man to labor and live on.”11 
It is relevant here that many of the classical liberal thinkers, far from rejecting social and economic rights, explicitly endorsed them. Recall Montesquieu’s claim, quoted above: “The alms given to a naked man in the street do not fulfill the obligations of the state, which owes to every citizen a certain subsistence, a proper nourishment, convenient clothing, and a kind of life not incompatible with health.” John Locke of course a large influence on American political thought, and he wrote in similar terms: “As Justice gives every Man a Title to the product of his honest Industry, and the fair Acquisitions of his Ancestors descended to him, so Charity gives every man a Title to so much of another’s plenty, as will keep him from extream want, where he has no means to subsist otherwise.” 
The chronological account, in short, emphasizes that some of the Constitution’s framers believed in some sort of social and economic rights, but adds that they did not believe in placing those rights in a constitution, for the simple reason that constitutionalization of such rights was a most foreign concept at the time. Of course it would remain necessary to explain the reason for the rise of second-generation rights— why they were absent when they were absent, and why they arose when they did—but this would not be a question about American exceptionalism in particular. It would be a question about changing conceptions of constitutional rights over time. 
Undoubtedly the chronological account has considerable truth. But as a complete explanation, it faces a serious problem: The meaning of the Constitution changes over time, and in numerous ways, the American constitution has gone far beyond the original understanding of its authors and ratifiers. Constitutional change is in part a function of explicit constitutional amendments, and this is the place to begin. After the Civil War, the Constitution was of course significantly altered, and here too we find no serious interest in social and economic rights. Why not? Perhaps the same chronological account works here as well: In the late nineteenth century, social and economic rights were generally unfamiliar. But in the New Deal period (on which more shortly), the Constitution was not amended at all; there was no interest in adding such rights to the Constitution. Why not? In the midst of President Johnson’s Great Society, and during widespread late-twentieth interest in poverty, housing rights, and the like, America saw no serious debate about constitutional amendments. There was no significant discussion of adding social and 11 Thomas Jefferson, 8 The Papers of Thomas Jefferson 681-83 (1953). economic rights to the American constitution. The chronological account cannot explain this fact. 
There is another problem. Constitutional change is often a product not of constitutional amendment, but of interpretation, leading to new understandings of old provisions.12 Even if the eighteenth century constitution did not contain social and economic rights, the American constitution might well have interpreted to do so. Consider the question whether there is a problem of “American exceptionalism” in the absence of a ban on sex discrimination in the American constitution. Almost all contemporary constitutions explicitly ban sex discrimination; why is the American constitution so different? A chronological account offers part of an answer, but it is ludicrously incomplete. The Equal Rights Amendment might have been ratified. It wasn’t; why not? Part of the answer points not to American exceptionalism in the context of sex equality, but to the change in judicial interpretation of the equal protection clause over time. The American constitution is now understood to have something very much like a constitutional ban on sex discrimination, not because of the original understanding of its text, but because of new judicial interpretations. If this has happened in the context of sex equality, why hasn’t it happened for social and economic rights as well? The chronological account offers no answer. 
The chronological account can be strengthened by emphasizing a simple fact: It is not easy to amend the American Constitution, even if there is wide support for the amendment. The Constitution nearly locks out changes—not by making them impossible, but by making them extremely difficult. The American public broadly supported the Equal Rights Amendment, but it nonetheless failed to pass. Because the Constitution creates real obstacles to amendment, immense popular support was not enough to ensure ratification of the ERA. Even if social and economic rights commanded widespread popular support, they might not find their way into the constitution. 
By itself this point seems a weak explanation of the failure to create social and economic rights, because no serious amendment effort was made. In these circumstances, it might seem that the difficulty of amending the constitution cannot explain the situation. But the absence of a serious amendment effort should not be misinterpreted. The very difficulty of amending the Constitution has a strong deterrent effect, and perhaps such an effort would have been made with a different constitutional structure. Because it is difficult to speculate about counterfactual history, the possibility cannot be ruled out. But there is every reason to think that even with a much easier amendment process, the Constitution would not have been altered to provide social and economic guarantees. 12 See David Strauss, Common Law Constitutional Interpretation, 63 U Chi L Rev 877 (1996). 
The point can be clarified by reference to the New Deal era. This was the period in which the United States thought most seriously about social and economic guarantees—not with an eye toward constitutional amendments, but nonetheless in a serious and selfconscious manner. Indeed, the New Deal saw a large-scale renovation of the American constitutional structure, amounting to a kind of second American Revolution.13 The renovation involved the three cornerstones of that structure: federalism; checks and balances; and individual rights. As is well known, the powers of the national government significantly increased, and a great deal of authority was concentrated in the presidency. What is less well known is the nature of the New Deal’s renovation of preexisting understandings of legal rights. Before the New Deal, the American legal culture defined “rights” largely in terms of the eighteenth century catalogue of the common law, and hence freedom of contract and private property were prominent illustrations of rights protected from governmental incursion. 
The New Dealers believed that the common law catalogue included too much and too little. A large part of their argument was an effort to denaturalize the common law. In their view, rights of freedom of contract and private property depended for their existence on a legal apparatus; they were hardly natural, but resulted from a form of governmental intervention into private affairs. Thus Roosevelt urged, “We must lay hold of the fact that the laws of economics are not made by nature. They are made by human beings.” This claim did not mean that freedom of contract and private property were bad ideas. But it did mean that they should be evaluated pragmatically and in terms of what they did for or to the human beings subject to them. And on this count, the New Dealers supported many readjustments of common law interests. Rights to governmental protection within the employment market, for example, were insufficiently protected by the common law, as were the interests of the poor, consumers of dangerous food and drugs, the elderly, traders on securities markets, and victims of unfair trade practices. 
This basic theme, the central ingredient of New Deal constitutionalism, was prominent throughout Roosevelt’s presidency. In his speech accepting the Democratic nomination for the presidency in 1936, for example, Roosevelt argued that although the constitutional framers were concerned only with political rights, new circumstances required the recognition of economic rights as well, because “freedom is no half-and-half affair.” The most dramatic statement of this revised notion of entitlement came in President Roosevelt’s State of the Union address of 1944, which set forth the “Second Bill of Rights” quoted as the epigraph to this essay. 
In coming to terms with Roosevelt’s proposal, three points are worth emphasizing. The first is the sheer amplitude of the relevant rights, including most of what can be found in the Universal Declaration and in contemporary constitutions. The second is Roosevelt’s insistence that the relevant rights had already been “accepted,” post-New Deal—that they reflected the nation’s official creed in 1944, and hence represent no new innovation. The third is that Roosevelt proposed no constitutional amendment, and no judicial role, but 13 Or perhaps third if we include the Civil War Amendments. instead an effort by Congress to “explore the means for implementing this economic bill of rights.” It should be noted in this regard that at the state level, constitutional amendments were indeed ratified, endorsing aspects of the Second Bill of Rights as a matter of state constitutional law. Indeed, about a dozen states now offer social and economic rights. The New York Constitution is exemplary: “The aid, care, and support of the needy are public concerns and shall be provided by the state and by such of its subdivisions, and in such manner, and by such means, as the legislature may from time to time determine.” The claim of large-scale American exceptionalism as a cultural matter is complicated not only by Roosevelt’s plea for a Second Bill of Rights, but also by the existence of considerable constitutional innovation at the state level—activity that has not, by the way, made much differences in terms of actual lives of poor people. 
But for present purposes, the crucial point is that the New Dealers did not pursue constitutional reform. Their approach on this count is fully consistent with their general strategy, which was to avoid official amendments entirely, and to use political processes and constitutional interpretation to move in the directions that they sought.14 Part of the reason for this strategy was the sheer difficulty of producing constitutional amendments. Part of it was great suspicion of the conservative judiciary. For those interested in creating a second Bill of Rights, constitutional amendment did not seem an attractive option in light of the inevitable fact that any such amendment would increase the authority of judges. The point is directly related to the second explanation, to which I now turn. 
The institutional explanation claims that in the American culture, constitutions are seen as pragmatic instruments—suited for, and not inextricable from, judicial enforcement. And indeed it is useful, even crucial to distinguish between the pragmatic and the aspirational conception of constitutions. When presented with a proposed constitutional provision, many Americans tend to ask, “What will this provision do, in fact? How will courts interpret this provision, in fact?” 
These questions played a major role in debates over the Equal Rights Amendment—helping to raise qualms about that Amendment even for those committed to sex equality.15 But other people, especially but not only in Eastern Europe, tend to think of constitutions as literally declarative—as expressive of a nation’s deepest hopes and highest aspirations. They like to ask, “what values does this provision affirm, in principle?” They see a constitution as a kind of declaration, probably not meant for judicial enforcement, and possibly not meant for compliance in the real world. As analogies, consider the Declaration of Independence or even the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was debated and signed with little attention to the question of judicial enforcement, which was of course not contemplated. It is important to emphasize here that many of the constitutions containing social and economic rights simply borrowed from the Universal Declaration. It is also important to note that there is real doubt about whether the many constitutions containing social and economic rights have made any difference at all “on the 14 See Bruce A. Ackerman, We the People vol. 1 (1995. 15 See Jane Mansbridge, Why We Lost the ERA (1994). ground”—that is, there is real doubt about whether such rights have actually lead to more money, food, or shelter for poor people. 
If we take the pragmatic approach, we will be likely to ask whether social and economic rights would be a sensible part of an enforceable constitution containing the important institution of judicial review. Should a constitution create a “right to just and favourable remuneration”? To “a standard of living adequate for the health and leisure of” one’s family, “including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services”? To “rest and leisure”? What would these provisions mean, concretely? What would they mean in a poor nation with high levels of unemployment and inadequate medical care and housing? What would they mean, concretely, in a wealthy nation like the United States or France? If a nation failed to protect the relevant rights, would courts be authorized to intervene—as they usually are when rights are violated? 
If these questions appear difficult to answer, we might explain American exceptionalism in institutional terms, as a response to the conception of constitutional rights as pragmatic instruments. And we might explain the contemporary practice of including such rights, all over the world, as a product of an understanding that they need not mean much, if anything in practice. Such rights are meant as signals, domestically and internationally, but they are not legally enforceable instruments. On this view, Americans should not be thought skeptical of social and economic guarantees in principle; even Ronald Reagan was committed to a social safety net. The real source of skepticism is an account of what kind of document a constitution really is, and of what kinds of rights belong in a document of that sort. 
There is considerable truth in this explanation. American courts have been reluctant to recognize social and economic rights in part because of a belief that enforcement and protection of such rights would strain judicial capacities. Political actors, even those interested in helping poor people, have been skeptical about the likely effectiveness of constitutional provisions that might be ignored in practice. Outside of the United States, some nations, including India and South Africa, have been alert to the underlying difficulties, and have sharply limited the constitutional status of such rights by reducing judicial authority. And as I have noted, social and economic rights have served as aspirations, with apparently no real-world effects, in the many nations in which they are recognized. It is hard to show that when nations are relatively more likely to help poor people, it is because they have constitutional provisions calling for such help. 
But the institutional account cannot be all of the picture. The reason is that those who want constitutions to be pragmatic instruments need not reject the idea of social and economic rights. In the United States itself, state constitutions protect those rights, and some courts are willing to enforce them, at least to some degree.16 In South Africa, initial steps have been taken, not toward careful judicial oversight of the welfare system, and not toward ensuring that everyone has decent shelter and food, but toward ensuring that the government at least creates “programs” that ensure minimal attention to basic needs.17 It is 16 See Tucker v. Toia. 17 Grootboom. surely right to say that social and economic rights could strain judicial capacities. Certainly no court, in poor or rich nations, is going to be able to ensure that everyone has decent food, clothing, medical care, and housing.18 But those who are committed to such rights, in principle, might well urge that courts could take steps to ensure that basic needs receive a degree of legislative priority, and that conspicuous neglect would be corrected. As a result, the institutional explanation has a serious defect. 
I now turn to what may well be the most tempting explanation, one that points to American exceptionalism in general. Socialism has never been a powerful force within the United States. America is said to be exceptional because “it didn’t happen here”19: There was never a strong effort to move the United States in the direction of socialism or social democracy. On this view, the absence of social and economic rights has an explanation in terms of American politics or even culture. No group that might have been interested in such rights was ever powerful enough to obtain them. In the debate over the Universal Declaration, social and communist nations were most enthusiastic about social and economic guarantees, whereas capitalist nations were most skeptical. Perhaps this, in a nutshell, is the best explanation for the American Constitution’s failure to include such guarantees. The Constitution’s content is a political artifact, and American politics is simply different. 
There is of course an extensive literature on American exceptionalism in general, with many competing views. Some people suggest that American workers have had, or have thought that they have, a high degree of upward mobility, muting dissatisfaction with any particular status quo. Others have suggested that feudalism is a necessary precursor for socialism, and that because America lacks a feudal past, socialism was inevitably going to fail. Others suggest that the American electoral system, with two dominant parties and elaborate checks and balances, dampened socialist efforts in the period in which they succeeded elsewhere. Still others suggest that powerful private groups were quick to suppress socialist movements whenever they threatened to be effective. For present purposes, it is unnecessary to choose among these competing explanations. What matters is the underlying weakness of socialism in the United States. 
There is this much truth in the cultural explanation: The existence of social and economic rights, within a nation’s constitution, is strongly correlated20 with the strength of socialist or left-wing elements within that nation. In America, a strong socialist movement might well have sought a constitutional amendment or instead led to political changes that would have produced novel interpretations. As we shall see, a more left-wing political order would have produced a more left-wing Supreme Court, and such a court would likely have interpreted the Constitution to recognize social and economic rights (see below). For this reason it is right to say that to understand the absence of such rights from American 18 Compare first generation rights, which are not very different on this count. The fourth amendment, for example, is violated every day. 19 See Lipset; Foner. 20 But far from perfectly. constitutional law, it is helpful to say something about the absence of a significant socialist movement in the United States. But as a full account of the situation, the cultural explanation is plainly inadequate. The reason is that a strong socialist movement is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for social and economic rights. It is easy to imagine a nation in which such a movement exists, but does not think it useful to insist on constitutional provisions of this kind. Consider Canada, Israel, and England, three nations with strong socialist movements but without social and economic rights. 
It is also easy to imagine a nation without a strong socialist movement but with considerable enthusiasm for social and economic rights. Indeed several such nations exist. Franklin Delano Roosevelt was no socialist, indeed he strongly believed in capitalist institutions; but he was committed to “freedom from want,” and as we have seen, he sought congressional protection of that form of freedom. It is easy to imagine a somewhat different FDR, one who had the same set of substantive beliefs, but who also believed that the constitutional route was the correct one to take. Why was that FDR not America’s FDR? The reason does not lie in the absence of a strong socialist movement in the United States. If an American president could be committed to a second bill of rights for legislative enactment, he could also be committed to a second bill of rights at the constitutional level. The absence of significant American interest in constitutionalization is not about culture alone. It must involve, at a minimum, the institutional points mentioned above. 
I have emphasized that the meaning of the American Constitution changes because of new interpretations. If the Constitution meant, in all respects, what it originally meant, American constitutional rights would be thin indeed. Most of the key rights-protecting provisions now mean far more than they originally meant. For example, no provision of the Constitution forbids the national government from discriminating on the basis of race; but the fifth amendment, preventing denials of liberty without due process of law, is now taken to prohibit race discrimination at the national level. The best reading of history is that the first amendment allowed Congress to regulate a great deal of speech; judicial interpretation, especially in the late twentieth century, has lead to a robust free speech principle, far beyond anything envisaged by the first amendment’s authors and ratifiers. I have mentioned that the fourteenth amendment, when originally ratified, did not prohibit sex discrimination at all, but the American Constitution is now understand to ban most forms of sex discrimination, and indeed to contain a far more robust ban than can be found under most of the world’s constitutions that contain explicit bans on sex discrimination. 
If the American Constitution meant what it originally meant, the nation would have a lot of explaining to do—and the absence of social and economic rights would be one of the least conspicuous forms of American exceptionalism at the constitutional level. Here is a hypothesis: An interpretation of the fourteenth amendment that called for social and economic rights would not, in fact, be much more of a stretch of the document than many interpretations that are now taken for granted in American constitutional law. I cannot defend the hypothesis here; to do so, it would be necessary to say a great deal about what constitutional interpretation entails. But I believe that I am building on conventional understandings. 
All this is relatively abstract. The realist explanation for American practice is more concrete. It emphasizes that American constitutional law is, to a considerable degree, a form of common law,21 based on analogical reasoning. It suggests that American constitutional law could easily have come to recognize social and economic rights. It urges that the crucial development was the election of President Nixon in 1968, which produced four Supreme Court appointments, which lead in turn to a critical mass of justices willing to reject the claim that social and economic rights were part of the Constitution. So described, the realist explanation seems to me entirely correct. 
To understand the point, it is necessary to see that there was a serious and partially successful effort, in the 1960s and 1970s, to understand the Constitution to create social and economic guarantees. In some of the cases, the Court went so far as to hold that the government must subsidize poor people in certain domains. In Griffin v. Illinois,22 for example, the Court held that the equal protection clause requires states to provide trial transcripts or their equivalent to poor people appealing their criminal convictions. In Douglas v. California,23 the Court extended this ruling, concluding that poor people must be provided with counsel on their first appeal of a criminal conviction. When the Court struck down the poll tax,24 it effectively ruled that states must provide the vote free of charge—even though it is expensive to run an election. 
These decisions emphatically recognize social and economic rights; they say that the government must provide financial assistance to poor people in certain domains. For this reason it is too simple to say that the American Constitution is not understood to create social and economic rights. But the reach of these decisions is limited to contexts in which poverty interacts with interests that seem part and parcel of citizenship (the rights to vote and to contest a criminal conviction). In other cases, however, the Court went further. In Shapiro v. Thompson,25 the Court held that the state of California could not, consistently with the Constitution, impose a six-month waiting period before new arrivals to the state could receive welfare benefits. The Court relied on the constitutional right to travel, but it also spoke of the special needs for people, contending that California denies “welfare aid upon which may depend the ability of the families to obtain the very means to subsist food, shelter, and other necessities of life.” If the right to travel was all that was involved, this suggestion would seem purposeless. 
Indeed, the Court came to give procedural protection to welfare benefits, in the important sense that under the due process clause, the government is not permitted to remove those benefits without giving people a hearing.26 In its initial decision, the Court 21 See Strauss, supra note. 22 351 U.S. 12 (1956). 23 372 U.S. 353 (1963). 24 Harper v. Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 U.S. 663 (1966). 25 394 U.S. 618 (1969). 26 Goldberg v. Kelly. emphasized the particular nature of welfare benefits: “Welfare, by meeting the basic demands of subsistence, can help bring within the reach of the poor the same opportunities that are available to others to participate meaningfully in the life of the community. [Public] assistance, then, is not mere charity, but a means to ‘promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity.’” With its striking reference to the Constitution itself, the Court seemed to signal its willingness to consider the possibility that some constitutional provision would grant a right to subsistence for those in need. In fact prominent academic writing suggested that the Court was moving in that direction.27 
By 1970, it was not at all clear that the Court would not eventually recognize a robust set of social and economic rights. In retrospect, the crucial event was the election of President Nixon in 1968, and his four appointments to the Court: Warren Burger in 1969, Harry Blackmun in 1970, and Lewis Powell and William Rehnquist in 1972. These appointees proved decisive to a series of decisions, issued in rapid succession, limiting the reach of Warren Court decisions and eventually making clear that social and economic rights do not have constitutional status outside of certain restricted domains. During the period from 1970 to 1973, the Court cut off the emerging development. Here is a brief outline. 
In Dandridge v. Williams,28 the Court rejected a constitutional challenge to a state law that imposed an upper limit on the size of grants under its welfare program, regardless of the size of the family. The Court recognized that pressing necessities were involved, but found that fact constitutionally irrelevant, and said so explicitly. In Lindsay v. Normet,29 the Court upheld a state’s summary eviction procedure. The plaintiff contended that the “need for decent shelter” and the “right to retain peaceful possession of one’s home” were fundamental interests under the Constitution, subject to intrusion only after a powerful showing of countervailing government justification. The Court rejected the argument, saying that the “Constitution does not provide judicial remedies for every social and economic ill. We are unable to perceive in that document any constitutional guarantee of access to dwellings of a particular quality.” Justice Powell wrote the key decision for a 5-4 majority in San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez,30 which upheld a constitutional challenge to local financing of public schools, even though local financing produces large intrastate disparities in per-pupil expenditures. Justice Powell’s lengthy opinion understood previous cases in an exceedingly narrow way, as involving absolute deprivations of constitutionally protected interests. Rodriguez was effectively the death knell for social and economic rights in the United States. 
This overview should be sufficient to show that the brief period from 1970 through 1973 played a crucial and underappreciated role in American jurisprudence. The Nixon nominees rejected what appeared to be an emerging trend in the direction of recognizing a robust set of social and economic rights. There can be no serious doubt that Humphrey 27 See Frank Michelman, On Protecting the Poor Through the Fourteenth Amendment. 28 397 US 471 (1970). 29 405 US 56 (1972). 30 411 US 1 (1973). nominees would have seen things very differently. Of course we cannot know what the Court would ultimately have said, nor can we know if a Humphrey Court would have improved the lives of poor people. But it does not seem to me too speculative to suggest that if Humphrey had been elected, social and economic rights, American-style, would bear the same relationship to such rights in other constitutions as sex equality, Americanstyle, has to sex equality in other constitutions: Little or no difference in constitutional meaning, notwithstanding substantial difference in constitutional text. 
Why does the American constitution lack social and economic rights? The chronological explanation contains some truth; in the late eighteenth century, such rights simply were not on the viewscreen for constitution-makers. But the chronological explanation fails for the simple reason that constitutional meaning changes over time, and chronology alone does not explain the fact that the many constitutional changes do not include recognition of social and economic rights. 
The institutional explanation properly draws attention to the fact that many authors of international documents and constitutions do not think much about the question of enforcement, and attempt instead to set out goals or aspirations. American constitutionalism has generally avoided this strategy, and constitutional design, emphatically including constitutional interpretation, has been undertaken with close reference to the possibility of judicial enforcement. The problem with the institutional explanation is that social and economic rights can, in fact, coexist with judicial enforcement. There are difficulties here, but they are not insuperable. 
It is tempting to think that the constitutional status of social and economic rights will be very much a function of the power, in the relevant nation, of movements for socialism or for social democracy. To some extent this is certainly true, almost a truism. But it is far from impossible to believe, enthusiastically, in a market economy, and to believe at the same time in the obligation to ensure decent conditions for everyone. The framers of the American constitution were hardly socialists, but Madison, the most important framer of all, emphasized the need for laws that would “raise extreme indigence toward a state of comfort.” The New Dealers were hardly socialists, but Franklin Delano Roosevelt supported a second bill of rights, one that amounts to a match for the most expansive of social and economic rights in international documents and the modern constitutions. Many American conservatives, enthusiastic about free markets, have endorsed the idea of a social safety net for all. For these reasons, it is too crude to invoke American exceptionalism as the explanation of the absence of social and economic rights in the American constitution. 
The realist explanation places a spotlight on the underappreciated fact that the United States Supreme Court came very close, in the 1960s and 1970s, to recognizing social and economic rights under the Constitution. A step of this kind would not have been fundamentally different from much of what the Court actually did in the twentieth century. Why did the Court refuse to recognize the relevant rights? A large part of the answer lies in the presidential election of 1968 and in particular in President Nixon’s four critical appointments: Chief Justice Warren Burger and Justices Blackmun, Powell, and Rehnquist. In a very brief period in the early 1970s, the Court, led by these nominees, cut the ground out from an emerging movement. This, I suggest, is a real source of “American exceptionalism” in the domain of social and economic rights. 
Readers with comments may address them to: 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (November 1999; Ethics, v. 110, no. 1). 
Joseph Isenbergh, Impeachment and Presidential Immunity from Judicial Process (November 1999; forthcoming Yale Law and Policy Review v.18 #1). Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional? (August 1999; Michigan Law Review #3). 
Elizabeth Garrett, The Law and Economics of “Informed Voter” Ballot Notations (November 1999, University of Virginia Law Review, v. 85). David A. Strauss, Do Constitutional Amendments Matter? (November 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Standing for Animals (November 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Culture and Government Money: A Guide for the Perplexed (April 2000). 
Emily Buss, Without Peers? The Blind Spot in the Debate over How to Allocate Educational Control between Parent and State (April 2000). David A. Strauss, Common Law, Common Ground, and Jefferson’s Principle (June 2000). 
Curtis A. Bradley and Jack L. Goldsmith, Treaties, Human Rights, and Conditional Consent (May 2000; Pennsylvania Law Review v. 149). Mary Ann Case, Lessons for the Future of Affirmative Action from the Past of the Religion Clauses? (May 2001, Supreme Court Review, 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights? Lessons from South Africa (May, 2000). 
Jill Elaine Hasday, Parenthood Divided: A Legal History of the Bifurcated Law of Parental Relations Elizabeth Garrett, Institutional Lessons from the 2000 Presidential Election (May 2001). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons: Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001). 
Jack Goldsmith, The Internet and the Legitimacy of Remote Cross-Border Searches (October 2001). 
Adrian Vermeule, Does Commerce Clause Review Have Perverse Effects? (October 2001). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Of Artificial Intelligence and Legal Reasoning (November 2001). 
Elizabeth Garrett, The Future of Campaign Finance Reform Laws in the Courts and in Congress, The William J. Brennan Lecture in Constitutional Law (December 2001). 
Julie Roin, Taxation without Coordination (March 2002). 
Geoffrey R. Stone, Above the Law: Research Methods, Ethics, and the Law of Privilege (March 2002; forthcoming J. Sociological Methodology 2002). Cass R. Sunstein, Is There a Constitutional Right to Clone? (March 2002). Emily Buss, Parental Rights (May 2002, forthcoming Virginia Law Review). David A. Strauss, Must Like Cases Be Treated Alike? (May 2002). David A. Strauss, The Common Law Genius of the Warren Court (May 2002). 
Jack Goldsmith and Ryan Goodman, U.S. Civil Litigation and International Terrorism (June 2002). 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002). 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002). 
Elizabeth Garrett, Is the Party Over? The Court and the Political Process (August 2002). 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002). 
Joseph Isenbergh, Activists Vote Twice (November 2002). 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (November 2002). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (November 2002). 
Jill Elaine Hasday, The Principle and Practice of Women’s “Full Citizenship”: A Case Study of Sex-Segregated Public Education (December 2002). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Why Does the American Constitution Lack Social and Economic Guarantees? (January 2003) 
